Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We have been an investor in ethanol production facilities beginning in 2006 and a refined coal production facility in 2017. We currently have equity investments in three ethanol production entities, two of which are majority ownership interests, and a majority ownership in one refined coal production entity. We may make additional alternative energy investments in the future.
Our ethanol operations are highly dependent on commodity prices, especially prices for corn, ethanol, distillers grains, non-food grade corn oil and natural gas. As a result of price volatility for these commodities, our operating results can fluctuate substantially. The price and availability of corn is subject to significant fluctuations depending upon a number of factors that affect commodity prices in general, including crop conditions, weather, federal policy and foreign trade. Because the market price of ethanol is not always directly related to corn prices, at times ethanol prices may not follow movements in corn prices and, in an environment of higher corn prices or lower ethanol prices, reduce the overall margin structure at the plants. As a result, at times, we may operate our plants at negative or minimally positive operating margins.
We expect our ethanol plants to produce approximately 2.8 gallons of denatured ethanol for each bushel of grain processed in the production cycle. We refer to the actual gallons of denatured ethanol produced per bushel of grain processed as the realized yield. We refer to the difference between the price per gallon of ethanol and the price per bushel of grain (divided by the realized yield) as the “crush spread.” Should the crush spread decline, it is possible that our ethanol plants will generate operating results that do not provide adequate cash flows for sustained periods of time. In such cases, production at the ethanol plants may be reduced or stopped altogether in order to minimize variable costs at individual plants.
We attempt to manage the risk related to the volatility of commodity prices by utilizing forward grain and natural gas purchase contracts, forward ethanol, distillers grains and non-food grade corn oil sale contracts and commodity futures and swap agreements as management deems appropriate. We attempt to match quantities of these sales contracts with an appropriate quantity of grain purchase contracts over a given period of time when we can obtain an adequate gross margin resulting from the crush spread inherent in the contracts we have executed. However, the market for future ethanol sales contracts generally lags the spot market with respect to ethanol price. Consequently, we generally execute fixed price contracts for no more than four months into the future at any given time and we may lock in our corn or ethanol price without having a corresponding locked in ethanol or corn price for short durations of time. As a result of the relatively short period of time our fixed price contracts cover, we generally cannot predict the future movements in our realized crush spread for more than four months; thus, we are unable to predict the likelihood or amounts of future income or loss from the operations of our ethanol facilities. We utilize derivative financial instruments, primarily exchange traded commodity future contracts and swaps, in conjunction with certain of our grain procurement and commodity marketing activities.
Our fiscal year 2020 operations and commodity prices in general were significantly impacted by the coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic. In an effort to contain the virus, there have been various and prolonged restrictions on travel, public gatherings and work from home orders throughout the world. This has resulted in reduced demand for gasoline and ethanol. Corn pricing has also been impacted by this lower demand for ethanol and resulting reduced ethanol production, although China increased its imports of U.S. corn during the latter part of fiscal year 2020. In the early periods of the COVID-19 pandemic, CBOT ethanol pricing declined sharply to approximately $0.84 per gallon while CBOT corn pricing declined to a low of approximately $3.03 per bushel. These and other market factors led to the shutdown of our NuGen ethanol plant from late March 2020 to late June 2020 and the shutdown of our One Earth ethanol plant from late March 2020 to late May 2020. CBOT ethanol and corn prices were at their highest levels during fiscal year 2020 at the end of January 2021 as the ethanol price was approximately $1.64 per gallon and the corn price was approximately $5.47 per bushel.
On August 10, 2017, we, through a 95.35% owned subsidiary, purchased the entire ownership interest of an entity that owns a refined coal facility for approximately $12.0 million. We began operating the refined coal facility immediately after the acquisition. We expect that the revenues from the sale of refined coal produced in the facility will be subsidized by federal production tax credits through November 18, 2021, subject to meeting qualified emissions reductions and other requirements as governed by Section 45 of the IRC. In order to maintain compliance with Section 45 of the IRC, we are required to test every six months, through an
independent laboratory, the effectiveness of our process with respect to emissions reductions. Annually, the IRS publishes the amount of federal income tax credit earned per ton of refined coal produced and sold for a given calendar year, which for 2020 is approximately $7.30 per ton. The tax credits can be earned for refined coal produced and sold by our facility through November 18, 2021. We expect to cease refined coal production operations on or before that date.
Net income attributable to REX common shareholders was approximately $3.0 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to approximately $7.4 million in fiscal year 2019. Both fiscal years 2020 and 2019 benefitted from reductions in our effective tax rate resulting from the impact of federal production tax credits associated with our refined coal operations and from the impact of research and experimentation credits associated with our ethanol and by-products operations. However, as refined coal production declined significantly in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019, the benefit of the related tax credits also declined.
We plan to seek and evaluate various investment opportunities including ethanol and/or energy related, carbon dioxide related, agricultural or other ventures we believe fit our investment criteria. We can make no assurances that we will be successful in our efforts to find such opportunities.
During fiscal year 2013, through a wholly owned subsidiary REX I.P., LLC, we entered into a joint venture to file and defend patents for technology relating to heavy oil and oil sands production methods, and to attempt to commercially exploit the technology to generate license fees, royalty income and development opportunities. The patented technology is an enhanced method of heavy oil recovery involving zero emissions downhole steam generation. We own 60% and Hytken owns 40% of the entity named Future Energy, LLC, an Ohio limited liability company. Future Energy is managed by a board of three managers, two appointed by us and one by Hytken.
We agreed to fund direct patent expenses relating to patent applications and defense, annual annuity fees and maintenance on a country by country basis, with the right to terminate funding and transfer related patent rights to Hytken. We may also fund all costs relating to new intellectual property, consultants, and future research and development, pilot field tests and equipment purchases for commercialization stage of the patents. To date, we have paid and expensed approximately $2.5 million to purchase our ownership interest and fund patent and other expenses. We have not tested or proven the commercial feasibility of the technology.
Ethanol Investments
In fiscal year 2006, we entered the ethanol industry by investing in several entities organized to construct and subsequently operate, ethanol producing plants. We are invested in three entities as of January 31, 2021,
utilizing equity investments. The following table is a summary of our ethanol investments at January 31, 2021 (gallons in millions):
Entity Trailing 12
Months Ethanol
Gallons Shipped REX’s
Current
Ownership
Interest Current Effective
Ownership of
Trailing 12
Months Ethanol
Gallons Shipped
One Earth Energy, LLC 118.6 75.4% 89.4
NuGen Energy, LLC 98.5 99.5% 98.0
Big River Resources, LLC:
Big River Resources W Burlington, LLC 101.0 10.3% 10.4
Big River Resources Galva, LLC 115.3 10.3% 11.9
Big River United Energy 116.1 5.7% 6.6
Big River Resources Boyceville 55.3 10.3% 5.7
Total 604.8
222.0
Trends and Uncertainties
During fiscal years 2020 and 2019, operating results in our ethanol and by-products segment have been, at times, adversely affected by a weak margin environment highlighted by higher costs for corn, lower availability of local corn, lower oil prices resulting from an oversupply of oil, the EPA granting small refiner waivers, and in the first quarter of fiscal year 2020, the outbreak of a new strain of COVID-19.
Weather conditions delayed, and in some cases prevented the planting of corn in much of the United States during 2019. Weather also contributed to intermittent logistical delays during fiscal year 2019. Throughout most of fiscal year 2019 and for the first six months of fiscal year 2020, we struggled to obtain adequate supplies of corn at our NuGen facility, on a consistent basis, at acceptable price levels. Consequently, we were not able to operate our NuGen ethanol plant at production levels near our historical averages. Should these trends continue, we may experience intermittent production slowdowns or stoppages. We cannot reasonably predict the likelihood of future period production levels compared to historical averages.
Under RFS, the EPA assigns individual refiners, blenders and importers the volume of renewable fuels they are obligated to use based on their percentage of total domestic transportation fuel sales. The EPA can waive the obligation for individual small refineries that are experiencing “disproportionate economic hardship” due to compliance with the RFS. Previously, the EPA approved relatively few such waivers. However, for the 2016 to 2018 compliance years, the EPA approved 85 SRWs totaling approximately 4.0 billion gallons. These actions affect ethanol demand as obligated parties such as refiners can use the waivers granted by the EPA to help them meet their obligations in different years. There continues to be uncertainty regarding how the EPA will administer the SRWs as the EPA has not ruled on SRWs for years after 2018.
During the early months of 2020, a new strain of COVID-19 spread into the United States and other countries. In an effort to contain the spread of this virus, there have been various government mandated restrictions, in addition to voluntary privately implemented restrictions, including limiting public gatherings, retail store closures, restrictions on employees working and the quarantining of people who may have been exposed to the virus. This led to reduced demand for gasoline and ethanol, and consequently, historically low ethanol pricing. As a result, we idled our NuGen and One Earth ethanol plants in late March of 2020. In May of 2020, businesses and other activities slowly began to reopen, which led to an increase in demand for gasoline and ethanol, and in related prices. As a result, we resumed production operations at the One Earth ethanol plant in
late May of 2020 and at NuGen in late June of 2020. In addition, actions by the Federal Reserve, related to the COVID-19 outbreak, have reduced interest rates. Given the amount of cash and short-term investments we have, this will significantly reduce our interest income in future periods, depending on the length of time interest rates remain at these levels. The impacts of the COVID-19 outbreak on our business operations, including the duration and impact on ethanol demand, cannot be reasonably estimated at this time, although a future prolonged production stoppage at our plants would have a further material adverse impact on our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows in future periods.
Congress passed the CARES Act in March 2020, which provided the United States department of Agriculture (“USDA”) with additional funding for the “Commodity Credit Corporation (“CCC”). The USDA is using this additional funding to provide direct payments to farmers, including farmers that we purchase corn from. Such direct payments to farmers could cause them to delay marketing decisions. Consequently, this could reduce the supply of corn and result in a price increase for what we pay for corn. In addition, China has been purchasing large quantities of corn, which could lead to sustained higher prices for corn.
Renewable Fuel Standard II (“RFS II”), established in October 2010, has been an important factor in the growth of ethanol usage in the United States. When it was originally established, RFS II required the volume of “conventional” or corn derived ethanol to be blended with gasoline to increase each year until it reached 15.0 billion gallons in 2015 and was to remain at that level through 2022. There are no established congressional target volumes beginning in 2023. The EPA has the authority to waive the biofuel mandate, in whole or in part, if there is inadequate domestic renewable fuel supply or the requirement severely harms the domestic economy or environment. On December 19, 2019, the EPA announced the final 2020 renewable volume obligation for conventional ethanol, which met the 15.0 billion gallons congressional target. The EPA has missed its deadline and has not yet released a draft renewable volume obligation rule for the 2021 volumes. On April 15, 2020, five Governors sent a letter to the EPA requesting a general waiver from RFS II due to the drop in demand caused by COVID-19 travel restrictions. On October 21, 2020, 15 Senators sent a letter to the EPA requesting a general waiver from RFS II to reduce the 2021 renewable volume obligation, citing the reduced demand for fuels due to COVID-19. It is unclear when the renewable volume obligation for 2021 will be released.
Throughout fiscal years 2020 and 2019, operating results in our refined coal segment have been adversely affected by lower utility plant demand from our only customer. Projections, provided by the utility plant, for fiscal year 2021 indicate this trend may continue and may be further impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. While this leads to lower pre-tax losses from this segment, it also leads to lower tax benefits from Section 45 credits being recognized. Ultimately, this results in lower amounts of segment profit.
Our refined coal operations will no longer qualify to earn Section 45 credits after November 18, 2021. Absent a change in tax regulations, this will result in the cessation of our refined coal operations on or before this date.
Should these trends and uncertainties continue, our future operating results are likely to be negatively impacted.
Results of Operations
For a detailed analysis of period to period changes, see the segment discussion that follows this section as that discussion reflects how management views and monitors our business.
Comparison of Fiscal Years 2020 and 2019 (Consolidated Results)
Net Sales and Revenue - Net sales and revenue in fiscal year 2020 were approximately $372.8 million, a 10.8% decrease from approximately $418.0 million in fiscal year 2019. The decrease was primarily caused by lower sales in our ethanol and by-products segment of approximately $45.0 million.
Gross Profit - Gross profit was approximately $13.9 million in fiscal year 2020, or 3.7% of net sales and revenue, versus approximately $12.5 million in fiscal year 2019 or 3.0% of net sales and revenue. Gross profit for fiscal year 2020 decreased by approximately $0.9 million compared to fiscal year 2019 as a result of operations in the ethanol and by-products segment and increased by approximately $2.2 million as a result of operations in the refined coal segment.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses - SG&A expenses for fiscal year 2020 were approximately $17.7 million (4.7% of net sales and revenue), a decrease of approximately $1.6 million or 8.3% from approximately $19.3 million (4.6% of net sales and revenue) for fiscal year 2019. A majority of the decrease results from lower shipping costs as less of our sales contracts provided for shipping to be paid by us in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. In addition, professional fees were lower in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. The decrease was also related to lower incentive compensation expense associated with lower profitability levels in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019.
Equity in Income of Unconsolidated Ethanol Affiliates - During fiscal years 2020 and 2019, we recognized income of approximately $0.5 million and $1.4 million, respectively, from our equity investment in Big River Resources, LLC (“Big River”), which is included in our ethanol and by-products segment results. Our investment in Big River, which has interests in four ethanol production plants, has an effective ownership of approximately 336 million gallons of ethanol shipped in the trailing twelve months ended January 31, 2021. Big River’s financial results were impacted by reduced ethanol demand related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We expect the operating experience of Big River to be generally consistent with the trends in crush spread margins described in the “Overview” section as Big River’s results are dependent on the same key drivers as our other ethanol investments (ethanol, corn, dried distillers grains and natural gas pricing).
Interest and Other Income - Interest and other income for fiscal year 2020 was approximately $1.8 million compared to approximately $4.2 million for fiscal year 2019. Interest income decreased as yields on our excess cash and our excess cash investment balances both decreased in fiscal year 2020.
Loss Before Income Taxes - As a result of the foregoing, loss before income taxes was approximately $1.5 million for fiscal year 2020 versus loss of approximately $1.2 million for fiscal year 2019.
Benefit for Income Taxes - Our effective tax rate was a benefit of 479.1 % and 1,096.1% for fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our effective rate is impacted by the noncontrolling interests of the companies we consolidate, as we recognize 100% of their income or loss before income taxes and noncontrolling interests. However, we only provide an income tax provision or benefit for our portion of the subsidiaries’ income or loss with a noncontrolling interest. Our effective tax rate decreased by 350.0% in fiscal year 2020 (approximately $5.2 million) and by 770.1% in fiscal year 2019 (approximately $9.0 million) as a result of federal production tax credits earned by our refined coal facility. The amount of these credits earned in fiscal year 2021 will vary with refined coal production levels and are expected to end by November 18, 2021. During fiscal years 2020 and 2019, our effective tax rate decreased by 135.5% (approximately $2.0 million) and 116.5% (approximately $1.4 million), respectively, as a result of research and experimentation credits earned by our ethanol plants. The amount of these credits earned in future periods will vary depending on the level of qualifying research expenditures at our ethanol plants. The provision for uncertain tax positions increased our effective tax rate by 70.6% (approximately $1.0 million) in fiscal year 2020. Primarily related to the statutes of limitation expiring, the provision for uncertain tax positions decreased our effective tax rate by 94.4% (approximately $1.1 million) in fiscal year 2019.
Net Income - As a result of the foregoing, net income was approximately $5.6 million for fiscal year 2020 versus approximately $11.6 million for fiscal year 2019.
Noncontrolling Interests - Income attributable to noncontrolling interests was approximately $2.6 million and $4.2 million during fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively, and represents the other owners’ share of the income or loss of NuGen, One Earth and the refined coal entity. Income attributable to noncontrolling interests of One Earth and NuGen combined was approximately $2.9 million and approximately $4.6 million, during fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively. The loss attributable to noncontrolling interests of the refined coal entity was approximately $0.3 million during each of fiscal years 2020 and 2019. We do not expect to recover any portion of the noncontrolling interests holder’s share of current and prior Future Energy losses; thus, we did not recognize any income or expense related to the noncontrolling interests of Future Energy in fiscal years 2020 and 2019.
Net Income Attributable to REX Common Shareholders - As a result of the foregoing, net income attributable to REX common shareholders was approximately $3.0 million for fiscal year 2020 compared to $7.4 million for fiscal year 2019.
Business Segment Results
We have two reportable segments, i) ethanol and by-products and ii) refined coal. The following sections discuss the results of operations for each of our business segments and corporate and other. As discussed in Note 13, our chief operating decision maker (as defined by Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 280, “Segment Reporting” (“ASC 280”) evaluates the operating performance of our business segments using net income attributable to REX common shareholders. Segment profitability measures are determined using the same accounting policies used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. The following tables summarize segment and other results and assets (amounts in thousands):
1 We record sales in the refined coal segment net of the cost of coal as we purchase the coal feedstock from the customer to which refined coal is sold.
Ethanol and by-products Segment
The ethanol and by-products segment includes the consolidated financial results of One Earth and NuGen, our equity investment in Big River and certain administrative expenses. The following table summarizes selected data of our ethanol segment:
The following table summarizes net sales and revenue from the ethanol and by-products segment, by product group (amounts in thousands):
Ethanol sales decreased from approximately $321.4 million in the prior year to approximately $284.2 million in the current year, primarily a result of a decrease of 18.2 million gallons (7.7%) sold during fiscal year 2020. In addition, a $0.07 decrease in the price per gallon sold contributed to the ethanol sales decrease from the prior year. Dried distillers grains sales were consistent with the prior year as a decrease of 4.8% in tons sold during fiscal year 2020 was offset by a 5.1% increase in the price per ton sold during fiscal year 2020. Non-food grade corn oil sales decreased from approximately $17.1 million in the prior year to approximately $15.1 million in the current year, primarily a result of a 13.6% decrease in pounds sold during fiscal year 2020. Modified distillers grains sales decreased from approximately $7.2 million in the prior year to approximately $2.6 million in the current year, primarily a result of a 66.7% decrease in tons sold during fiscal year 2020 as production was shifted towards more profitable dried distillers grains during fiscal year 2020. Losses on derivative financial instruments were approximately $1.0 million during fiscal year 2020 and were insignificant during fiscal year 2019. The volume decreases discussed above were primarily a
result of the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on ethanol demand, lower ethanol pricing, an oversupply of oil and diminished local supplies of corn from a poor 2019 harvest caused by localized weather conditions. These factors resulted in idling both of our consolidated ethanol plants in March of 2020. In May of 2020, businesses and other activities slowly began to reopen, which led to an increase in demand for gasoline and ethanol, and in related prices. As a result, we resumed production operations at the One Earth ethanol plant in May of 2020 and at the NuGen ethanol plant in June of 2020. Because of the uncertainty regarding the economic impact of the COVID-19 virus outbreak and the availability of corn, we do not have a reasonable estimate of future periods’ sales volume.
Gross profit was approximately $19.5 million in fiscal year 2020, or 5.2% of net sales and revenue which was approximately $0.9 million lower compared to approximately $20.4 million of gross profit in fiscal year 2019 or 4.9% of net sales and revenue. The crush spread for fiscal year 2020 was approximately $0.03 per gallon of ethanol sold compared to approximately $0.05 per gallon of ethanol sold during fiscal year 2019. Both of our consolidated ethanol plants were idled for portions of fiscal year 2020. Consequently, lower production and resulting sales volumes reduced gross profit for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. Given the inherent volatility in ethanol, distillers grains, non-food grade corn oil, grain and natural gas prices, we cannot predict the likelihood that the spread between ethanol, distillers grains, non-food grade corn oil and grain prices in future periods will be consistent with prices in historical periods.
Grain accounted for approximately 78% ($274.6 million) of our cost of sales during fiscal year 2020 compared to approximately 78% ($311.2 million) during fiscal year 2019. Natural gas accounted for approximately 5% ($17.7 million) of our cost of sales during fiscal year 2020 compared to approximately 5% ($19.6 million) during fiscal year 2019. Both the grain and natural gas dollar decreases were primarily attributable to the lower production levels incurred in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019.
We attempt to match quantities of ethanol, distillers grains and non-food grade corn oil sale contracts with an appropriate quantity of grain purchase contracts over a given period of time when we can obtain an adequate margin resulting from the crush spread inherent in the contracts we have executed. However, the market for future ethanol sales contracts generally lags the spot market with respect to ethanol price. Consequently, we generally execute fixed price contracts for no more than four months into the future at any given time and we may lock in our corn or ethanol price without having a corresponding locked in ethanol or corn price for short durations of time. As a result of the relatively short period of time our fixed price contracts cover, we generally cannot predict the future movements in our realized crush spread for more than four months. We utilize derivative financial instruments, primarily exchange traded commodity future contracts and swaps, in conjunction with our grain procurement and commodity marketing activities.
SG&A expenses for fiscal year 2020 were approximately $14.8 million (4.0% of net sales and revenue) which was approximately $1.6 million lower compared to approximately $16.4 million (3.9% of net sales and revenue) for fiscal year 2019. A majority of the decrease results from lower shipping costs as less of our sales contracts provided for shipping to be paid by us in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. In addition, professional fees were lower in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. The decrease was also related to lower incentive compensation expense associated with lower profitability levels in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019.
During fiscal years 2020 and 2019, we recognized income of approximately $0.5 million and approximately $1.4 million, respectively, from our equity investment in Big River. Big River’s results for fiscal year 2020 were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 outbreak. Big River has interests in four ethanol production plants, has an effective ownership of ethanol gallons shipped in the trailing twelve months ended January 31, 2021 of approximately 336 million gallons. Big River’s operations also include agricultural elevators.
Interest and other income was approximately $1.5 million for fiscal year 2020 compared to approximately $3.0 million for fiscal year 2019. Interest income decreased as yields on our excess cash and our excess cash investment balances both decreased in fiscal year 2020.
Income related to noncontrolling interests was approximately $2.9 million and approximately $4.6 million during fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively. These amounts represent the other owners’ share of the income or loss of NuGen and One Earth.
The provision for income taxes was approximately $31,000 in fiscal year 2020 compared to a benefit for income taxes of approximately $1.5 million in fiscal year 2019. During fiscal years 2020 and 2019, we recognized the tax benefits of research and experimentation credits earned by our ethanol plants. We recognized a provision for increasing the liability for unrecognized tax benefits during fiscal year 2020 and recognized a tax benefit from reducing the liability for unrecognized tax benefits during fiscal year 2019 as a result of statutes expiring.
Segment profit for fiscal year 2020 was approximately $3.8 million, a decrease of approximately $1.7 million from approximately $5.4 million for fiscal year 2019. The decrease from fiscal year 2019 results is primarily related to lower interest and other income and lower income from our equity investment in Big River in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. In addition, we recognized a tax provision in fiscal year 2020 compared to a tax benefit in fiscal year 2019.
Refined Coal Segment
The refined coal segment includes the consolidated financial results of our refined coal entity and certain administrative expenses. We acquired the refined coal entity during the third quarter of fiscal year 2017. Our refined coal facility is eligible to earn Section 45 production tax credits through November 2021. The operations of the facility are not profitable without such credits. We therefore expect to cease operating our refined coal facility by November 2021.
The refined coal entity sells one product, refined coal. We record sales in the refined coal segment net of the cost of coal as we purchase the coal feedstock from the customer to which refined coal is sold. Sales decreased from approximately $334,000 in the prior year to approximately $182,000 in the current year. During fiscal year 2020, operating results have been adversely affected by lower utility plant demand from our only customer. We expect sales to vary depending on fluctuations in demand from the site host utility, which generally change based upon weather conditions in the geographic markets the utility serves and competing fuel prices and supplies. Based upon projections from the site host utility, we expect varying and intermittent demand for refined coal.
Gross loss was approximately $5.7 million in fiscal year 2020, which was approximately $2.2 million lower compared to approximately $7.9 million of gross loss in fiscal year 2019. The decrease in gross loss results primarily from lower refined coal production in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. We expect future period gross loss to vary in generally the same manner as the sales fluctuations described above. Based on the agreements in place that govern the operations, sales and purchasing activities of the refined coal plant, we expect that the refined coal operation will continue operating at a gross loss and that the ongoing losses will be subsidized by federal production income tax credits through November 18, 2021.
SG&A expenses were insignificant for each of fiscal years 2020 and 2019.
Loss related to noncontrolling interests was approximately $0.3 million during each of fiscal years 2020 and 2019. This amount represents the other owner’s share of the pre-tax loss of refined coal operations.
The benefit for income taxes was approximately $6.6 million and approximately $10.8 million during fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively. These amounts include the benefit of Section 45 production tax credits and a benefit related to segment loss before income taxes. The decrease in the benefit for income taxes primarily results from lower production in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. The refined coal facility is eligible to earn tax credits through November 2021. However, the amount of credits earned will vary with annual production levels.
As a result of the foregoing, including the benefit of federal tax credits associated with refined coal production and sales, segment profit was approximately $1.0 million and approximately $3.4 million for fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Corporate and Other
SG&A expenses for fiscal year 2020 were approximately $2.7 million, consistent with approximately $3.0 million for fiscal year 2019.
Interest and other income was approximately $0.3 million for fiscal year 2020 versus approximately $1.2 million for fiscal year 2019. Interest income decreased as yields on our excess cash and our excess cash investment balances both decreased in fiscal year 2020.
Corporate and other expenses exceeded interest and other income, for fiscal year 2020 by approximately $1.8 million, compared to approximately $1.4 million for fiscal year 2019.
Comparison of Fiscal Years 2019 and
See “Item 7 Management’s discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of cash have been income from operations. Our primary uses of cash have been capital expenditures at our ethanol plants, stock repurchases and contributions to fund refined coal operating losses.
Outlook - Our cash and short-term investments balance of approximately $180.7 million at January 31, 2021 includes approximately $132.5 million held by One Earth and NuGen. We expect that One Earth and NuGen will use a majority of their cash for working capital needs, capital expenditures, general corporate purposes and dividend payments. We expect our equity method investee to limit the payment of dividends based upon working capital needs.
We are investigating various uses of our excess cash. We have a stock buyback program with an authorization level of an additional approximately 34,000 shares at January 31, 2021. We typically repurchase our common stock when our stock price is trading at prices we deem to be a discount to the underlying value of our net assets. We plan to seek and evaluate various investment opportunities including ethanol and/or energy related, carbon dioxide related, agricultural or other ventures we believe fit our investment criteria.
We expect capital expenditures to be in the range of approximately $5 million to $10 million in fiscal year 2021 for various projects at our consolidated ethanol plants. However, actual capital expenditures could vary from this range for unexpected expenditures as our plants continue to age. We expect to fund these capital expenditures with available cash at our ethanol plant subsidiaries.
Operating Activities - Net cash provided by operating activities was approximately $8.6 million for fiscal year 2020 compared to approximately $10.3 million in fiscal year 2019. During fiscal year 2020, operating cash flow was provided by net income of approximately $5.6 million and adjustments of approximately $17.9 million, which consisted of depreciation, amortization of operating lease right-of-use assets, stock based compensation expense, income from equity method investments, interest income from investments, and the deferred income tax provision. Big River paid dividends to REX of approximately $3.5 million during fiscal year 2020. Accounts receivable increased approximately $6.7 million, primarily a result of the timing of products shipped and the receipt of customer payments at One Earth and NuGen. Inventory increased approximately $2.2 million, primarily a result of larger quantities of finished goods and higher per unit costs at January 31, 2021. Prepaid expenses and other assets increased approximately $3.1 million, primarily a result of higher fair values of forward purchase contracts. Accounts payable decreased approximately $2.3 million, primarily a result of the timing of inventory receipts and vendor payments. Accrued expenses and other liabilities decreased approximately $3.8 million, which was primarily a result of operating lease payments, lower incentive compensation in fiscal year 2020 and lower refined coal segment related commissions.
Net cash provided by operating activities was approximately $10.3 million for fiscal year 2019. During fiscal year 2019, operating cash flow was provided by net income of approximately $11.6 million and adjustments of approximately $17.2 million, which consisted of depreciation, amortization of operating lease right-of-use assets, stock based compensation expense, income from equity method investments, interest income from investments, and the deferred income tax provision. Big River paid dividends to REX of approximately $1.0 million during fiscal year 2019. Accounts receivable increased approximately $1.6 million, primarily a result of the timing of products shipped and the receipt of customer payments at One Earth and NuGen. Inventory increased approximately $17.2 million, primarily a result of larger quantities of corn and higher per unit costs at January 31, 2020. Accounts payable increased approximately $11.4 million, primarily a result of the inventory increase. Accrued expenses and other liabilities decreased approximately $13.0 million, which was primarily a result of operating lease payments, lower incentive compensation in fiscal year 2019 and lower refined coal segment related commissions.
Investing Activities - Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $20.8 million during fiscal year 2020 compared to approximately $14.4 million during fiscal year 2019. Capital expenditures in fiscal year 2020 totaled approximately $10.4 million, the majority of which were various projects at One Earth’s and NuGen’s ethanol plants. During fiscal year 2020, we used cash of approximately $96.2 million for purchases of short-term investments and received cash of approximately $86.3 million related to maturities of these investments as certain of these investments remained outstanding at January 31, 2021. We began investing in highly liquid short-term investments during fiscal year 2018 in order to increase earnings on excess cash.
Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $14.4 million during fiscal year 2019. Capital expenditures in fiscal year 2019 totaled approximately $3.8 million, the majority of which were various projects at One Earth’s and NuGen’s ethanol plants. During fiscal year 2019, we used cash of approximately $26.0 million for purchases of short-term investments and received cash of approximately $15.0 million related to maturities of these investments as certain of these investments remained outstanding at January 31, 2020.
Financing Activities - Net cash used in financing activities was approximately $22.4 million during fiscal year 2020 compared to approximately $4.0 million for fiscal year 2019. During fiscal year 2020, we purchased approximately 315,000 shares of our common stock for approximately $19.6 million in open market transactions. During fiscal year 2020, we used cash of approximately $2.9 million to purchase shares from and pay dividends to noncontrolling members of the entities that own One Earth’s and NuGen’s ethanol plants. During fiscal year 2020, we received approximately $0.1 million in capital contributions from the minority investor in the refined coal entity.
Net cash used in financing activities was approximately $4.0 million during fiscal year 2019. During fiscal year 2019, we used cash of approximately $4.3 million to purchase shares from and pay dividends to noncontrolling members of the entities that own One Earth’s and NuGen’s ethanol plants. During fiscal year 2019, we received approximately $0.3 million in capital contributions from the minority investor in the refined coal entity.
Based on our forecasts, which are primarily based on estimates of plant production, prices of ethanol, corn, distillers grains, non-food grade corn oil and natural gas as well as other assumptions, management believes that cash flow from operating activities together with working capital will be sufficient to meet One Earth’s and NuGen’s respective liquidity needs. However, if a material adverse change in the financial position of One Earth or NuGen should occur, or if actual sales or expenses are substantially different than what has been forecasted (because of the COVID-19 pandemic or other factors), One Earth’s and NuGen’s liquidity, and ability to fund future operating and capital requirements could be negatively impacted.
We expect to fund future operating losses at our refined coal facility with cash at the parent company level.
Approximately 4.0% of our net assets are restricted pursuant to the terms of various loan agreements of our equity method investment as of January 31, 2021. None of our consolidated subsidiaries or the parent company has restricted net assets at January 31, 2021.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Tabular Disclosure of Contractual Obligations
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements under which we are legally obligated to make future cash payments. These agreements include obligations related to purchasing inventory and leasing rail cars. The following table summarizes by category expected future cash outflows associated with contractual obligations in effect, at January 31, 2021 (amounts in thousands):
(a) Amounts primarily represent payments due for rail car leases at One Earth and NuGen.
(b) Amounts primarily represent payments due for a natural gas pipeline, grain, natural gas and other contracts at One Earth and NuGen. We are not able to determine the likely settlement for forward corn purchase contracts which do not contain a determinable fixed price; accordingly, payments for such contracts have been excluded from the table above.
(c) We are not able to determine the likely settlement period for uncertain tax positions, accordingly, approximately $8.4 million of uncertain tax positions and related interest and penalties have been excluded from the table above.
Seasonality and Quarterly Fluctuations
Our business is directly affected by the supply and demand for ethanol. The demand for ethanol typically increases during the spring and summer months and during holiday travel.
Impact of Inflation
The impact of inflation has not been material to our results of operations for the past three fiscal years.
Critical Accounting Policies
We believe the application of the following accounting policies, which are important to our financial position and results of operations, require significant assumptions, judgments and estimates on the part of management. We base our assumptions, judgments, and estimates on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time our consolidated financial statements are prepared. On a regular basis, management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our financial statements are presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material. Further, if different assumptions, judgments and estimates had been used, the results could have been different and such differences could be material. For a summary of all of our accounting policies, including the accounting policies discussed below, see Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The full impact of the economic downturn resulting from the spread of COVID-19 is unknown at this time. However, it could lead to material impacts to our financial position and results of operations, including, but not limited to, charges from adjustments of the carrying amount of inventory, long-lived asset impairment charges and deferred tax valuation allowances.
Management believes that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Revenue Recognition - For ethanol and by-products segment sales, we recognize sales of ethanol, distillers grains and non-food grade corn oil when obligations under the terms of the respective contracts with customers are satisfied; this occurs with the transfer of control of products, generally upon shipment from the ethanol plant or upon loading of the rail car used to transport the products. For refined coal segment sales, we recognize sales of refined coal when obligations under the term of the contract with its customer are satisfied; this occurs when control of the product transfers to the customer, generally upon the refined coal leaving the plant. Refined coal sales are recorded net of the cost of coal as we purchase the coal feedstock from our customer to which we sell refined coal.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets - We review our long-lived assets, consisting of property and equipment, equity method investments and operating lease right-of-use assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. We assess long-lived assets for impairment by first determining the forecasted, undiscounted cash flows the asset group is expected to generate. If this total is less than the carrying value of the asset, we will then determine the fair value of the asset group. An impairment loss would be recognized in the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset
exceeded the fair value of the asset. Significant management judgement is required to determine the fair value of long-lived assets, which includes discounted cash flows. Such estimates could be significantly affected by future changes in market conditions. During fiscal year 2020, we concluded the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our industry and our operating results was an indicator that impairment may exist related to certain of our long-lived assets. As a result, we performed a recoverability test for the One Earth and NuGen asset groups (the lowest level at which related cash flows can be identified) and determined that there was no impairment as the gross undiscounted future cash flows substantially exceeded the respective carrying values. We recorded no impairment charges in fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Income Taxes - Income taxes are recorded based on the current year amounts payable or refundable, as well as the consequences of events that give rise to deferred tax assets and liabilities based on differences in how those events are treated for tax purposes, net of valuation allowances. We base our estimate of deferred tax assets and liabilities on current tax laws and rates and other expectations about future outcomes. Changes in existing regulatory tax laws and rates and future business results may affect the amount of deferred tax liabilities or the valuation of deferred tax assets over time. We have established valuation allowances for certain state net operating loss carryforwards. We assessed all available positive and negative evidence to determine whether we expect sufficient future taxable income will be generated to allow for the realization of existing federal deferred tax assets. Despite the cumulative book loss incurred over the three-year period ended January 31, 2021, we believe there is sufficient objectively verifiable income for management to conclude that it is more likely than not that the Company will utilize available federal deferred tax assets prior to their expiration. However, realization of these deferred tax assets is not certain. Changes in our current estimates for factors such as unanticipated market conditions and legislative developments could have a material effect on our ability to utilize deferred tax assets. As we earn federal income tax credits (pursuant to IRC Section 45) based on the amount of refined coal produced and sold, variations in refined coal production and related sales will result in changes in our future effective income tax rate.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For information related to recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.