Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this annual report.
Business Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the development of a novel therapeutic peptide, Thymosin beta 4, or Tß4, for tissue and organ protection, repair, and regeneration. We have formulated Tß4 into three distinct product candidates in clinical development:
• RGN-259, a preservative-free topical eye drop for regeneration of corneal tissues damaged by injury, disease or other pathology;
• RGN-352, an injectable formulation to treat cardiovascular diseases, central and peripheral nervous system diseases, and other medical indications that may be treated by systemic administration; and
• RGN-137, a topical gel for dermal wounds and reduction of scar tissue.
We are continuing strategic partnership discussions with biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies regarding the further clinical development of all of our product candidates.
Current Financial Circumstances
In October 2020, we sold the 2020 Notes. The sale of the 2020 Notes resulted in gross proceeds to the Company of $500,000. In January 2020, Sabby exercised their remaining warrants and the Company received proceeds of $241,911. At present, with the receipt of the sale proceeds from the closing on the 2020 Notes in October 2020, we have sufficient cash to fund planned operations into the second quarter of 2021.
Current Clinical Status
In January 2015, we entered into a Joint Venture Agreement with GtreeBNT whereby we created ReGenTree LLC (“ReGenTree” or “Joint Venture”) jointly owned by us and GtreeBNT, which will commercialize RGN-259 for treatment of dry eye syndrome and neurotrophic keratitis, an orphan ophthalmic indication in the United States.
To date ReGenTree has sponsored a Phase 2/3 clinical trial (“ARISE-1”) and Phase 3 clinical trials in patients with DES (“ARISE-2”). Last year it completed a Phase 3 clinical trial in patients with neurotrophic keratitis (“NK”) (“SEER-1”), and is currently sponsoring a Phase 3 trial (ARISE-3) in patients with DES, both in the U.S. In May 2016, we reported the results of the 317-patient ARISE-1 trial and in October 2017, we reported the results of the ARISE-2 trial. The ARISE-2 study, which was sponsored by ReGenTree and managed by Ora, Inc. pursuant a contract between the parties, demonstrated a number of statistically significant improvements in both signs and symptoms of DES with 0.1% RGN-259 versus placebo, while showing excellent safety, comfort, and tolerability profiles. The ocular discomfort symptom showed a statistically significant reduction in the RGN-259-treated group at day 15 as compared to placebo (p=0.0149) in the change from baseline. For sign, RGN-259 also improved the dry eye patient’s ability to withstand an exacerbated condition in a patient subgroup with both compromised corneal fluorescein staining and Schirmer’s test at baseline. In this population, RGN-259 showed superiority over placebo in reducing corneal fluorescein staining in the change from baseline at days 15 and 29 (p=0.0207 and 0.0254, respectively). RGN-259 confirmed its global effects on dry eye syndrome and fast onset in multiple sign and symptom efficacies with no safety issues in the ARISE-1 and ARISE-2 studies as well as in the pooled data, although ARISE-2 was not successful in duplicating the results of ARISE-1 where the study population was limited and less diversified. ReGenTree is proceeding with its RGN-259 development plan as discussed with the FDA in April 2018. ReGenTree and Ora, Inc. have entered into a contract for management of ARISE-3. The first patient was enrolled in the second quarter of 2019 and the last patient was enrolled in October 2020. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the completion of ARISE-3 was delayed from the original timeline but the patent treatment and follow-up was completed in November as ReGenTree previously reported in clinicaltrials.gov. As of the date of this filing, the patient database has been locked and topline results are expected shortly.
The NK trial (SEER-1), a smaller study in an orphan population, enrolled of 18 patients. On May 14, 2020, the Company reported that the trial was closed and reported the results of SEER-1. Six out of 10 patients in the RGN-259 treated group and 1 out of 8 patients in the placebo treated group achieved complete corneal healing in four weeks. In terms of the primary endpoint, “ratio of corneal wound healed patients after four weeks' administration”, the statistical difference was slightly over 0.05 (p = 0.0656, Fisher's exact test), due to the limited number of patients in each group. When another statistical analysis method was used to analyze the same primary endpoint (Chi square test), there was statistical significance, p = 0.0400. In addition, in a pre-specified secondary endpoint evaluating corneal epithelial healing at day 43 (two weeks post-treatment) and the durability of RGN-259 treatment, we also confirmed a clear statistical difference using the Fisher's exact test, p = 0.0359. Several other efficacy parameters were either highly significant or strongly trending toward statistical significance in the RGN-259 group indicating the depth of patient response to RGN-259.
GtreeBNT has developed the CMC (chemistry, manufacturing and controls) dossier required for Phase 3 clinical trials and commercialization in the U.S. and in Korea. This comprehensive and critical effort ensures that final drug product manufacturing, packaging, stability, purity, reproducibility, etc., meets regulatory guidelines and product specifications. The product of this activity is the current product formulation being utilized in the U.S. trials being conducted by ReGenTree and will also be utilized in the planned clinical activity to be conducted by GtreeBNT under the RGN-259 license agreement for Pan Asia.
During the past several years, ReGenTree, LLC began developing a modified eye drop formulation that it believes will enhance the efficacy of thymosin beta 4 for NK, improve the patient experience, and allow a proprietary valued orphan product price for this rare disease. The Company has completed a preliminary formulation for NK patients that will be considered for use in future clinical study. ReGenTree has not yet determined if it will use this new formulation in the future for NK.
In February 2017, our licensee for RGN-137, GtreeBNT, through its subsidiary, Lenus Therapeutics, LLC, received permission from the FDA to sponsor a Phase 3 clinical trial using RGN-137 to treat patients with epidermolysis bullosa (“EB”), a genetic disease that causes severe blistering of the skin and internal organs. In August 2017, the Company amended the agreement for RGN-137 held by GtreeBNT. Under the amendment the Territory was expanded to include Europe, Canada, South Korea, Australia and Japan. In December 2018, GtreeBNT initiated a small Phase 2 open trial in patients with EB to evaluate RGN-137 in such patients prior to sponsoring a larger Phase 3 trial. Three patients have been enrolled in the open clinical trial to date. It was reported in August 2019, that the first patient had positively responded to RGN-137. As of the date of this report, the Company has not been updated as to current enrollment status.
Financial Operations Overview
We have never generated product revenues, and we do not expect to generate product revenues until the FDA approves one of our product candidates, if ever, and we begin marketing and selling it. We anticipate incurring additional operating losses in the future as we continue to explore the potential clinical benefits of Tß4-based product candidates over multiple indications. To fund further development and clinical trials we have entered into a series of strategic partnerships under licensing and joint venture agreements (see Note 4 of our financial statements) where our partners are responsible for advancing development of our product candidates with multiple clinical trials.
In October 2020, we sold the 2020 Notes. The sale of the 2020 Notes resulted in gross proceeds to the Company of $500,000. In January 2020, Sabby exercised their remaining warrants and the Company received proceeds of $241,911. At present, with the receipt of the sale proceeds from the closing on the 2020 Notes in October 2020, we have sufficient cash to fund planned operations into the second quarter of 2021. Accordingly, we will continue to evaluate opportunities to raise additional capital and are in the process of exploring various alternatives, including, without limitation, a public or private placement of our securities, debt financing, corporate collaboration and licensing arrangements, government grants, or the sale of our company or certain of our intellectual property rights.
Most of our expenditures to date have been for research and development, or R&D, activities and general and administrative, or G&A, activities. R&D costs include all of the wholly-allocable costs associated with our various clinical programs passed through to us by our outsourced vendors. Those costs include manufacturing Tß4 and peptide fragments, formulation of Tß4 into our product candidates, stability studies for both Tß4, and the various formulations, preclinical toxicology, safety and pharmacokinetic studies, clinical trial management, medical oversight, laboratory evaluations, statistical data analysis, regulatory compliance, quality assurance and other related activities. R&D includes cash and non-cash compensation, payroll taxes, travel and other miscellaneous costs of our internal R&D personnel, three persons in total, who are dedicated on a part-time hourly basis to R&D efforts. R&D also includes a proration of our common infrastructure costs for office space and communications. We expense our R&D costs as they are incurred.
R&D expenditures are subject to the risks and uncertainties associated with clinical trials and the FDA review and approval process. As a result, these expenses could exceed our expectations, possibly materially. We are uncertain as to what we will incur in future research and development costs for our clinical studies, as these amounts are subject to, management's continuing assessment of the economics of each individual research and development project and the internal competition for project funding.
G&A costs include outside professional fees for legal, business development, audit and accounting services. G&A also includes cash and non-cash compensation, travel and other miscellaneous costs of our internal G&A personnel, two in total, who are wholly dedicated to G&A efforts. G&A also includes a proration of our common infrastructure costs for office space and communications. Our G&A expenses also include costs to maintain our intellectual property portfolio. Historically we have expanded our patent prosecution activities, and in some cases, we have filed patent applications for non-critical strategic purposes intended to prevent others from filing similar patent claims. We continue to closely monitor our patent applications in the United States, Europe and other countries with the advice of outside legal counsel to determine if they will continue to provide strategic benefits. In cases where we believe the benefit has been realized or it becomes unnecessary due to the issuance of other patents, or for other reasons that will not affect the strength of our intellectual property portfolio, we have and will continue to abandon these patent applications in order to reduce our costs of continued prosecution or maintenance.
Critical Accounting Policies
We prepare our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Such accounting principles require that our management make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. Our actual results could differ materially from those estimates. The items in our financial statements that have required us to make significant estimates and judgments are as follows:
Revenue Recognition
The Company analyzes contracts to determine the appropriate revenue recognition using the following steps: (i) identification of contracts with customers, (ii) identification of distinct performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determination of contract transaction price, (iv) allocation of contract transaction price to the performance obligations and (v) determination of revenue recognition based on timing of satisfaction of the performance obligation. The Company recognizes revenues upon the satisfaction of its performance obligation (upon transfer of control of promised goods or services to our customers) in an amount that reflects the consideration to which it expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Whenever we determine that an arrangement should be accounted for as a single unit of accounting, we must determine the period over which the performance obligations will be performed, and revenue will be recognized. Revenue will be recognized using either a relative performance or straight-line method. We recognize revenue using the relative performance method provided that we can reasonably estimate the level of effort required to complete our performance obligations under an arrangement and such performance obligations are provided on a best-efforts basis. Revenue recognized is limited to the lesser of the cumulative amount of payments received or the cumulative amount of revenue earned, as determined using the relative performance method, as of each reporting period.
The Company’s contracts with customers may at times include multiple promises to transfer products and services. Contracts with multiple promises are analyzed to determine whether the promises, which may include a license together with performance obligations such as providing a clinical supply of product and steering committee services, are distinct and should be accounted for as separate performance obligations or whether they must be accounted for as a single performance obligation. The Company accounts for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations may require significant judgment. If we cannot reasonably estimate when our performance obligation either ceases or becomes inconsequential and perfunctory, then revenue is deferred until we can reasonably estimate when the performance obligation ceases or becomes inconsequential. Revenue is then recognized over the remaining estimated period of performance.
Whenever the Company determines that an arrangement should be accounted for as a combined performance obligation, we must determine the period over which the performance obligation will be performed and when revenue will be recognized. Revenue is recognized using either a relative performance or straight-line method. We recognize revenue using the relative performance method provided that we can reasonably estimate the level of effort required to complete our performance obligation under an arrangement and such performance obligation is provided on a best-efforts basis. Revenue recognized is limited to the lesser of the cumulative amount of payments received or the cumulative amount of revenue earned, as determined using the relative performance method, as of each reporting period.
If the Company cannot reasonably estimate the level of effort required to complete our performance obligation under an arrangement, the performance obligation is provided on a best-efforts basis and we can reasonably estimate when the performance obligation ceases or the remaining obligations become inconsequential and perfunctory, then the total payments under the arrangement, excluding royalties and payments contingent upon achievement of substantive milestones, would be recognized as revenue on a straight-line basis over the period we expect to complete our performance obligations. Revenue is limited to the lesser of the cumulative amount of payments received or the cumulative amount of revenue earned, as determined using the straight-line basis, as of the period ending date.
If the Company cannot reasonably estimate when our performance obligation either ceases or becomes inconsequential and perfunctory, revenue is deferred until we can reasonably estimate when the performance obligation ceases or becomes inconsequential. Revenue is then recognized over the remaining estimated period of performance.
At the inception of each arrangement that includes development milestone payments, the Company evaluates the probability of reaching the milestones and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur in the future, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within the control of the Company or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received and therefore revenue recognized is constrained as management is unable to assert that a reversal of revenue would not be possible. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis, for which the Company recognizes revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, the Company re-evaluates the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjusts its estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Amounts received prior to satisfying the above revenue recognition criteria are recorded as unearned revenue in our accompanying balance sheets.
Contract assets are generated when contractual billing schedules differ from revenue recognition timing. Contract assets represent a conditional right to consideration for satisfied performance obligations that becomes a billed receivable when the conditions are satisfied. There were no contract assets as of December 31, 2020.
Contract liabilities result from arrangements where we have received payment in advance of performance under the contract. Changes in contract liabilities are generally due to either receipt of additional advance payments or our performance under the contract.
We have the following amounts recorded for contract liabilities:
The contract liabilities amounts disclosed above as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, are primarily related to revenue being recognized on a straight-line basis over periods ranging from 23 to 30 years, which, in management’s judgment, is the best measure of progress towards satisfying the performance obligations and represents the Company’s best estimate of the period of the obligation.
Share-based payment
We account for share-based compensation based on the estimated grant date fair value of the award using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The estimated grant date fair value is recognized over the requisite service period.
Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards require the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected life of the share-based payment awards and stock price volatility. Since our historical data is limited, the expected life was determined in accordance with SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107 guidance for “plain vanilla” options. Since our historical trading volume is relatively low, we estimated the expected volatility based on monthly closing prices for a period consistent with the expected life of the option.
The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. See Notes 2 and 8 to the Financial Statements for a further discussion on stock-based compensation and the relative ranges of our historical, underlying assumptions.
Results of Operations
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded revenue in the amount of approximately $77,000 versus $77,000 recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019. The revenue reflects the amortization over 30 years of the payments we received under the original joint venture license agreement and the payment we received for the expansion of the territorial rights to include Canada in April 2016. The payments received under the 2017 RGN-137 license amendment were amortized for revenue over 23 years.
Expenses - Research and development. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our R&D expenditures decreased by $60,000, or 92%, to $5,000, from approximately $65,000 in 2019. The limited R&D expenditures reflects the shift of our internal R&D efforts as our partners assume full responsibility for clinical development. The decrease in 2020 results from the classification of stock option compensation expense in G&A to more accurately reflect the Company’s current operations versus 2019. We expect our R&D expenses will remain at low levels unless we decide to reinitiate internal R&D efforts for our unpartnered programs.
Expenses - General and administrative. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our G&A expenses increased by approximately $93,000, or 7%, to $1,366,000 from $1,274,000 in 2019. Increases are reflected in 2020 expenses for personnel and related (increase of $39,000) and stock option compensation expense (increase of $125,000) , These increases were partially offset by decreases in professional fees (decrease of $7,000), insurance (decrease of $13,000), sponsorship (decrease of $5,000), travel (decrease of $9,000), investor relations (decrease of $25,000), facility and related (decrease of $4,000), license fees (decrease of $2,000) and other (decrease of $6,000). We believe that our G&A expenses will remain at current levels as we wait for data from the upcoming clinical trials being conducted by our partners. If we enter into additional partnerships or other business transactions, including financings, we will incur additional legal and transaction related expenses.
Interest Expense. Our statement of operations reflects interest expense of $232,631 for the year ended December 31, 2020 versus $153,410 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase reflects the 2019 Notes being outstanding for the full year as well as the issuance of the 2020 Notes in October 2020.
Net Loss. Our statement of operations reflects a net loss of $1,523,368 for the year ended December 31, 2020 versus net loss of $1,404,247 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Losses from operations increased in 2020 versus 2019, $1,294,543 and $1,261,881, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have not commercialized any of our product candidates to date and have incurred significant losses since inception. In addition, we have primarily financed our operations through the equity or issuance of debt including the sale of a series of convertible promissory notes through private placements with accredited investors and the March and August 2014 private placements of common stock with GtreeBNT as well as our entry into the ReGenTree joint venture in early 2015. The report of our independent registered public accounting firm regarding our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 contains an explanatory paragraph regarding our ability to continue as a going concern based upon our history of operating losses and dependence on future financing in order to meet our planned operating activities.
Our statement of operations reflects a net loss of $1,523,368 for the year ended December 31, 2020. We had cash and cash equivalents of $427,898 at December 31, 2020. In October 2020, we sold the 2020 Notes, resulting in gross proceeds to the Company of $500,000. In January 2020, Sabby exercised their remaining warrants and the Company received proceeds of $241,911. At present, with the receipt of the sale proceeds from the closing on the 2020 Notes in October 2020, we have sufficient cash to fund planned operations into the second quarter of 2021.
We may also receive funds from grants, new partnerships or the raising of additional capital if the market climate warrants. Additionally, we intend to continue to pursue additional partnering activities, particularly for RGN-352, our injectable systemic product candidate for cardiac and central nervous system indications. This estimate also does not include receipt of any funds from grants, new partnerships or the raising of additional capital if the market climate warrants. A sale of common stock and warrants, a convertible instrument or additional partnering of licensed rights are possible sources of operating capital in the future. Additionally, we intend to continue to pursue additional partnering activities, particularly for RGN-352, our injectable systemic product candidate for cardiac and central nervous system indications.
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $1,007,000 and $1,138,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease is 2020 reflects an increase in accrued expenses on the 2020 balance sheet.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities. We did not use any cash for investing activities in 2020 or 2019.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $795,000 and $1,541,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2020, the cash provided by financing activities consisted of the proceeds from the sale of the 2020 Notes of $500,000 and $242,000 from the exercise of warrants and the receipt of a Paycheck Protection Program loan, administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration, of $55,000, while in 2019 the cash provided by financing activities consisted of the proceeds from the sale of the 2019 Notes of $1,300,000 and $241,000 from the exercise of warrants.
Future Funding Requirements
The expenditures that will be necessary to execute our business plan are subject to numerous uncertainties that may adversely affect our liquidity and capital resources. Currently, RegeneRx has active partnerships in four major territories: the U.S., Europe, China and Pan Asia. Our partners have been moving forward and making progress in each territory. In each case, the cost of development is being borne by our partners with no financial obligation for RegeneRx. Patient accrual, treatment, and follow-up for ophthalmic trials are, in general, relatively fast, as opposed to most other clinical efforts, ARISE-3, ReGenTree’s Phase 3 trial, was initiated and the first patient was enrolled in the second quarter of 2019 and enrollment was completed in November 2020. Top line data from ARISE-3 is expected shortly.
We still have significant clinical assets to develop, primarily RGN-352 (injectable formulation of Tß4 for cardiac and CNS disorders) in the U.S., Pan Asia, and Europe, and RGN-259 in the EU. Our goal is to wait until the results are obtained from the current ophthalmic clinical trials before moving into the EU with RGN-259. If successful, this should allow us to obtain a higher value for the clinical asset at that time. However, we intend to continue to develop RGN-352, either by obtaining grants to fund a Phase 2a clinical trial in the cardiovascular or central nervous system fields or finding a suitable partner with the resources and capabilities to develop it as we have with RGN-259.
In addition, the length of time required for clinical trials varies substantially according to the type, complexity, novelty and intended use of a product candidate. Some of the factors that could impact our liquidity and capital needs include, but are not limited to:
· the progress of our clinical trials;
· the progress of our research activities;
· the number and scope of our research programs;
· the progress of our preclinical development activities;
· the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, enforcing and defending patent and other intellectual property claims;
· the costs related to development and manufacture of preclinical, clinical and validation lots for regulatory purposes and commercialization of drug supply associated with our product candidates;
· our ability to enter into corporate collaborations and the terms and success of these collaborations;
· the costs and timing of regulatory approvals; and
· the costs of establishing manufacturing, sales and distribution capabilities.
Moreover, the duration and the cost of clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of a project as a result of differences arising during the clinical trial protocol, including, among others, the following:
· the number of patients that ultimately participate in the trial;
· the duration of patient follow-up that seems appropriate in view of the results;
· the number of clinical sites included in the trials; and
· the length of time required to enroll suitable patient subjects.
Also, we test our product candidates in numerous preclinical studies to identify indications for which they may be efficacious. We may conduct multiple clinical trials to cover a variety of indications for each product candidate. As we obtain results from trials, we may elect to discontinue clinical trials for certain product candidates or for certain indications in order to focus our resources on more promising product candidates or indications.
Our proprietary product candidates have not yet achieved FDA regulatory approval, which is required before we can market them as therapeutic products. In order to proceed to subsequent clinical trial stages and to ultimately achieve regulatory approval, the FDA must conclude that our clinical data establish safety and efficacy. Historically, the results from preclinical studies and early clinical trials have often not been predictive of results obtained in later clinical trials. A number of new drugs and biologics have shown promising results in clinical trials, but subsequently failed to establish sufficient safety and efficacy data to obtain necessary regulatory approvals.
Sources of Liquidity
We have not commercialized any of our product candidates to date and have primarily financed our operations through the issuance of common stock and common stock warrants in private and public financings. In June of 2016, we raised $1,520,000 by selling 5,147,059 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase 5,147,059 shares of common stock to Sabby. On March 2, 2018, we entered into a warrant reprice and exercise and issuance agreement with Sabby, which, in consideration of the holders exercising in full all of the 2016 Offering warrants the exercise price per share of the warrants was reduced to $0.20 per share. In addition, and as further consideration, we issued to the holders of the 2016 Offering warrants 3,860,294 new warrants with an exercise price of $0.2301 per share. Pursuant to the terms of the Reprice Agreement the exercise price of the new warrants will be reduced from $0.2301 to $0.125 as a result of the sale of the 2019 Notes. We received gross proceeds of approximately $1,000,000 pursuant the exercise and issued 5,147,059 of common stock. In February 2019, we sold a series of convertible promissory notes to accredited investors including Essetifin S.p.A., our largest shareholder. The sale of the notes resulted in gross proceeds to the Company of $1,300,000 over two closings. The first closing in the amount of $650,000 occurred in February 2019 and the second closing, also in the amount of $650,000, occurred on May 13, 2019 after the Company provided notice of the enrollment of the first patent in the ARISE-3 clinical trial in DES sponsored by ReGenTree. The notes contain a $0.12 conversion price and are initially convertible into 10,833,333 chares off common stock. The purchasers also received a warrant exercisable at $0.18 to purchase additional 8,125,000 shares of common stock. In addition, we received proceeds of $115,625 pursuant to the exercise of warrants held by Sabby Management as well as $125,000 for April 2019 warrant exercises. In January 2020, Sabby exercised their remaining warrants and the Company received proceeds of $241,911. In October 2020, we sold the 2020 Notes resulting in gross proceeds to the Company of $500,000. The 2020 Notes were accompanied by 2020 Warrants. At present, with the receipt of the sale proceeds from the closing on the 2020 Notes and proceeds from the January 2020 warrant exercises, we will have sufficient cash to fund planned operations into the second quarter of 2021.
We continuously monitor our cash use as well as the clinical timelines. We continue to evaluate options including the licensing of additional rights to commercialize our clinical products as well as raising capital through the capital markets.
We have various strategic agreements and license agreements with: GtreeBNT, ReGenTree and Lee’s. These license agreements provide for the opportunity for us to receive milestone payments upon specified commercial events and royalty payments in connection with any commercial sales of the licensed products in the respective territories. However, there are no assurances that we will be able to attain any such milestones or generate any such royalty payments under the agreements.
Licensing Agreements
As noted above, we have entered into two strategic agreements with GtreeBNT. GtreeBNT licensed the development and commercialization rights for RGN-259, in Asia (excluding China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan) while also licensing the development and commercialization rights for RGN-137 in the U.S. In August 2017, the Company amended the license agreement for RGN-137 held by GtreeBNT. Under the amendment the Territory was expanded to include Europe, Canada, South Korea, Australia and Japan. In January 2015, we entered into a joint venture and licensing agreement with GtreeBNT that will commercialize RGN-259 for treatment of dry eye and neurotrophic keratitis in the United States, as well as any other indications within the field of ophthalmology. The license agreements provide for the opportunity for us to receive milestone payments upon specified commercial events and royalty payments in connection with any commercial sales of the licensed products in the respective territories. However, there are no assurances that we will be able to attain any such milestones or generate any such royalty payments under the agreements.
We also have entered into a license agreement with Lee’s Pharmaceuticals that provides for the opportunity for us to receive milestone payments upon specified events and royalty payments in connection with any commercial sales of Tß4-based products in China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan (Greater China). However, there are no assurances that we will be able to attain any such milestones or generate any such royalty payments under the agreement. In February 2019, the agreement was amended and assigned by Lee’s to their affiliate, Zhaoke Ophthalmology Pharmaceutical Limited. There were no economic changes to the agreement.
Government Grants
We have pursued, and may continue to pursue, government funding for both RGN-259 and RGN-352. We are not currently receiving funding under a Government Grant.
Other Financing Sources
Other potential sources of outside capital include entering into additional strategic business relationships, additional issuances of equity securities or debt financing or other similar financial instruments. If we raise additional capital through a strategic business relationship, we may have to give up valuable rights to our intellectual property. If we raise funds by selling additional shares of our common stock or securities convertible into our common stock, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders may be significantly diluted. In addition, if additional funds are raised through the issuance of preferred stock or debt securities, these securities are likely to have rights, preferences and privileges senior to our common stock and may involve significant fees, interest expense, restrictive covenants and the granting of security interests in our assets.
Our failure to successfully address liquidity requirements could have a materially negative impact on our business, including the possibility of surrendering our rights to some technologies or product opportunities, delaying our clinical trials, or ceasing operations. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional capital in sufficient amounts, on acceptable terms, or at all.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as such term is defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.