ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
We are a leading luxury retailer in the home furnishings market. Our curated and fully-integrated assortments are presented consistently across our sales channels in sophisticated and unique lifestyle settings. We offer dominant merchandise assortments across a number of categories, including furniture, lighting, textiles, bathware, décor, outdoor and garden, and child and teen furnishings. We position our Galleries as showrooms for our brand, while our websites, other digital initiatives and Source Books act as virtual extensions of our physical spaces. Our retail business is fully integrated across our multiple channels consisting of our retail locations, Source Books and websites. We have an integrated RH Hospitality experience in ten of our Design Gallery locations, which includes Restaurants and wine bars.
As of January 30, 2021, we operated the following number of Galleries, outlets and Showrooms:
The COVID-19 outbreak in the first quarter of fiscal 2020 caused disruption to our business operations. In our initial response to the COVID-19 health crisis we undertook immediate adjustments to our business operations including temporarily closing all of our retail locations and Restaurants, curtailing expenses and delaying investments including scaling back some inventory orders while we assessed the status of our business. Our approach to the crisis evolved quickly as our business trends substantially improved during the second through fourth fiscal quarters of fiscal 2020 as a result of both the reopening of most of our retail locations and also strong consumer demand for our products.
Local regulatory changes related to COVID-19 have continued to place operational restrictions on our Galleries and hospitality locations during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 and into the first quarter of 2021. While we have continued to serve our customers and operate our business through the ongoing COVID-19 health crisis, there can be no assurance that future events will not have an impact on our business, results of operations or financial condition since the extent and duration of the health crisis remains uncertain. Future adverse developments in connection with the COVID-19 crisis, including additional waves or resurgences of COVID-19 outbreaks, including with regard to new strains or variants of the virus, evolving international, federal, state and local restrictions and safety regulations in response to COVID-19 risks, changes in consumer behavior and health concerns, the pace of economic activity in the wake of the COVID-19 crisis, or other similar issues could adversely affect our business, results of operations or financial condition in the future, or our financial results and business performance in future periods. As of March 24, 2021 we had reopened all of our Galleries and Outlets, and nine out of ten of our Restaurants although many of our Restaurants were continuing to conduct business under occupancy limitations and other operational restrictions.
Although our business has strengthened during the period from the second quarter of fiscal 2020 and continuing into the first quarter of fiscal 2021, various constraints in our merchandise supply chain have resulted in some delays in our ability to convert business demand into revenues at normal historical rates. We anticipate that the business conditions related to COVID-19 will continue to adversely affect the capacity of our vendors and supply chain to meet our merchandise demand levels during fiscal 2021. We expect that our supply chain may catch up to demand in the second half of fiscal 2021, but business circumstances and operational conditions in numerous international locations where our vendors operate cannot be predicted with certainty. As an example, many other countries have not administered vaccines in response to COVID-19 with the same speed as the United States and a number of foreign countries have reestablished lockdowns and stay-at-home orders in response to increased COVID-19 cases during recent months. As a result, the pandemic may continue to adversely affect business operations in these jurisdictions which could in turn have a negative impact on our business and our ability to source products through these locations.
54 | FORM 10-K
PART II
Our overall customer demand in specific markets during fiscal 2020 has generally correlated favorably with our customers’ ability to access our Galleries and Outlets. Depending on the future course of the pandemic and further outbreaks, we may experience further restrictions on and closures of our physical operations with respect to Galleries, Outlets and Restaurants. Although we have experienced strong demand for our products during fiscal 2020, some of the demand may have been driven by stay-at-home restrictions that have been in place throughout many parts of the United States and Canada. The exact impact of changes to these stay-at-home restrictions cannot be predicted with certainty. For example, consumer spending on the home including home furnishings has been strong during the period in which the stay-at-home orders have been in place. The relaxation of the stay-at-home restrictions may trigger a shift in consumer spending patterns toward other categories such as travel and leisure activities and away from purchase of merchandise related to the home including home furnishings.
We are undertaking a large number of new business initiatives at the same time in order to support our future growth. We have multiple growth initiatives and innovations in our development pipeline, including expanded merchandise assortments and new collections, additional galleries and guesthouses, new concepts and businesses including through investment in joint ventures and acquisitions. The COVID-19 health crisis had a short-term impact on some of those efforts and initiatives such as the timing of some construction efforts with respect to opening new Gallery locations and optimizing our inventory. From the second quarter of fiscal 2020, we have resumed many investments and previously deferred expenditures, but we anticipate that our decisions regarding these matters will continue to evolve in response to changing business circumstances including further developments with respect to the pandemic. For example, real estate development counterparties with respect to some of our Gallery development projects have withdrawn from these projects as a result of capital or liquidity constraints due to COVID-19 related difficulties, and these and other similar factors may impact the timing or scope of some of our new Galleries. The ongoing global impact of COVID-19, including travel restrictions imposed by various countries, will continue to affect certain aspects of our planned international expansion and has been a major factor in our decision to delay the timing of our previous plans to open a number of our international locations. Given the pace at which business conditions are evolving in response to the COVID-19 health crisis, any negative developments could cause us to decide to curtail and/or further postpone business investments including those related to opening new Galleries in the U.S. as well as other initiatives including our international expansion.
For more information, refer to Item 1A - Risk Factors-The COVID-19 pandemic poses significant and widespread risks to our business as well as to the business environment and the markets in which we operate.
Key Value Driving Strategies
In order to drive growth across our business, we are focused on the following long-term key strategies and business initiatives:
Product Elevation. Our goal is to establish RH as the undisputed design and quality leader of the luxury home furnishings sector. We have multiple growth initiatives and innovations that will further elevate the design and quality of every product category as we climb the luxury mountain and continue to differentiate our products in the market, including the introduction of RH Couture Upholstery and RH Bespoke, over the next several years.
Assortment Expansion. We are expanding our assortment and introducing new concepts to increase market share and brand awareness. This will include the launch of RH Contemporary in 2021, a new collection that bridges the gap between RH Interiors and RH Modern, while elevating our brand and expanding our market, and RH Color in the next several years.
Gallery Transformation. Our product is elevated and rendered more valuable by our architecturally inspiring Galleries. We believe our strategy to open new Design Galleries in every major market will unlock the value of our vast assortment, generating a revenue opportunity for our business of $5 to $6 billion in North America. We believe we can significantly increase our sales by transforming our real estate platform from our existing legacy retail footprint to a portfolio of Design Galleries that is sized to the potential of each market and the size of our assortment. In addition, we plan to incorporate Hospitality into most of the new Design Galleries that we open in the future, which further elevates and renders our product and brand more valuable. We believe Hospitality has created a unique new retail experience that cannot be replicated online, and that the addition of Hospitality will help drive incremental sales of home furnishings in these Galleries.
Global Expansion. We believe that our luxury brand positioning and unique aesthetic has strong international appeal, and that pursuit of global expansion will provide RH access to a substantial long-term market opportunity to build a $20 to $25 billion global brand over time. As such, we are actively pursuing expanding the RH brand globally with the objective of launching international locations in Europe beginning in 2022. We have secured a number of locations in various markets in the United Kingdom and continental Europe in which we expect to introduce our first Galleries outside of the U.S. and Canada.
PART II
FORM 10-K | 55
Brand Elevation. Our vision is to move the brand beyond curating and selling product to conceptualizing and selling spaces by building an ecosystem of products, places, services and spaces that elevate and establish the RH brand as a global thought leader, taste and place maker. Our ecosystem, with its immersive experiences, exposes existing and new customers to our evolving authority in design, architecture and hospitality while acting as a next-generation brand elevation and marketing strategy.
Digital Reimagination. We are reimagining our website into the World of RH, a digital portal presenting our products, places, services and spaces. This will enable existing and new customers to experience the immersive and multi-dimensional World of RH, inclusive of Our Products: Interiors, Modern, Contemporary, Color, Beach House, Ski House, Baby & Child, TEEN and Waterworks; Our Places: Galleries, Guesthouses, Restaurants and Residences; Our Services: Interior Design, Architecture and Landscape Architecture; and Our Spaces: Plane and Yacht Design and Charter.
Business Optimization. We continue to evolve our operating platform to elevate the customer experience and enhance decision-making. These efforts include initiatives such as (i) RH In-Your-Home, a reimagined home delivery experience that sets a new standard for “white glove” delivery and extends the Gallery into the customer’s home, (ii) the opening of a new LA-based distribution center, which will allow us to reduce delivery times by seven to ten days for both outdoor furniture and special order upholstery in most major markets, and (iii) an internal digital transformation that will leapfrog the way we work and drive significant productivity in the product development process, which will begin with the reimagination of the Center of Innovation and Product Leadership.
Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
The disruption to our business operations from the COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on the comparability of certain ratios and year-over-year trends for our operating results for fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019. The primary negative impact to our revenues from store closures occurred during the first half of fiscal 2020, but despite the reopening of most of our Galleries during the second and third fiscal quarters and a strong resurgence in customer demand for our products, we have continued to address a range of business circumstances related to COVID-19 including delays in inventory receipts and manufacturing as our supply chain recovers from the impact of the global health crisis. We have also changed the cadence of our expenses and investments as we have sought to address the impact of the pandemic on the business and delayed the opening of certain new Gallery locations due to issues related to COVID-19 including the extensive travel restrictions that have been in place in Europe. From the second quarter of fiscal 2020, we have resumed many investments and previously deferred expenditures but we anticipate that our decisions regarding these matters will continue to evolve in response to changing business circumstances including further developments with respect to the pandemic. We also expect that direct and indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to affect the comparability of our results during fiscal 2021. Although we have experienced strong demand for our products during the second half of fiscal 2020, for example, some of the demand may have been driven by stay-at-home restrictions that have been in place throughout many parts of the United States and Canada. The relaxation of the stay-at-home restrictions may trigger a shift in consumer spending patterns toward other categories such as travel and leisure activities and away from the purchase of merchandise related to the home including home furnishings which could affect our results of operation in fiscal 2021.
Apart from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations and on macroeconomic conditions, below are certain factors that affect our results of operations.
Our Strategic Initiatives. We are in the process of implementing a number of significant business initiatives that have had and will continue to have an impact on our results of operations.
As a result of the number of current business initiatives we are pursuing, we have experienced in the past and may experience in the future significant period-to-period variability in our financial performance and results of operations. While we anticipate that these initiatives will support the growth of our business, costs and timing issues associated with pursuing these initiatives can negatively affect our growth rates in the short term and may amplify fluctuations in our growth rates from quarter to quarter. Delays in the rate of opening new Galleries and in pursuit of our international expansion as a result of COVID-19 have results in delays in the corresponding increase in revenues that we experience as new Design Galleries are introduced. In addition, we anticipate that our net revenues, adjusted net income and other performance metrics will remain variable as our business model continues to emphasize high growth and numerous, concurrent and evolving business initiatives.
Our Ability to Source and Distribute Products Effectively. Our net revenues and gross profit are affected by our ability to purchase our merchandise in sufficient quantities at competitive prices. Our current and anticipated demand, and our level of net revenues have been adversely affected in prior periods by constraints in our supply chain, including the inability of our vendors to produce sufficient quantities of some merchandise to match market demand from our customers, leading to higher levels of customer back orders and lost sales. For example, a number of our vendors are experiencing delays in
56 | FORM 10-K
PART II
production and shipment of merchandise orders related to direct and indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, as we introduce new products and expand our merchandise assortments into new categories, we expect to experience delays in the production of some new offerings as we have had similar experiences during prior periods when we adopted substantial newness in our business such as with the introduction of RH Modern in 2015. During fiscal 2020, the lag in manufacturing and inventory receipts related to the COVID-19 pandemic, together with dislocations in our supply chain, resulted in some delays in our ability to convert demand into revenues and our global supply chain has not fully recovered from the impact of this dislocation. While we expect this dislocation to be resolved by the second half of fiscal 2021, there can be no assurance as to the exact course that the recovery in our supply chain will occur and a number of factors could contribute to further complications in our supply chain including COVID-19 developments in countries where our vendors produce and ship merchandise. Based on total dollar volume of purchases for fiscal 2020, approximately 72% of our products were sourced from Asia, 15% from the United States and the remainder from other countries and regions. For fiscal 2020, approximately 35% of our products were sourced from China. For more information, refer to Item 1A - Risk Factors-The COVID-19 pandemic poses significant and widespread risks to our business as well as to the business environment and the markets in which we operate.
Consumer Preferences and Demand. Our ability to maintain our appeal to existing customers and attract new customers depends on our ability to originate, develop and offer a compelling product assortment responsive to customer preferences and design trends. We have successfully introduced a large number of new products in past periods, which we believe has been a contributing factor in our sales growth and results of operations. Periods in which our products have achieved strong customer acceptance generally have had more favorable results. If we misjudge the market for our products or the product lines that we acquire, we may be faced with excess inventories for some products and may be required to become more promotional in our selling activities, which would impact our net revenues and gross profit.
Overall Economic Trends. The industry in which we operate is cyclical, and consequently our net revenues are affected by general economic conditions including conditions that affect the housing market. For example, reduced consumer confidence and lower availability and higher cost of consumer credit reduce demand for our products and limit our ability to increase prices or sustain price increases. We have determined that our customer purchasing patterns are influenced by economic factors including the health and volatility of the stock market. We have seen that previous declines in the stock market and periods of high volatility have been correlated with a reduction in consumer demands for our products and may continue in future periods. We target consumers of high-end home furnishings. As a result, we believe that our sales are sensitive to a number of macroeconomic factors that influence consumer spending generally, but that our sales are particularly affected by the health of the higher end customer and demand levels from that customer demographic. While the overall home furnishings market may be influenced by factors such as employment levels, interest rates, demographics of new household formation and the affordability of homes for the first time home buyer, the higher end of the housing market may be disproportionately influenced by other factors, including stock market prices, restrictions on travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the number of second and third homes being bought and sold, the number of foreign buyers in higher end real estate markets in the U.S., tax policies and interest rates, and the perceived prospect for capital appreciation in higher end real estate. Shifts in consumption patterns linked to the reopening of businesses in light of improvements relating to the COVID-19 pandemic may also have an impact on consumer spending in the high-end housing market. We have in the past experienced volatility in our sales trends related to many of these factors and believe our sales may be impacted by these economic factors in future periods. These headwinds tied to macroeconomic factors may continue in future quarters. For more information, refer to Item 1A - Risk Factors-Changes in consumer spending and factors that influence spending of the specific categories of consumers that purchase from us, including the health of the high-end housing market, may significantly impact our revenue and results of operations and - The COVID-19 pandemic poses significant and widespread risks to our business as well as to the business environment and the markets in which we operate.
PART II
FORM 10-K | 57
Fluctuation in Quarterly Results. Our quarterly results vary depending upon a variety of factors, including changes in our product offerings and the introduction of new merchandise assortments and categories, the opening of new retail locations, shifts in the timing of various events quarter over quarter including holidays and other events such as store closures, the timing of Source Book releases, promotional events and the timing and extent of our realization of the costs and benefits of our numerous strategic initiatives, among other things. As a result of these factors, our working capital requirements and demands on our product distribution and delivery network may fluctuate during the year. For example, we experienced significant fluctuations in our revenue growth over the last several years including within the quarters during fiscal 2020. Our quarterly results during fiscal 2020 were affected by a variety of factors related to the overall operating environment including the impact of the pandemic on various parts of our operations and we expect this variability in quarterly results to continue in fiscal 2021. In addition, we have historically experienced some seasonality in our business trends as our sales are typically higher in the second fiscal quarter, which correlates to a peak selling season for outdoor items including outdoor furniture. Unique factors in any given quarter may affect period-to-period comparisons between the quarters being compared, and the results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of the results that we may achieve for a full fiscal year.
How We Assess the Performance of Our Business
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of financial and operating measures that affect our results of operations, including:
Net Revenues and Demand. Net revenues reflect our sale of merchandise plus shipping and handling revenue collected from our customers, less returns and discounts. Revenues are recognized when a customer obtains control of the merchandise. We collect annual membership fees related to the RH Members Program, which are recorded as deferred revenue when collected from customers and recognized as revenue based on expected product revenues over the annual membership period.
We also track “demand” in our business which is a non-GAAP metric linked to the level of customer orders. Demand is an operating metric that we use in reference to the dollar value of orders placed (orders convert to net revenue upon a customer obtaining control of the merchandise), and excludes exchanges and shipping fees.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin. Gross profit is equal to our net revenues less cost of goods sold. Gross profit as a percentage of our net revenues is referred to as gross margin. Cost of goods sold include the direct cost of purchased merchandise; inventory shrinkage, inventory adjustments due to obsolescence, including excess and slow-moving inventory and lower of cost or net realizable value reserves; inbound freight; all freight costs to get merchandise to our stores; design, buying and allocation costs; occupancy costs related to store operations and our supply chain, such as rent and common area maintenance for our leases; depreciation and amortization of leasehold improvements, equipment and other assets in our stores and distribution centers. In addition, cost of goods sold include all logistics costs associated with shipping product to our customers, which are partially offset by shipping income collected from customers (recorded in net revenues on the consolidated statements of income).
Our gross profit and gross margin can be favorably impacted by sales volume increases, as occupancy and certain other costs that are largely fixed do not necessarily increase proportionally with volume increases. Changes in the mix of our products may also impact our gross profit and gross margin. We review our inventory levels on an ongoing basis in order to identify slow-moving merchandise and use product markdowns and our outlet stores to efficiently sell these products. The timing and extent of markdowns are driven primarily by customer acceptance of our merchandise. The primary drivers of the costs of individual goods are raw materials costs, which fluctuate based on a number of factors beyond our control, including commodity prices, changes in supply and demand, general economic conditions, competition, import duties, tariffs and government regulation, logistics costs (which may increase in the event of, for example, expansions of or interruptions in the operation of our distribution centers, furniture home delivery centers and customer service center or damage or interruption to our information systems) and labor costs in the countries where we source our merchandise. We place orders with merchandise vendors primarily in United States dollars and, as a result, are not exposed to significant foreign currency exchange risk.
Our gross profit and gross margin may not be comparable to other specialty retailers, as some companies may not include all or a portion of the costs related to their distribution network and store occupancy in calculating gross profit and gross margin as we and many other retailers do, but instead may include them in selling, general and administrative expenses. In addition, certain of our store leases are accounted for as finance leases which result in our recording a portion of the expense related to these agreements in interest expense-net on the consolidated statements of income.
58 | FORM 10-K
PART II
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses include all operating costs not included in cost of goods sold. These expenses include payroll and payroll related expenses, store expenses other than occupancy and expenses related to many of our operations at our corporate headquarters, including utilities, depreciation and amortization, credit card fees and marketing expense, which primarily includes Source Book production, mailing and print advertising costs. All store pre-opening costs are included in selling, general and administrative expenses and are expensed as incurred. We expect certain of these expenses to continue to increase as we open new stores, develop new product categories and otherwise pursue our current business initiatives. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net revenues are usually higher in lower-volume quarters and lower in higher-volume quarters because a significant portion of the costs are relatively fixed.
In addition, in recent periods we have experienced increased selling, general and administrative expenses, including certain non-cash compensation expenses and costs associated with asset impairments and leases losses, sale leaseback transactions, reorganizations and distribution center closures and product recalls, as discussed in “Basis of Presentation and Results of Operations” below.
Adjusted Operating Income, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income. We believe that adjusted operating income, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income are useful measures of operating performance, as the adjustments eliminate non-recurring and other items that are not reflective of underlying business performance, facilitate a comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis from period-to-period and provide for a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our business. We also use adjusted operating income, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income as methods for planning and forecasting overall expected performance and for evaluating on a quarterly and annual basis actual results against such expectations.
We define adjusted operating income as consolidated operating income, adjusted for the impact of certain non-recurring and other items that we do not consider representative of our underlying operating performance.
We define EBITDA as consolidated net income (loss) before depreciation and amortization, interest expense-net and income tax expense. Adjusted EBITDA reflects further adjustments to EBITDA to eliminate the impact of non-cash compensation, as well as certain non-recurring and other items that we do not consider representative of our underlying operating performance. Because adjusted EBITDA omits non-cash items, we feel that it is less susceptible to variances in actual performance resulting from depreciation, amortization and other non-cash charges and can be more reflective of our operating performance.
We define adjusted net income as consolidated net income (loss), adjusted for the impact of certain non-recurring and other items that we do not consider representative of our underlying operating performance. Refer to Item 6 - Selected Consolidated Financial Data for further information.
Free Cash Flow. Free cash flow excludes all non-cash items. Free cash flow is net cash provided by operating activities adjusted by the non-cash accretion of debt discount upon settlement of debt, proceeds from sale of asset, capital expenditures, principal payments under finance leases and equity method investments. Free cash flow is included in this filing because our senior leadership team believes that free cash flow provides meaningful supplemental information for investors regarding the performance of our business and facilitates a meaningful evaluation of operating results on a comparable basis with historical results. Our senior leadership team uses this non-GAAP financial measure in order to have comparable financial results to analyze changes in our underlying business.
PART II
FORM 10-K | 59
Basis of Presentation and Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of income and other financial and operating data.
60 | FORM 10-K
PART II
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of income as a percentage of total net revenues.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
Net revenues
Consolidated net revenues increased $201.2 million, or 7.6%, to $2,848.6 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $2,647.4 million in fiscal 2019.
RH Segment net revenues for fiscal 2020 were negatively impacted by $1.4 million and for fiscal 2019 were favorably impacted by $0.4 million, in each case related to product recalls. Excluding the product recall adjustments, consolidated net revenues increased $203.0 million, or 7.7%, to $2,850.0 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $2,647.0 million in fiscal 2019. Product recalls and the establishment or adjustment of any related recall accruals can affect our results and cause quarterly fluctuations affecting the period-to-period comparisons of our results. No assurance can be provided that any accruals will be for the appropriate amount, and actual losses could be higher or lower than what we accrue from time to time, which could further affect results.
PART II
FORM 10-K | 61
RH Segment net revenues
RH Segment net revenues increased $215.1 million, or 8.6%, to $2,729.4 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $2,514.3 million in fiscal 2019. The below discussion highlights several significant factors that resulted in increased RH Segment net revenues, which are listed in order of magnitude.
RH Segment core net revenues increased due to strong customer demand for our products primarily beginning in June 2020 through the end of fiscal 2020. The strong customer demand in the second half of fiscal 2020 more than offset the negative impact to demand we experienced in our business due to Gallery closures and macroeconomic conditions resulting from COVID-19 in March and April of 2020. Outlet sales decreased $33.9 million to $187.5 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $221.4 million in fiscal 2019 due to COVID-19 related closures in the first quarter of fiscal 2020. RH Segment net revenues also decreased in our Contract business and RH Hospitality operations due to COVID-19 related factors including a slowdown in commercial purchasing activities, as well as closures and reduced capacity in our RH Hospitality locations. Despite our revenue growth during the year, the growth in revenue was lower than the growth in customer demand for our products during the second half of fiscal 2020 primarily due to the effects of higher than anticipated demand and disruptions across our global supply chain as a result of COVID-19. It may take several quarters for inventory receipts and manufacturing to catch up to the increase in customer demand.
Waterworks net revenues
Waterworks net revenues decreased $13.9 million, or 10.5%, to $119.2 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $133.1 million in fiscal 2019 primarily due to temporary showroom closures and construction delays related to COVID-19.
Gross profit
Consolidated gross profit increased $230.5 million, or 21.1%, to $1,325.5 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $1,095.0 million in fiscal 2019. As a percentage of net revenues, gross margin increased 510 basis points to 46.5% of net revenues in fiscal 2020 compared to 41.4% of net revenues in fiscal 2019.
RH Segment gross profit for fiscal 2020 was negatively impacted by $5.9 million related to product recalls and includes asset impairments of $2.4 million related to Outlet inventory resulting from retail closures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. RH Segment gross profit for fiscal 2019 was negatively impacted by $4.9 million related to accelerated depreciation for reductions in the estimated useful life of certain assets and was favorably impacted by $3.8 million related to product recalls.
Excluding the product recall, inventory reserves and accelerated asset depreciation adjustments mentioned above, consolidated gross margin would have increased 540 basis points to 46.8% of net revenues in fiscal 2020 compared to 41.4% of net revenues in fiscal 2019.
RH Segment gross profit
RH Segment gross profit increased $235.4 million, or 22.7%, to $1,274.1 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $1,038.7 million in fiscal 2019. As a percentage of net revenues, RH Segment gross margin increased 540 basis points to 46.7% of net revenues in fiscal 2020 compared to 41.3% of net revenues in fiscal 2019.
Excluding the product recall, inventory reserves and acceleration of depreciation adjustments mentioned above, RH Segment gross margin would have increased 560 basis points to 47.0% of net revenues in fiscal 2020 from 41.4% of net revenues in fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily driven by product mix and price increases, as well as higher product margins in select categories in our Core business. Additionally, we had lower Outlet promotional activity during the period and drove leverage in our RH Segment occupancy costs.
Waterworks gross profit
Waterworks gross profit decreased $4.9 million, or 8.7%, to $51.4 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $56.3 million in fiscal 2019. As a percentage of net revenues, Waterworks gross margin increased 80 basis points to 43.1% of net revenues in fiscal 2020 compared to 42.3% of net revenues in fiscal 2019.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Consolidated selling, general and administrative expenses increased $126.5 million, or 17.3%, to $858.7 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $732.2 million in fiscal 2019, primarily due to non-cash compensation of $117.1 million related to an option grant made to Mr. Friedman in October 2020.
62 | FORM 10-K
PART II
RH Segment selling, general and administrative expenses
RH Segment selling, general and administrative expenses increased $128.7 million, or 18.9%, to $808.4 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $679.7 million in fiscal 2019.
RH Segment selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2020 includes non-cash compensation of $117.1 million related to an option grant made to Mr. Friedman in October 2020, loss of $9.4 million related to a sale leaseback transaction, $7.0 million related to severance costs and related payroll taxes associated with the termination of associates and a reorganization undertaken in response to the impact of retail closures on our business, $5.0 million related to asset impairments and $3.9 million due to accelerated asset depreciation.
RH Segment selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2019 included impairments of $15.2 million which consisted of asset impairments of $9.1 million, an RH Contemporary Art lease impairment of $4.6 million, resulting from an update to both the timing and the amount of future estimated lease related cash inflows, and other lease impairments of $1.5 million due to early exit of leased facilities. RH Segment selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2019 also included acceleration of depreciation due to a change the estimated useful life of certain assets of $1.3 million, reorganization related costs of $1.1 million and a $0.5 million charge related to the termination of a service agreement, partially offset by a gain on real estate related to asset previously classified as held for sale and other land sales of $1.5 million, a favorable $1.2 million legal settlement related to historical freight charges and $0.2 million related to product recalls.
Excluding the adjustments mentioned above, RH Segment selling, general and administrative expenses would have been 24.4% and 26.4% of net revenues for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net revenues was primarily driven by a reduction in advertising costs due to our decision to not mail the Fall 2020 Source Books, leverage in employment and employment related costs, and reduced travel related expenses, partially offset by increased professional fees and incremental COVID-19 related expenses.
Waterworks selling, general and administrative expenses
Waterworks selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $2.2 million, or 4.2%, to $50.3 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $52.5 million in fiscal 2019. Waterworks selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2020 included $1.6 million related to asset impairments and $1.3 million related to product recalls. Excluding the asset impairments and product recalls, Waterworks selling, general and administrative expenses would have increased 30 basis points to 39.7% of net revenues in fiscal 2020 compared to 39.4% of net revenues in fiscal 2019.
Interest expense-net
Interest expense-net decreased $17.9 million in fiscal 2020 compared in fiscal 2019, which consisted of the following in each fiscal year:
PART II
FORM 10-K | 63
Goodwill and tradename impairment
We incurred a $20.5 million tradename impairment charge in fiscal 2020 for our Waterworks reporting unit. We did not recognize goodwill impairment in fiscal 2020 or goodwill or tradename impairment in fiscal 2019. Refer to “Impairment” within Note 3- Significant Accounting Policies in our consolidated financial statements within Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(Gain) loss on extinguishment of debt-net
We recognized a $0.2 million gain on extinguishment of debt in fiscal 2020 related to the maturity and settlement of the 2020 Notes in July 2020. We incurred $6.5 million of loss on extinguishment of debt in fiscal 2019 primarily due to a $6.7 million loss from the repayment in full of the second lien term loan in September 2019, which resulted in a prepayment penalty of $4.0 million and acceleration of amortization of debt issuance costs of $2.7 million. In addition, we recognized a $1.0 million gain on extinguishment of debt in fiscal 2019 due to the maturity and settlement of the 2019 Notes in June 2019 and a $0.8 million loss due to accelerated debt issuance costs related to the early repayment of the FILO term loan.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense was $104.6 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $48.8 million in fiscal 2019. Our effective tax rate was 27.8% in fiscal 2020 compared to 18.1% in fiscal 2019. The effective tax rate was significantly impacted by non-deductible stock-based compensation related to an option grant made to Mr. Friedman in October 2020, which resulted in income tax expense of $29.1 million in fiscal 2020. In addition, the effective tax rate in fiscal 2020 was favorably impacted by net excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation of $22.2 million and $21.4 million in fiscal 2019 resulting from increased option exercise activity and appreciation of our stock price.
Equity method investments losses
Equity method investments losses consists of our proportionate share of the losses of our equity method investments by applying the hypothetical liquidation at book value methodology, which resulted in a $0.9 million loss in fiscal 2020.
Fiscal 2019 Compared to Fiscal 2018
(1) Waterworks results include non-cash amortization of $0.4 million related to the inventory fair value adjustment recorded in connection with our acquisition of Waterworks during fiscal 2018.
Net revenues
Consolidated net revenues increased $141.8 million, or 5.7%, to $2,647.4 million in fiscal 2019 compared to $2,505.7 million in fiscal 2018.
Consolidated net revenues for fiscal 2019 were positively impacted by $0.4 million and for fiscal 2018 were negatively impacted by $4.7 million, in each case related to product recalls. Excluding the product recall adjustments, consolidated net revenues increased $136.7 million, or 5.4%, to $2,647.0 million in fiscal 2019 compared to $2,510.4 million in fiscal 2018. Product recalls and the establishment or adjustment of any related recall accruals can affect our results and cause quarterly fluctuations affecting the period-to-period comparisons of our results. No assurance can be provided that any accruals will be for the appropriate amount, and actual losses could be higher or lower than what we accrue from time to time, which could further affect results.
64 | FORM 10-K
PART II
RH Segment net revenues
RH Segment net revenues increased $138.8 million, or 5.8%, to $2,514.3 million in fiscal 2019 compared to $2,375.5 million in fiscal 2018. The below discussion highlights several significant factors that resulted in increased RH Segment net revenues, which are listed in order of magnitude.
RH Segment core net revenues increased primarily due to existing Galleries, as well as an increase in retail weighted-average selling square footage related to new store openings, including New York, Nashville, Minneapolis, Columbus and Yountville. Net revenues also increased from our RH Hospitality operations and Contract business. In addition, we believe that our net revenues were negatively impacted by a decline in sales in the fourth quarter resulting from several factors, including higher than expected backorders due to a year-over-year decrease in inventories as well as our decision to eliminate most seasonal holiday merchandising from our business, which decision we believe contributed a larger than anticipated impact to sales as customers who might otherwise purchase our Holiday merchandise chose to shop at other retailers offering holiday merchandise selections and, as a result, our net revenues were less than the prior period not only due to elimination of the sale of the holiday merchandise but also the loss of additional sales of non-holiday merchandise that would typically been made at the same time by customers attracted to our product offerings of holiday merchandise.
Outlet sales increased $42.4 million in fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 primarily due to increased promotional activity as a result of our efforts to reduce inventory subsequent to the distribution center closures as part of the distribution center network redesign.
RH Segment net revenues for fiscal 2019 were positively impacted by $0.4 million and for fiscal 2018 were negatively impacted by $4.7 million, in each case related to product recalls.
Waterworks net revenues
Waterworks net revenues increased $3.0 million, or 2.3%, to $133.1 million in fiscal 2019 compared to $130.2 million in fiscal 2018.
Gross profit
Consolidated gross profit increased $109.4 million, or 11.1%, to $1,095.0 million in fiscal 2019 compared to $985.6 million in fiscal 2018. As a percentage of net revenues, gross margin increased 210 basis points to 41.4% of net revenues in fiscal 2019 compared to 39.3% of net revenues in fiscal 2018.
RH Segment gross profit for fiscal 2019 was negatively impacted by $4.9 million related to acceleration of depreciation due to a change in the estimated useful life of certain assets and was positively impacted by $3.8 million related to product recalls. RH Segment gross profit for fiscal 2018 was negatively impacted by $2.6 million related to acceleration of depreciation due to a change in the estimated useful life of certain assets, $1.5 million related to costs associated with distribution center closures, $1.2 million due to inventory impairment related to Holiday merchandise and $0.6 million related to product recalls.
Waterworks gross profit for fiscal 2018 was negatively impacted by $0.4 million of amortization related to the inventory fair value adjustment recorded in connection with the acquisition.
Excluding the accelerated asset depreciation, product recall adjustments, costs associated with the distribution center closures, inventory impairment and impact of the amortization related to the inventory fair value adjustment mentioned above, consolidated gross margin would have increased 190 basis points to 41.4% of net revenues in fiscal 2019 compared to 39.5% of net revenues in fiscal 2018.
RH Segment gross profit
RH Segment gross profit increased $104.9 million, or 11.2%, to $1,038.7 million in fiscal 2019 compared to $933.8 million in fiscal 2018. As a percentage of net revenues, RH Segment gross margin increased 200 basis points to 41.3% of net revenues in fiscal 2019 compared to 39.3% of net revenues in fiscal 2018.
Excluding the accelerated asset depreciation, product recall adjustments, costs associated with distribution center closures and inventory impairment mentioned above, RH Segment gross margin would have increased 190 basis points to 41.4% of net revenues in fiscal 2019 compared to 39.5% of net revenues in fiscal 2018. The increase was primarily related to improvements in our distribution center network redesign resulting in reduced delivery expense and leverage in occupancy costs, as well as improvements in our core merchandise margins. The overall increase was partially offset by lower outlet product margins due to increased promotional activity and higher discounts due to our efforts to reduce inventory.
PART II
FORM 10-K | 65
Waterworks gross profit
Waterworks gross profit increased $4.5 million, or 8.7%, to $56.3 million in fiscal 2019 compared to $51.8 million in fiscal 2018. As a percentage of net revenues, Waterworks gross margin increased 250 basis points to 42.3% of net revenues in fiscal 2019 compared to 39.8% of net revenues in fiscal 2018.
Excluding the impact of the amortization related to the inventory fair value adjustment mentioned above, Waterworks gross margin would have increased 220 basis points to 42.3% of net revenues in fiscal 2019 compared to 40.1% of net revenues in fiscal 2018.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Consolidated selling, general and administrative expenses increased $8.3 million, or 1.2%, to $732.2 million in fiscal 2019 compared to $723.8 million in fiscal 2018.
RH Segment selling, general and administrative expenses
RH Segment selling, general and administrative expenses increased $8.9 million, or 1.3%, to $679.7 million in fiscal 2019 compared to $670.8 million in fiscal 2018.
RH Segment selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2019 included impairments of $15.2 million which consisted of asset impairments of $9.1 million, an RH Contemporary Art lease impairment of $4.6 million, resulting from an update to both the timing and the amount of future estimated lease related cash inflows, and other lease impairments of $1.5 million due to early exit of leased facilities. RH Segment selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2019 also included acceleration of depreciation due to a change the estimated useful life of certain assets of $1.3 million, reorganization related costs of $1.1 million and a $0.5 million charge related to the termination of a service agreement, partially offset by a gain on real estate related to asset previously classified as held for sale and other land sales of $1.5 million, a favorable $1.2 million legal settlement related to historical freight charges and $0.2 million related to product recalls.
Additionally, RH Segment selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2019 included advertising and marketing costs which increased $10.7 million primarily due to an increase in circulation and pages of our Source Books. This was partially offset by a decrease in corporate expenses of $3.4 million, primarily due to reduced preopening expense associated with our Design Gallery openings, partially offset by an increase in credit card fees and other corporate costs.
RH Segment selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2018 included a $10.0 million charge related to reorganizations primarily due to streamlining and realigning our home office operations, $8.5 million impairment recorded upon reclassification of an owned Design Gallery as asset held for sale, $3.4 million related to impairment of the RH Contemporary Art lease, $1.6 million related to costs associated with distribution center closures and $1.0 million related to product recalls, partially offset by a favorable $5.3 million legal settlement, net of related legal expenses.
RH Segment selling, general and administrative expenses would have been 26.4% and 27.4% of net revenues for fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018, respectively, excluding the asset impairments, accelerated asset depreciation, reorganization related costs, product recall adjustments, costs associated with distribution center closures and legal settlements mentioned above. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net revenues was primarily driven by other corporate costs.
Waterworks selling, general and administrative expenses
Waterworks selling, general and administrative expenses increased $1.4 million, or 2.6%, to $53.1 million in fiscal 2018 compared to $51.7 million in fiscal 2017. Waterworks selling, general and administrative expenses were 40.8% and 42.8% of net revenues in fiscal 2018 and fiscal 2017, respectively. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net revenues was primarily driven by leverage in corporate costs.
66 | FORM 10-K
PART II
Interest expense-net
Interest expense-net increased $19.4 million in fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018, which consisted of the following in each fiscal year:
Goodwill and tradename impairment
We did not recognize goodwill or tradename impairment in fiscal 2019. We incurred a $32.1 million goodwill and tradename impairment charge in fiscal 2018 for our Waterworks reporting unit. Refer to “Impairment” within Note 3- Significant Accounting Policies in our consolidated financial statements within Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(Gain) loss on extinguishment of debt-net
We incurred $6.5 million of loss on extinguishment of debt in fiscal 2019 primarily due to a $6.7 million loss from the repayment in full of the second lien term loan in September 2019, which resulted in a prepayment penalty of $4.0 million and acceleration of amortization of debt issuance costs of $2.7 million. In addition, we recognized a $1.0 million gain on extinguishment of debt in fiscal 2019 due to the maturity and settlement of the 2019 Notes in June 2019 and a $0.8 million loss due to accelerated debt issuance costs related to the early repayment of the FILO term loan. We incurred a $0.9 million loss on extinguishment of debt in fiscal 2018 due to the repayment in full of the LILO term loan, the promissory note secured by our aircraft and the equipment security notes in June 2018, which resulted in accelerated amortization of debt issuance costs of $0.6 million and a prepayment penalty of $0.3 million.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense was $48.8 million in fiscal 2019 compared to $25.2 million in fiscal 2018. Our effective tax rate was 18.1% in fiscal 2019 compared to 15.7% in fiscal 2018. The effective tax rate was significantly impacted by discrete tax benefits related to net excess tax windfalls from stock-based compensation of $21.4 million in fiscal 2019 and $19.0 million in fiscal 2018 resulting from increased option exercise activity and appreciation of our stock price. Additionally, the effective tax rate in fiscal 2018 was impacted by the goodwill impairment for the Waterworks reporting unit.
PART II
FORM 10-K | 67
Quarterly Results
The following table sets forth our historical quarterly consolidated statements of income for each of the last eight fiscal quarters ended through January 30, 2021. This quarterly information has been prepared on the same basis as our annual audited financial statements and includes all adjustments that we consider necessary to fairly state the financial information for the fiscal quarters presented. The quarterly data should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Our quarterly results vary depending upon a variety of factors, including changes in our product offerings and the introduction of new merchandise assortments and categories, the opening of new retail locations, shifts in the timing of various events quarter over quarter including holidays and other events such as store closures, the timing of Source Book releases, promotional events and the timing and extent of our realization of the costs and benefits of our numerous strategic initiatives, among other things. In addition, we have historically experienced some seasonality in our business trends as our sales are typically higher in the second fiscal quarter, which correlates to a peak selling season for outdoor items including outdoor furniture. As a result of these factors, our working capital requirements and demands on our product distribution and delivery network may fluctuate during the year and results of a period shorter than a full year may not be indicative of results expected for the entire year.
(1) Adjusted net income is a supplemental measure of financial performance that is not required by, or presented in accordance with, GAAP. We define adjusted net income as consolidated net income (loss), adjusted for the impact of certain non-recurring and other items that we do not consider representative of our underlying operating performance. Adjusted net income is included in this filing because our senior leadership team believes that adjusted net income provides meaningful supplemental information for investors regarding the performance of our business and facilitates a meaningful evaluation of actual results on a comparable basis with historical results. Our senior leadership team uses this non-GAAP financial measure in order to have comparable financial results to analyze changes in our underlying business from quarter to quarter. The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss), the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, to adjusted net income for the periods indicated below.
68 | FORM 10-K
PART II
(a) The adjustments in the third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2020 represent non-cash compensation charges related to an option grant made to Mr. Friedman in October 2020.
(b) Under GAAP, certain convertible debt instruments that may be settled in cash on conversion are required to be separately accounted for as liability and equity components of the instrument in a manner that reflects the issuer’s non-convertible debt borrowing rate. Accordingly, in accounting for GAAP purposes for the $350 million aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes that were issued in June 2014 (the “2019 Notes”), the $300 million aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes that were issued in June and July 2015 (the “2020 Notes”), the $335 million aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes that were issued in June 2018 (the “2023 Notes”) and the $350 million aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes that were issued in September 2019 (the “2024 Notes”), we separated the 2019 Notes, 2020 Notes, 2023 Notes and 2024 Notes into liability (debt) and equity (conversion option) components and we are amortizing as debt discount an amount equal to the fair value of the equity components as interest expense on the 2019 Notes, 2020 Notes, 2023 Notes and 2024 Notes over their expected lives. The equity components represent the difference between the proceeds from the issuance of the 2019 Notes, 2020 Notes, 2023 Notes and 2024 Notes and the fair value of the liability components of the 2019 Notes, 2020 Notes, 2023 Notes and 2024 Notes, respectively. Amounts are presented net of interest capitalized for capital projects of $0.7 million, $0.7 million, $0.9 million and $1.4 million during the first, second, third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2019, respectively. Amounts are presented net of interest capitalized for capital projects of $1.8 million, $1.3 million, $1.1 million and $1.1 million during the first, second, third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2020, respectively. The 2019 Notes matured on June 15, 2019 and the 2020 Notes matured on July 15, 2020 and neither impacted amortization of debt discount post-maturity.
(c) Represents tradename impairment related to the Waterworks reporting unit. Refer to “Impairment” within Note 3-Significant Accounting Policies in our consolidated financial statements within Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
PART II
FORM 10-K | 69
(d) The adjustment in the first quarter of fiscal 2019 includes acceleration of depreciation expense of $3.0 million due to a change in the estimated useful lives of certain assets and a $0.5 million charge related to the termination of a service agreement associated with such assets. The adjustment in the second quarter of fiscal 2019 includes acceleration of depreciation expense of $1.9 million and lease impairments of $0.7 million due to early exit of leased facilities. The adjustment in the third quarter of fiscal 2019 includes lease impairments of $0.8 million due to early exit of leased facilities and asset impairments of $0.2 million. The adjustment in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019 includes asset impairments of $8.9 million, an RH Contemporary Art lease impairment of $4.6 million and acceleration of depreciation expense of $1.3 million. The adjustment in first quarter of fiscal 2020 includes asset impairments of $4.8 million, asset impairments of $2.4 million related to Outlet inventory resulting from retail closures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and acceleration of depreciation expense of $1.3 million. The adjustment in the second quarter of fiscal 2020 includes $1.3 million of accelerated depreciation expense driven by a reduction in the estimated useful lives of certain assets. The adjustment in the third quarter of fiscal 2020 includes $1.3 million of accelerated depreciation expense driven by a reduction in the estimated useful lives of certain assets the acceleration of depreciation expense of $1.3 million and asset impairments of $0.8 million. The adjustment in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 represents right-of-use asset impairments resulting from an update to both the timing and the amount of future estimated lease related cash inflows based on present market conditions of exited locations.
(e) The adjustment in the third quarter of fiscal 2019 represents the gain on a real estate sale related to an asset previously classified as held for sale. The adjustment in the second quarter of fiscal 2020 represents a loss from a sale-leaseback transaction related to one of our previously owned Design Galleries.
(f) Represents severance costs and related taxes associated with reorganizations.
(g) Represents adjustments to net revenues, cost of goods sold and inventory charges associated with product recalls, as well as accrual adjustments, and vendor and insurance claims.
(h) The adjustment in the second quarter of fiscal 2019 represents the gain on extinguishment of debt upon the maturity and settlement of the 2019 Notes in June 2019. The adjustment in the third quarter of fiscal 2019 includes the loss on extinguishment of debt related to a second lien term loan which was repaid in full in September 2019. The adjustments in the third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2019 include the acceleration of debt issuance costs related to early repayment of the FILO term loan. The adjustment in the second quarter of fiscal 2020 represents a gain on extinguishment of debt upon the maturity and settlement of the 2020 Notes in July 2020.
(i) Represents legal settlements, net of related legal expenses.
(j) Represents the gain on real estate land sales.
(k) The first and second quarters of fiscal 2019 assume a normalized tax rate of 21%. The adjustment in the third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2019 represents the tax effect of the adjusted items based on our effective tax rates of 13.7% and 14.9%, respectively. The adjustment in the first quarter of fiscal 2020 is based on an adjusted tax rate of 24.3%, which excludes the tax impact associated with the Waterworks reporting unit tradename impairment. The adjustment in the second quarter of fiscal 2020 represents the tax effect of the adjusted items based on our effective tax rate of 16.1%. The adjustment in the third quarter of fiscal 2020 is based on an adjusted tax rate of 23.3%, which excludes the tax impact associated with the non-cash compensation charge related to an option grant made to Mr. Friedman in October 2020. The adjustment in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 is based on an adjusted tax rate of 22.5%, which excludes our share of equity method investments losses.
(l) Represents our proportionate share of the losses of our equity method investments. Refer to Note 8-Equity Method Investments in our consolidated financial statements within Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
70 | FORM 10-K
PART II
(2) EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are supplemental measures of financial performance that are not required by, or presented in accordance with, GAAP. We define EBITDA as consolidated net income (loss) before depreciation and amortization, interest expense-net and income tax expense (benefit). Adjusted EBITDA reflects further adjustments to EBITDA to eliminate the impact of non-cash compensation, certain non-recurring, and other items that we do not consider representative of our underlying operating performance. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are included in this filing because our senior leadership team believes that these metrics provide meaningful supplemental information for investors regarding the performance of our business and facilitate a meaningful evaluation of operating results on a comparable basis with historical results. Our senior leadership team uses these non-GAAP financial measures in order to have comparable financial results to analyze changes in our underlying business from quarter to quarter. Our measures of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not necessarily comparable to other similarly titled captions for other companies due to different methods of calculation. The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss), the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the periods indicated below.
(a) Represents non-cash compensation related to equity awards granted to employees, including non-cash compensation charges related to an option grant made to Mr. Friedman in October 2020.
(b) Refer to the reconciliation of net income (loss) to adjusted net income table above and the related footnotes for additional information.
(c) Represents amortization associated with capitalized cloud computing costs.
PART II
FORM 10-K | 71
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
The primary cash needs of our business have historically been for merchandise inventories, payroll, Source Books, store rent, capital expenditures associated with opening new stores and updating existing stores, as well as the development of our infrastructure and information technology. We seek out and evaluate opportunities for effectively managing and deploying capital in ways that improve working capital and support and enhance our business initiatives and strategies. In the past we have pursued substantial repurchases of our common stock when we believed that such investments represented a good long term investment for the benefit of our shareholders. In October 2018, our Board of Directors approved a $700 million share repurchase program, of which $250 million in share repurchases were completed in fiscal 2018 at an average price of $122.10 per share, and the $700 million authorization amount was replenished by the Board of Directors in March 2019. During the first quarter of fiscal 2019, we repurchased approximately 2.2 million shares of our common stock at an average price of $115.36 per share, for an aggregate repurchase amount of approximately $250 million, with $450 million still available under this share repurchase program. Refer to “Share Repurchase Programs” below. We evaluate our capital allocation from time to time and may engage in future investments in connection with existing or new share repurchase programs in circumstances where buying shares of our common stock or related investments, which may include investments in derivatives or other equity linked instruments, represent a good value and provides a favorable return for our shareholders. We have in the past been opportunistic in responding to favorable market conditions regarding both sources and uses of capital. Our use of convertible notes financings has enabled us to pursue various investments, such as our share repurchase programs which we consider to have been an excellent allocation of capital for the benefit of our shareholders. We regularly evaluate various debt and other financing alternatives, including convertible notes and other equity-linked instruments. Financing that we arrange through the sale of equity linked instruments such as our convertible notes financings may lead to substantial dilution to our investors if the price of our common stock exceeds the upper strike exercise price of the warrants in connection with our bond hedge transactions, which has been the case in connection with our convertible notes which matured in 2019 and 2020. At the same time, the investments we have previously made in connection with our share repurchase programs have more than offset the amount of dilution we experienced in relation to these warrants. We expect to continue to take an opportunistic approach regarding both sources and uses of capital in connection with our business.
We have $685 million in aggregate principal amount of convertible notes outstanding as of January 30, 2021, of which $335 million mature in June 2023 and $350 million mature in September 2024. Based on the strong cash flow generated in 2020 and continued strong cash flow anticipated in future years, we expect to repay the outstanding principal amount of our convertible notes at maturity in June 2023 and September 2024 in cash, in each case to minimize dilution. While we purchased convertible note hedges and sold warrants with respect to each convertible note transaction, which are intended to offset any actual earnings dilution from the conversion of the 2024 Notes until our common stock is above approximately $338.24 per share and from the conversion of the 2023 Notes until our common stock is above approximately $309.84 per share, our shareholders may still experience dilution to the extent our common stock trades above such levels. While we anticipate using excess cash, free cash flow and borrowings on our asset based credit facility to repay the convertible notes in cash to minimize dilution, we may need to pursue additional sources of liquidity to repay such convertible notes in cash at their respective maturity dates or upon early conversion, as applicable. There can be no assurance as to the availability of capital to fund such repayments, or that if capital is available through additional debt issuances or refinancing of the convertible notes, that such capital will be available on terms that are favorable to us.
Our business has historically relied on cash flows from operations, net cash proceeds from the issuance of the convertible senior notes, as well as borrowings under our credit facilities as our primary sources of liquidity. We believe our operating cash flows, in conjunction with available financing arrangements, will be sufficient to repay our debt obligations as they become due, meet working capital requirements and fulfill other capital needs for more than the next 12 months.
From the second quarter of fiscal 2020, we have resumed many investments and previously deferred expenditures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, but we anticipate that our decisions regarding these matters will continue to evolve in response to changing business circumstances including further developments with respect to the pandemic. We will continue to closely manage our investments while considering both the overall economic environment as well as the needs of our business operations. In addition, our near term decisions regarding the sources and uses of capital in our business will continue to reflect and adapt to changes in market conditions and our business including further developments with respect to the pandemic.
72 | FORM 10-K
PART II
While we have continued to serve our customers and operate our business through the ongoing COVID-19 health crisis, there can be no assurance that future events will not have an impact on our business, results of operations or financial condition since the extent and duration of the health crisis remains uncertain. Future adverse developments in connection with the COVID-19 crisis, including additional waves or resurgences of COVID-19 outbreaks, including with regard to new strains or variants of the virus, evolving international, federal, state and local restrictions and safety regulations in response to COVID-19 risks, changes in consumer behavior and health concerns, the pace of economic activity in the wake of the COVID-19 crisis, or other similar issues could adversely affect our business, results of operations or financial condition in the future, or our financial results and business performance for fiscal 2020 and beyond.
We extended and amended our asset based credit facility in June 2017, which has a total availability of $600 million, of which $10 million is available to Restoration Hardware Canada, Inc., and includes a $200 million accordion feature under which the revolving line of credit may be expanded by agreement of the parties from $600 million to up to $800 million if and to the extent the lenders revise their credit commitments to encompass a larger facility. The revolving line of credit has a maturity date of June 28, 2022.
While we do not require additional debt to fund our operations, our goal continues to be in a position to take advantage of the many opportunities that we identify in connection with our business and operations. We have pursued in the past, and may pursue in the future, additional strategies to generate capital to pursue opportunities and investments, including through the strategic sale of existing assets, utilization of our credit facilities, entry into various second lien credit agreements and other new debt financing arrangements that present attractive terms. In addition to funding the normal operations of our business, we have used our liquidity to fund significant investments and strategies such as our share repurchase programs, various acquisitions and growth initiatives, including through joint ventures and real estate investments. For example, in fiscal 2019 we executed a sale-leaseback transaction for the Yountville Design Gallery for sales proceeds of $23.5 million and in fiscal 2020 we executed a sale-leaseback transaction for the Minneapolis Design Gallery for sales proceeds of $25.5 million, both of which qualified for sale-leaseback accounting in accordance with ASC 842.
During fiscal 2017, we increased the aggregate level of our indebtedness through various forms of debt financing and our net debt to trailing twelve months adjusted EBITDA reached a level in excess of 5X during this time period. Our business has performed very well since that time and we have increased earnings, generated substantial cash flow, paid down debt and reduced this leverage ratio to a level of 0.7X as of January 30, 2021. While our cash flow has enabled this significant reduction in the aggregate since fiscal 2017 and we currently have multiple financing alternatives available to us on favorable terms that could provide us with additional financial flexibility with respect to capital allocation, there can be no assurance that additional capital, whether raised through the sale of assets, utilization of our existing debt financing sources, or pursuit of additional debt financing sources, will be available to us on a timely manner, on favorable terms or at all. We may elect to incur additional debt and increase the level of indebtedness in our leverage ratio in the future. Any increase in debt and the level of indebtedness in our leverage ratio could expose us to greater risks in the event of a financial or operational downturn or other events including unanticipated adverse developments that affect our financial performance or the ability to access financial markets. To the extent we pursue additional debt as a source of liquidity, our capitalization profile may change and may include significant leverage, and as a result we may be required to use future liquidity to repay such indebtedness and may be subject to additional terms and restrictions which affect our operations and future uses of capital. See Item 1A - Risk Factors-Our operations have significant liquidity and capital requirements and depend on the availability of adequate financing and sources of capital on reasonable terms. If we fail to use our financial resources effectively, or if we are unable to obtain sufficient capital when needed, it could have a significant negative effect on our ability to grow our business.
In addition, our capital needs and uses of capital may change in the future due to changes in our business or new opportunities that we choose to pursue. We have invested significant capital expenditures in developing and opening new Design Galleries, and these capital expenditures have increased in the past and may continue to increase in future periods as we open additional Design Galleries, which may require us to undertake upgrades to historical buildings or construction of new buildings.
Our adjusted capital expenditures include capital expenditures from investing activities and cash outflows of capital related to construction activities to design and build landlord-owned leased assets, net of tenant allowances received. Given the pace at which business conditions are evolving in response to the COVID-19 health crisis, we may adjust our investments in various business initiatives including our capital expenditures over the course of fiscal 2021. We anticipate our adjusted capital expenditures to be $250 million to $300 million in fiscal 2021, primarily related to our efforts to continue our growth and expansion, including construction of new Design Galleries and infrastructure investments. Adjusted capital expenditures in fiscal 2020 were $180.6 million, net of cash received related to landlord tenant allowances of $17.3 million. Our fiscal 2020 adjusted capital expenditures are partially offset by net proceeds from sales of assets of $25.0 million.
PART II
FORM 10-K | 73
Certain lease arrangements require the landlord to fund a portion of the construction related costs through payments directly to us. Other lease arrangements for our new Design Galleries require the landlord to fund a portion of the construction related costs directly to third parties, rather than through traditional construction allowances and accordingly, under these arrangements we do not expect to receive contributions directly from our landlords related to the building of our Design Galleries. As we develop new Galleries, as well as other potential strategic initiatives in the future like our integrated hospitality experience, we may explore other models for our real estate, which could include longer lease terms or further purchases of, or joint ventures or other forms of equity ownership in, real estate interests associated with new sites and buildings. These approaches might require different levels of capital investment on our part than a traditional store lease with a landlord. We also believe there is an opportunity to transition our real estate strategy from a leasing model to a development model, where we potentially buy and develop our Design Galleries then recoup the investments through a sale-leaseback arrangement resulting in lower capital investment and lower rent. For example, we have used this strategy in fiscal 2019 through the sale-leaseback transaction for the Yountville Design Gallery and in July 2020 through the sale-leaseback transaction for the Minneapolis Design Gallery. In the event that such capital and other expenditures require us to pursue additional funding sources, we can provide no assurances that we will be successful in securing additional funding on attractive terms or at all.
In addition, we continue to address the effects of COVID-19 on our business with respect to real estate development and the introduction of new Galleries in both the US and internationally. A range of factors involved in the development of new Gallery and RH Hospitality may continue to be affected by the COVID-19 health crisis including delays in construction as well as permitting and other necessary governmental actions. In addition, the scope and cadence of investments by third parties including landlords and other real estate counterparties may be adversely affected by the health crisis. Actions taken by international as well as federal, state and local government authorities, and in some instances mall and shopping center owners, in response to the pandemic, may require changes to our real estate strategy and related capital expenditure and financing plans. In addition, we may continue to be required to make lease payments in whole or in part for our Galleries, Outlets and Restaurants that were temporarily closed or are required to close in the future in the event of resurgences in COVID-19 outbreaks or for other reasons. Any efforts to mitigate the costs of construction delays and deferrals, retail closures and other operational difficulties, including any such difficulties resulting from COVID-19, such as by negotiating with landlords and other third parties regarding the timing and amount of payments under existing contractual arrangements, may not be successful, and as a result, our real estate strategy may have ongoing significant liquidity needs even as we make changes to our planned operations and expansion cadence.
There can be no assurance that we will have sufficient financial resources, or will be able to arrange financing on favorable terms to the extent necessary to fund all of our initiatives, or that sufficient incremental debt will be available to us in order to fund our cash payments in respect of the repayment of our outstanding convertible senior notes in an aggregate principal amount of $685 million at maturity of such senior convertible notes. To the extent we need to secure additional sources of liquidity, we cannot assure you that we will be able to raise necessary funds on favorable terms, if at all, or that future financing requirements would not require us to raise money through an equity financing or by other means that could be dilutive to holders of our capital stock. Any adverse developments in the U.S. or global credit markets as a result of COVID-19 could affect our ability to manage our debt obligations and our ability to access future debt. In addition, agreements governing existing or new debt facilities may restrict our ability to operate our business in the manner we currently expect or to make required payments with respect to existing commitments including the repayment of the principal amount of our convertible senior notes in cash upon maturity of such senior notes. To the extent we need to seek waivers from any provider of debt financing, or we fail to observe the covenants or other requirements of existing or new debt facilities, any such event could have an impact on our other commitments and obligations including triggering cross defaults or other consequences with respect to other indebtedness. Our current level of indebtedness, and any additional indebtedness that we may incur, exposes us to certain risks with regards to interest rate increases and fluctuations. Our ability to make interest payments or to refinance any of our indebtedness to manage such interest rates may be limited or negatively affected by credit market conditions, macroeconomic trends and other risks.
74 | FORM 10-K
PART II
Cash Flow Analysis
A summary of operating, investing and financing activities is set forth in the following table:
Net Cash Provided By Operating Activities
Operating activities consist primarily of net income adjusted for non-cash items including depreciation and amortization, impairments, stock-based compensation, amortization of debt discount and the effect of changes in working capital and other activities.
For fiscal 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $500.8 million and consisted of net income of $271.8 million and an increase in non-cash items of $335.7 million, partially offset by a change in working capital and other activities of $106.7 million. The sources of cash from working capital were primarily driven by increases in deferred revenue and customer deposits of $116.2 million primarily due to strong consumer demand for our products during the second half of fiscal 2020, as well as an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $63.6 million and other current liabilities of $43.9 million. These sources of cash from working capital were partially offset by uses of cash driven by an increase in merchandise inventory of $104.6 million, an increase in landlord assets under construction of $69.5 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $67.3 million and a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $58.9 million primarily due to payments made under the related lease agreements.
For fiscal 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $339.2 million and consisted of net income of $220.4 million and an increase in non-cash items of $199.3 million, partially offset by a change in working capital and other activities of $80.5 million. The sources of cash from working capital were primarily driven by decreases in merchandise inventories of $93.3 million, and prepaid expenses and other current assets of $28.4 million. These sources of cash from working capital were partially offset by uses of cash driven by a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $77.0 million primarily due to payments made under the agreements, an increase in landlord assets under construction of $64.3 million, as well as decreases in other current liabilities and other non-current obligations of $45.8 million and $25.1 million, respectively.
For fiscal 2018, net cash provided by operating activities was $249.6 million and consisted of net income of $135.7 million and an increase in non-cash items of $296.5 million, partially offset by a change in working capital and other activities of $182.6 million. The sources of cash from working capital were primarily driven by increases in other current liabilities of $51.2 million. These sources of cash from working capital were partially offset by uses of cash driven by an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $88.4 million related to (i) adoption of Topic 606, (ii) vendor deposits and (iii) federal and state tax receivables due to prepayments, a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $70.9 million, an increase in landlord assets under construction of $59.0 million and a decrease in other non-current obligations of $18.1 million.
Net Cash Used In Investing Activities
Investing activities consist primarily of investments in capital expenditures related to investments in retail stores, information technology and systems infrastructure, as well as supply chain investments. Investing activities also include strategic investments made by the Company.
For fiscal 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $197.6 million primarily due to investments in retail stores, information technology and systems infrastructure, and supply chain of $111.1 million. In fiscal 2020, we completed the acquisition of equity method investments with $80.7 million in cash payments and invested $17.9 million to acquire a business and assets. Net cash used in investing activities was partially offset by net proceeds from the sale of building and land of $25.0 million.
PART II
FORM 10-K | 75
For fiscal 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $122.5 million, of which $93.6 million primarily related to investments in retail stores, information technology and systems infrastructure, and supply chain investments. In addition, we made deposits on an asset under construction of $53.0 million, offset by net proceeds from the sale of building and land of $24.1 million.
For fiscal 2018, net cash used in investing activities was $80.0 million due to investments in retail stores, information technology and systems infrastructure, and supply chain investments.
Net Cash Used In Financing Activities
Financing activities consist primarily of borrowings related to convertible senior notes, credit facilities and other financing arrangements, and cash used in connection with such financing activities include investments in share repurchase programs, repayment of indebtedness including principal payments under finance lease agreements and other equity related transactions such as the convertible note bond hedge and warrant transactions in connection with our convertible notes financings.
For fiscal 2020, net cash used in financing activities was $243.9 million. The $300 million 2020 Notes matured in July 2020, of which $215.8 million is presented as repayments of convertible senior notes within net cash used in financing activities and $84.0 million is reflected as non-cash accretion of debt discount upon settlement of debt presented in net cash provided by operating activities. Net cash used in financing activities also included repayments under promissory and equipment notes of $34.5 million.
For fiscal 2019, net cash used in financing activities was $174.8 million. The $350.0 million 2019 Notes matured in June 2019, of which $278.6 million is presented as repayments of convertible senior notes within net cash used in financing activities and $70.5 million is reflected as non-cash accretion of debt discount upon settlement of debt presented in net cash provided by operating activities. Net cash used in financing activities included repurchases of approximately 2.2 million shares of our common stock for an aggregate repurchase amount of $250.0 million, as well as net repayments of $57.5 million under the asset based credit facility. Net cash used in financing activities included borrowings under a $350.0 million convertible senior notes agreement issued in September 2019, which provided net proceeds of $304.1 million after taking into consideration the convertible note hedge and warrant transactions, as well as discounts upon original issuance and offering costs. Net repayments under the term loan facilities (as defined below) were $4.0 million, and net borrowings under promissory and equipment notes of $105.5 million were comprised of $52.5 million of promissory notes secured by certain equipment and $53.0 million related to promissory notes on asset under construction. Equity related transactions provided $20.1 million due to $27.1 million of proceeds from exercise of employee stock options, partially offset by $7.1 million of cash paid for employee taxes related to net settlement of equity awards. Principal payments under finance lease agreements totaled $9.7 million.
For fiscal 2018, net cash used in financing activities was $189.0 million primarily due to net repayments of debt of $254.4 million under the asset based credit facility, LILO term loan, equipment loans and promissory note secured by our aircraft, as well as due to $250 million of share repurchases made under the $950 Million Repurchase Program. The repayments of debt described above were partially funded by the $335 million convertible senior notes issued in June 2018, which provided net proceeds of $287.8 million after taking into consideration the convertible note hedge and warrant transactions, as well as discounts upon original issuance and offering costs. Equity related transactions provided $34.5 million due to $44.0 million of proceeds from exercise of employee stock options, partially offset by $9.5 million of cash paid for employee taxes related to net settlement of equity awards. Principal payments under finance lease agreements totaled $6.9 million.
Non-Cash Transactions
Non-cash transactions consist of non-cash additions of property and equipment and landlord assets and reclassification of assets from landlord assets under construction to finance lease right-of-use assets, as well as promissory notes forgiven in exchange for assets and the conversion of loan receivables into equity method investments. In addition, non-cash transactions consist of shares issued and received related to convertible senior note transactions.
Convertible Senior Notes
Refer to Note 12-Convertible Senior Notes in our consolidated financial statements within Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on our 0.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2024, 0.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2023 and 0.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2020. Our 0.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2020 matured on July 15, 2020.
76 | FORM 10-K
PART II
Asset Based Credit Facility
Refer to Note 13-Credit Facilities in our consolidated financial statements within Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on our asset based credit facility.
Equipment Loan Facility
Refer to Note 13-Credit Facilities in our consolidated financial statements within Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on our equipment loan facility.
Share Repurchase Programs
We regularly review share repurchase activity and consider various factors in determining whether and when to execute investments in connection with our share repurchase programs, including, among others, current cash needs, capacity for leverage, cost of borrowings, results of operations and the market price of our common stock. We believe that share repurchase programs will continue to be an excellent allocation of capital for the long-term benefit of our shareholders. We may undertake other repurchase programs in the future with respect to our securities.
We generated $405 million, $330 million and $163 million in free cash flow in fiscal 2020, fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018, respectively, which provides us the financial flexibility to execute investments, such as our share repurchase programs. Refer to “How We Assess the Performance of Our Business” for our definition of free cash flow. A reconciliation of our net cash provided by operating activities to free cash flow is as follows:
$950 Million Share Repurchase Program
In 2018, our Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program through open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or other means, including through Rule 10b-18 open market repurchases, Rule 10b5-1 trading plans or through the use of other techniques such as the acquisition of other equity linked instruments, accelerated share repurchases including through privately-negotiated arrangements in which a portion of the share repurchase program is committed in advance through a financial intermediary and/or in transactions involving hedging or derivatives. We completed $250.0 million in share repurchases in fiscal 2018 under this program. In the first quarter of fiscal 2019, we repurchased approximately 2.2 million shares of our common stock at an average price of $115.36 per share, for an aggregate repurchase amount of approximately $250.0 million under this share repurchase program. We did not make any repurchases under this program in fiscal 2020. The total current authorized size of this share purchase program is up to $950 million (the “950 Million Repurchase Program”). As of January 30, 2021, there was $450 million remaining for future share repurchases under this program.
PART II
FORM 10-K | 77
Contractual Obligations
As of January 30, 2021, our future contractual cash obligations were as follows:
(1) Under the Credit Agreement, the asset based credit facility has a maturity date of June 28, 2022. As of January 30, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings under our asset based credit facility.
(2) Equipment promissory note obligations do not include interest of $1.3 million and $0.2 million for the fiscal periods 2021 and 2022-2023, respectively.
(3) We enter into operating and finance leases in the normal course of business. Most lease arrangements provide us with the option to renew the leases at defined terms. The table above includes future obligations for renewal options that are reasonably certain to be exercised and are included in the measurement of the lease liability. Amounts above do not include future lease payments under leases that have not commenced or estimated contingent rent due under operating and finance leases. As of January 30, 2021, our obligation for leases signed but not yet commenced and contingent rent was $7.0 million. As of January 30, 2021, our obligation for legally binding payments under the non-cancellable term for leases signed but not yet commenced under our accounting policy was $793.5 million, of which $28.3 million, $82.8 million and $92.7 million will be paid in fiscal periods 2021, 2022-2023 and 2024-2025, respectively, and $589.7 million will be paid subsequent to fiscal 2025. Refer to Note 11-Leases in our consolidated financial statements within Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Other Commitments
We enter into various commitments related to the procurement of merchandise inventory. As of January 30, 2021, these merchandise inventory purchase commitments were $677.4 million.
As of January 30, 2021, the liability of $8.5 million for unrecognized tax benefits associated with uncertain tax positions (refer to Note 15-Income Taxes in our consolidated financial statements within Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K) has not been included in the contractual obligations table above as we are not able to reasonably estimate when cash payments for these liabilities will occur or the amount by which these liabilities will increase or decrease over time.
As of January 30, 2021, future capital funding requirements of $5.8 million related to our equity method investments (refer to Note 8-Equity Method Investments in our consolidated financial statements within Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K) has not been included in the contractual obligations table above as we are not able to reasonably estimate when cash payments for these funding requirements will occur.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no material off balance sheet arrangements as of January 30, 2021.
78 | FORM 10-K
PART II
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires our senior leadership to make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and related notes, as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We evaluate our accounting policies, estimates, and judgments on an on-going basis. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions and such differences could be material to the consolidated financial statements.
Information on all of our significant accounting policies can be found in Note 3-Significant Accounting Policies in our audited consolidated financial statements. Our senior leadership team evaluates the development and selection of our critical accounting policies and estimates and believes that certain of our significant accounting policies involve a higher degree of judgment or complexity and are most significant to reporting our consolidated results of operations and financial position, and are therefore discussed as critical. The following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. The following items require significant estimation or judgment in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Merchandise Inventories-Reserves
Our merchandise inventories are comprised of finished goods and are carried at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined on a weighted-average cost method. To determine if the value of inventory should be marked down below original cost, we use estimates to determine the lower of cost or net realizable value, which considers current and anticipated demand, customer preference and the merchandise age. The inventory value is adjusted periodically to reflect current market conditions, which requires judgments that may significantly affect the ending inventory valuation, as well as gross margin. The estimates used in inventory valuation are lower of cost or net realizable value reserves and obsolescence (including excess and slow-moving inventory).
Our inventory reserves contain uncertainties that require us to make assumptions and to apply judgment regarding a number of factors, including market conditions, the selling environment, historical results and current inventory trends. We adjust our inventory reserves for net realizable value and obsolescence based on trends, aging reports, specific identification and estimates of future retail sales prices. If actual results change from our prior estimates, we adjust our inventory reserves accordingly throughout the period. We have not made any material changes to our assumptions included in the calculations of the lower of cost or net realizable value reserves during the periods presented.
Impairment
Tradenames, Trademarks and Other Intangible Assets
We annually evaluate whether tradenames, trademarks and other intangible assets continue to have an indefinite life. Tradenames, trademarks and other intangible assets are reviewed for impairment annually in the fourth quarter and may be reviewed more frequently if indicators of impairment are present. Conditions that may indicate impairment include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in customer demand or business climate that could affect the value of an asset, a product recall or an adverse action or assessment by a regulator.
We qualitatively assess indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the asset is less than its carrying amount. If tradenames, trademarks and other intangible assets are not qualitatively assessed or if such intangible assets are qualitatively assessed and it is determined it is not more likely than not that the asset’s fair value is greater than its carrying amount, an impairment review is performed by comparing the carrying value to the estimated fair value, determined using a discounted cash flow methodology, which requires us to make judgments that may significantly affect the ending asset valuation. Factors used in the valuation of intangible assets with indefinite lives include, but are not limited to, our plans for future operations, brand initiatives, recent results of operations and projected future cash flows.
In the event we quantitatively assess a reporting unit’s indefinite-lived intangible asset for impairment, we perform an impairment test which utilizes the discounted cash flow methodology under the relief-from-royalty method. Under the relief-from-royalty method, our significant assumptions include the forecasted future revenues and the estimated royalty rate, expressed as a percentage of revenues.
PART II
FORM 10-K | 79
Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, such as property and equipment and lease right-of-use assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Conditions that may indicate impairment include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in customer demand or business climate that could affect the value of an asset, change in the intended use of an asset, a product recall or an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. If the sum of the estimated undiscounted future cash flows over the remaining life of the primary asset is less than the carrying value, we recognize a loss equal to the difference between the carrying value and the fair value, usually determined by the estimated discounted cash flow analysis of the asset or asset group. The asset group is defined as the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are available and largely independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets, which for our stores is the individual gallery level.
Since there is typically no active market for our long-lived assets, we estimate fair values based on the expected future cash flows of the asset or asset group, using a discount rate commensurate with the related risk. The estimate of fair value requires judgments that may significantly affect the ending asset valuation. Future cash flows are estimated based on gallery-level historical results, current trends, and operating and cash flow projections. Our estimates are subject to uncertainty and may be affected by a number of factors outside our control, including general economic conditions and the competitive environment. While we believe our estimates and judgments about future cash flows are reasonable, future impairment charges may be required if the expected cash flow estimates, as projected, do not occur or if events change requiring us to revise our estimates.
Lease Accounting
Reasonably Certain Lease Term
In recognizing the lease right-of-use assets and lease liabilities, we utilize the lease term for which we are reasonably certain to use the underlying asset, including consideration of options to extend or terminate the lease. At lease commencement, we evaluate whether we are reasonably certain to exercise available options based on consideration of a variety of economic factors and the circumstances related to the leased asset. Factors considered include, but are not limited to, (i) the contractual terms compared to estimated market rates, (ii) the uniqueness or importance of the asset or its location, (iii) the potential costs of obtaining an alternative asset, (iv) the potential costs of relocating or ceasing use of the asset, including the consideration of leasehold improvements and other invested capital, and (v) any potential tax consequences.
The determination of the reasonably certain lease term affects the inclusion of rental payments utilized in the incremental borrowing rate calculations, the results of the lease classification test, and our consideration of certain assets held for sale or planned for sale-leaseback. The reasonably certain lease term may materially impact our financial position related to certain Design Galleries or distribution center facilities which typically have greater lease payments. Although the above factors are considered in our analysis, the assessment involves subjectivity considering our strategy, expected future events and market conditions. While we believe our estimates and judgments in determining the lease term are reasonable, future events may occur which may require us to reassess this determination.
Incremental Borrowing Rate
As most of our leases do not include an implicit interest rate, we determine the discount rate for each lease based upon the incremental borrowing rate (“IBR”) in order to calculate the present value of the lease liability at the commencement date. The IBR is computed as the rate of interest that we would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the total lease payments in a similar economic environment. We utilize our asset based credit facility as the basis for determining the applicable IBR for each lease. We estimate the incremental borrowing rate for each lease primarily by reference to yield rates on debt issuances by companies of a similar credit rating, the weighted-average lease term and adjustments for differences between the yield rates and the actual term of the credit facility. In determining the yield rates, for Design Galleries we utilize market information on the lease commencement date and for leases other than new Design Galleries, we utilize market information as of the beginning of the quarter in which the lease commenced.
Fair Value
We determine the fair value of the underlying asset, and the lease components such as land and building, for purposes of determining the lease classification and allocating our contractual rental payments to the lease components. The fair value of the underlying asset and lease components also impact our assets held for sale and sale-leaseback transactions. The fair value assessments may materially impact our financial position related to certain Design Galleries or distribution center facilities which typically have greater fair values.
80 | FORM 10-K
PART II
The determination of fair value requires subjectivity and estimates, including the use of multiple valuation techniques and uncertain inputs, such as market price per square foot and assumed capitalization rates or the replacement cost of the assets, where applicable. Where real estate valuation expertise is required we obtain independent third-party appraisals to determine the fair value of the underlying asset and lease components. While determining fair value requires a variety of input assumptions and judgment, we believe our estimates of fair value are reasonable.
Stock-Based Compensation-Performance-Based Awards
For awards with performance-based criteria, compensation expense is recognized on an accelerated basis over the requisite service period. The fair value of each performance-based option award granted is estimated on the date of grant using a Monte Carlo simulation option pricing model that requires the input of subjective assumptions regarding the future exercise behavior, expected volatility and a discount for illiquidity. We determined these assumptions based on consideration of (i) future exercise behavior based on the historical observed exercise pattern of the award recipient, (ii) expected volatility based on our historical observed common stock prices measured over the full trading history of our common stock and implied volatility based on 180-day average trading prices of our common stock, and (iii) a discount for illiquidity estimated using the Finnerty method.
Equity Method Investments
In fiscal 2020, we entered into equity method investments in connection with real estate development initiatives in Aspen, Colorado. These investments in privately-held limited liability companies (the “Aspen LLCs” or “equity method investments”) meet the criteria of variable interest entities (“VIEs”) and are not consolidated.
When we have a variable interest in another legal entity, we evaluate whether that legal entity is within the scope of the VIE model and, if so, whether we are the primary beneficiary of the VIE. We evaluate a legal entity for consolidation under the VIE model if no scope exceptions apply and, by design, the total equity investment at risk is not sufficient to permit the legal entity to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support or, as a group, the holders of the equity investment at risk lack any of the characteristics of a controlling financial interest. The Aspen LLCs are qualitatively determined to be VIEs due to insufficient equity investment at risk.
We consolidate a VIE if our involvement indicates that we are the primary beneficiary. We would be the primary beneficiary of a VIE if we have both (i) the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and (ii) the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits of the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE. The determination of the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact economic performance requires judgement and is impacted by numerous factors including the purpose of the VIE, contractual rights and obligations of the variable interest holders, and mechanisms for the resolution of disputes among the variable interest holders. We account for investments under the equity method of accounting when we are not the primary beneficiary with a controlling financial interest but we have significant influence over the operations of the investee. In evaluating if we exert control or significant influence we consider factors such as the terms and structure of the investment agreement and the legal structure of the investee, including investor voting or other rights, and other agreements with the investee. We account for our investments in the Aspen LLCs using the equity method of accounting because we do not have a controlling financial interest but have the ability to exercise significant influence over the Aspen LLCs.
Equity method investments are initially measured at cost. As of our investment date, we determine the fair value of the underlying assets and liabilities held by the Aspen LLCs for purposes of determining whether or not we have basis differences arising in connection with our investment. The determination of fair value of the underlying real estate assets requires subjectivity and estimates, including the use of various valuation techniques and Level 3 inputs, such as market price per square foot and assumed capitalization rates or the replacement cost of the assets, where applicable. If specialized expertise is required we obtain independent third-party appraisals to determine the fair value of the underlying assets and liabilities. While determining fair value requires a variety of input assumptions and judgment, we believe our estimates of fair value are reasonable.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to “Recently Issued Accounting Standards” within Note 3-Significant Accounting Policies in our consolidated financial statements within Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
PART II
FORM 10-K | 81