Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of OperationS
See Note 3 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of 2019 acquisitions.
Unless otherwise noted, amounts and percentages for all periods discussed below reflect the results of operations and financial condition from our continuing operations.
Results of Operations
Revenues were $26.2 million in 2020, an increase of $2.5 million, or 10.5%, compared to $23.7 million in 2019. The increase in revenue year-over-year was due to higher revenues from MGI and Golden Ridge, offset by a small decline in revenue from our RBT operations. Higher revenue from MGI was the greatest factor driving overall revenue growth in 2020. MGI was acquired in April 2019, and therefore, our revenues included no MGI revenue in the first quarter of 2019, while Golden Ridge generated positive year-over-year revenue growth in the first and fourth quarters of 2020.
Gross losses were $2.5 million in 2020, compared to gross losses of $0.9 million in 2019. The increase in gross losses was primarily attributable to higher losses at Golden Ridge due to increases in input commodity prices, low levels of productivity, and unmet production targets, which added $0.8 million in expenses related to contract settlements. These dynamics were particularly impactful in the second and third quarters of 2020. Gross losses in 2020 were also negatively impacted by a decline in gross profit for our RBT operations, offset in part by a higher gross profit contribution from MGI.
SG&A was $8.0 million in 2020, a decline of $5.7 million, or 41.8%, compared to $13.7 million in 2019. The decline in SG&A was primarily related to lower personnel expenses and a reduction in outside services and consultant fees, as well as productivity gains in corporate support functions. Losses on disposition of property and equipment were $0.8 million in 2020, compared to $0.0 million in 2019. Losses on disposition of property and equipment included a $0.1 million loss due to hurricane damage to a facility in Louisiana.
Operating losses were $11.3 million in 2020, compared to $14.6 million in 2019, and net losses from continuing operations were $11.7 million in 2020, compared to $13.7 million in 2019. There was $0.1 million of other expense, net, in 2020, compared to other income, net, of $0.9 million in 2019. In 2020, interest expense increased to $0.3 million as we incurred higher fees and interest expense related to an increase in average borrowings. Included in 2019 other income, net, was a $0.8 million gain from a settlement with the sellers of Golden Ridge.
COVID-19 Assessment
The COVID-19 pandemic is a worldwide health crisis that is adversely affecting the business and financial markets of many countries. The pandemic could adversely affect the demand for our products, and it poses the risk that we, or our customers, suppliers, and other business partners may be disrupted or prevented from conducting business for an uncertain period of time. The extent to which this would impact our financial results is unknown as it is dependent on future developments, which are highly uncertain. As such, it is difficult to estimate the exact magnitude of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
We have not had, and we do not expect, any of our facilities to be subject to government-mandated closures, and we have informed our customers that we anticipate operating throughout the COVID-19 outbreak. Disruption in the supply chain of raw materials used to produce our products, as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak, has not caused us to close any of our facilities, and to date, our employees have been reporting to work, either remotely or in-person without any material change in attendance or productivity. However, we cannot ensure that the COVID-19 outbreak will not cause disruptions to our business in the future.
In April 2020, we applied for, and received, a $1.8 million SBA Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loan as discussed further in Note 11 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We believe the funds from this loan enabled us to maintain our workforce levels during 2020 despite economic uncertainties related to our business resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak. The loan and accrued interest were to be forgivable, provided that the loan proceeds were used for the purpose of maintaining workforce levels. The loan and related accrued interest were completely forgiven in January 2021.
Liquidity, Going Concern and Capital Resources
We used $7.9 million in operating cash during in 2020, compared to $13.5 million in 2019. The reduction in operating cash uses in 2020 reflected lower net operating losses, higher depreciation and amortization, and lower investment in working capital, with higher inventories and accounts payable, offset by a reduction in commodities payable and accounts receivable.
We used $0.9 million in investing cash during in 2020, compared to $8.0 million in 2019. Investing cash in 2019 included $3.8 million associated with the acquisition of MGI. Total capital expenditures were $1.2 million in 2020, compared with $4.2 million in capital expenditures in 2019.
We raised a total of $5.7 million in financing cash in 2020, compared to $23.1 million in 2019. On March 30, 2020, we entered into an at-the-market (ATM) issuance sales agreement under which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock. As discussed further in Note 11 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, i) in April 2020, we obtained a $1.8 million SBA Payroll Protection Program (PPP) loan and ii) in July 2020, we secured a $2.0 million mortgage on our rice mill in Wynne, Arkansas. As further discussed in Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, in the second half of 2020, we received net proceeds of $2.3 million under the ATM agreement. The PPP loan was forgiven in January 2021.
We funded our working capital needs in 2020 primarily with funds received from the sale of receivables under our factoring agreement, supplemented by proceeds from the PPP loan, mortgage note and stock offering.
Management believes that despite the multi-year history of operating losses and negative operating cash flows from continuing operations, there is no substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that these financial statements are issued. Factors alleviating this doubt include the reduction in operating losses in the second half of 2020, $5.3 million in cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020, a nearly 42% reduction in annual SG&A, and our ability to procure addition capital if needed through a variety of sources.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements, other than operating leases with original terms of less than a year and employee contracts, that have or are likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenue, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in U.S. Dollars and in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by the application of our accounting policies. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Critical accounting estimates are those that require application of management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. While we apply our judgment based on assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, actual results could vary from these assumptions. It is possible that materially different amounts would be reported using different assumptions. The following is a description of what we consider to be our most significant critical accounting policies.
Inventories - Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined by the first-in, first-out method. We employ a full absorption procedure using standard cost techniques for the majority of our operations. The standards are customarily reviewed and adjusted so that they are materially consistent with actual purchase and production costs. Provisions for potentially obsolete or slow-moving inventory are made based upon our analysis of inventory levels, historical obsolescence and future sales forecasts, while inventory determined to be obsolete is written off immediately.
Property and Equipment - Property and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is computed on the straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Expenditures for maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred while renewals and betterments are capitalized. Gains or losses on the sale of property and equipment are reflected in net income (loss).
Impairment of Long-lived Assets - We review our long-lived assets, such as property and equipment, operating lease assets, and right-of-use assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss is recognized when the undiscounted future cash flows estimated to be generated by the asset to be held and used are not sufficient to recover the unamortized balance of the asset. An impairment loss is recognized based on the difference between the carrying values and estimated fair value. The estimated fair value is determined based on either the discounted future cash flows or other appropriate fair value methods with the amount of any such deficiency charged to operations in the current year. Estimates of future cash flows are based on many factors, including current operating results, expected market trends and competitive influences. Assets to be disposed of by sale are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value, less estimated costs to sell.
Goodwill - Goodwill is recorded when the purchase price paid for an acquisition exceeds the estimated fair value of net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis in the fourth quarter and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit below its carrying value. We may first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If we conclude that is the case, or chose to not perform the qualitative assessment, we quantify the reporting unit’s fair value. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, we will record an impairment loss based on the difference. The impairment loss will be limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. Multiple valuation techniques may be used to assess the fair value of the reporting unit. All of these techniques include the use of estimates and assumptions that are inherently uncertain. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value or goodwill impairment, or both.
Intangible Assets, exclusive of goodwill - Recognized intangible assets, exclusive of goodwill, are amortized over the useful lives of the assets unless that life is determined to be indefinite. All of our intangible assets, exclusive of goodwill, are finite lived. We evaluate the remaining useful life of an intangible asset each reporting period to determine whether events or circumstances may indicate that a revision to the useful life is warranted to reflect the remaining expected use of the asset. If an intangible asset’s useful life is determined to be finite, but the precise length of that life is not known, the intangible asset is amortized over our best estimate of the asset’s useful life in a manner that reflects the pattern in which the asset’s economic benefits are consumed or expected to be realized. We review our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss is recognized when the undiscounted future cash flows estimated to be generated by the asset to be held and used are not sufficient to recover the unamortized balance of the asset. Our primary intangible asset, exclusive of goodwill, is a customer relationship intangible which was recognized in the acquisition of MGI and derives its value from future cash flows expected from the customers acquired from MGI. Changes in the actual or estimated cash flows of these customers could result in a material adjustment to amortization expense, an impairment loss, or both. Estimates of future cash flows are based on many factors, including current cash flows, expected market trends and competitive influences.
Revenue Recognition - We account for a contract with a customer when the written contract is committed, the rights of the parties, including payment terms, are identified, the contract has commercial substance and consideration is probable of collection. Substantially all of our revenue is derived by fulfilling customer orders for the purchase of our products under contracts which contain a single performance obligation, to supply continually defined quantities of product at fixed prices. We account for shipping and handling activities that occur after the customer has obtained control of a good as a fulfillment cost rather than as an additional promised service. We recognize revenue at the point in time that control of the ordered product(s) is transferred to the customer, which is upon delivery to the customer, or its designee at our location, a customer location or other customer-designated delivery point. For substantially all of our contracts, control of the ordered product(s) transfers at our location. Amounts invoiced to customers for shipping and handling are reported as revenues and the related costs incurred to deliver product to the customer are reported as cost of goods sold.
Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for fulfilling product orders. Incidental items that are immaterial in the context of the contract are recognized as expense. Our contracts do not include a significant financing component. Our contracts may include terms that could cause variability in the transaction price, including, for example, rebates and volume discounts, or other forms of contingent revenue. The amount of consideration we expect to receive and revenue we recognize includes estimates of variable consideration, including costs for rebates and discounts. If the consideration promised in a contract includes a variable amount, we estimate the amount to which we expect to be entitled using either the expected value or most likely amount method. Changes in judgments and estimates regarding probability of collection and variable consideration might result in a change in the timing or amount of revenue recognized.