Item 7. Management's Discussion & Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements and notes. Forward-looking statements in this MD&A are not guarantees of future performance and may involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected. Refer to the "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" and Item 1A. Risk Factors for a discussion of these risks and uncertainties.
Overview and 2020 Highlights
Our mission is to be a catalyst in the world’s transition to sustainable energy. We design, develop, and are in the process of manufacturing the Endurance, the first electric full-size pickup truck targeted for sale to fleet customers. In addition, we are leveraging our technologies by investing in the development additional all-electric vehicles geared for the commercial market. Located in Lordstown, Ohio, the Lordstown Complex spans 6.2 million square feet and is in a near-production-ready state. We also intend to build company-owned service centers where we offer maintenance, repair, parts, and other services related to our products.
Since inception, we have been developing our flagship vehicle, the Endurance™, an electric full-size pickup truck. We introduced the Endurance™ in June 2020 and expect to build beta and pre-production vehicles during the first half of 2021. We are targeting commencement of commercial production of Endurance in September 2021 and initial sales starting in late 2021.
Our goal is to achieve a leadership position as an OEM vehicle supplier to the commercial fleet industry. We intend to do so by focusing on the following strengths:
● a highly experienced and proven senior management team led by founder and CEO, Mr. Burns, with over 180 years of collective experience in the automotive and electric vehicle areas from prominent OEMs, including Workhorse, Tesla, Karma, Toyota, GM, Hyundai and Volkswagen;
● the near-production-ready, strategically located manufacturing Lordstown Complex, that we believe offers significant advantages in terms of the time and cost necessary to reach full-scale commercial production;
● approximately 800,000 square feet within the plant complex allocated for in-wheel motor and lithium-ion battery pack production and assembly, which together account for our propulsion production;
● the unique and efficient design of the Endurance incorporating advanced technology and engineering, including the use of in-wheel hub motors resulting in what we believe will be the fewest moving parts of any comparable vehicle currently available; and
● a safe, reliable and efficient vehicle, designed for and targeted to the needs of the fleet market, that we believe will offer a significantly reduced total cost of ownership and compelling value as compared to currently available alternatives.
Within the broader trend of vehicle electrification, by targeting the sizable fleet market and focusing on its particular needs, we aim to obtain a “first mover” advantage, build strong customer relationships and capitalize on a significant market opportunity.
Production and Engineering. We developed a prototype and alpha build Endurance models including multiple skateboards for testing and validating the truck and future development opportunities. We are beginning to build more than 50 beta models that we will use to further refine the Endurance through crash, engineering and validation testing. We also expect to use these beta vehicles for demonstrations to customers. We expect to complete the beta builds in the second quarter of fiscal 2021. We achieved 5-star crash testing for front, side and rear impact through software simulation, which typically translates into 97-98% accuracy in physical testing.
Manufacturing Facility. We consider our 6.2 million square foot, near-production ready Lordstown Complex one of our key competitive advantages. We acquired the plant from General Motors in 2019 and are in the process of repurposing and retooling the factory for electric vehicle production rather than internal combustion engine (“ICE”) vehicle production.
Propulsion Production and Assembly Lines. Concurrent with the retooling of the assembly and production floor, we are building an approximate 800,000 square foot battery pack production and assembly and hub motor production capabilities.
Personnel. At the end of fiscal 2020 the company employed 320 full-time personnel in the areas of manufacturing, engineering, marketing, sales, facilities, human resources, IT, supply chain, accounting and finance. These employees are engineering the Endurance and preparing the plant for mass production. We expect to end fiscal year 2021 with over 1,000 employees.
Research and Development Center. In November 2020, the company opened a satellite research and development center in Farmington Hills, Michigan. This facility includes space for vehicle inspection and benchmarking, as well as labs for testing, validation and prototyping. We understand that automotive engineering talent in the Detroit area is world-renowned and, with this new Research and Development (“R&D”) Engineering Center, expects to access the deep automotive engineering talent pool and numerous automotive supplier partners that exist in the region.
First Sales and Service Center. We established our first sales and service center in Irvine, California. The facility, combined with our mobile service, will enable us to service commercial users in the southern California region. We have chosen California as the location for our first service center outside of Ohio due to the favorable regulatory backdrop in the state, which is aggressively promoting more widespread adoption of electric vehicles. We have established Lordstown EV Sales, LLC, to receive direct orders from customers and have received our dealership license from California.
Strategic Relationships. We continues to build out its supply network and has an agreement with Elaphe to license and provide manufacturing services with respect to its in-wheel hub motors. We have secured long-term supply agreements with two leading global battery cell suppliers, representing two of the Endurance’s most critical components.
Camping World. We announced the formation of a relationship with Camping World (NYSE: CWH), to create a national electric vehicle (“EV”) service and collision network for our vehicles, beginning with the Endurance. We are currently in discussions with Camping World regarding a comprehensive service agreement that includes the re-design of their existing service centers for electric vehicles, as well as other comprehensive service aspects such adding fast charging capabilities, and servicing and repairing Endurance vehicles. More specifically, the discussions include cost-sharing, timing of rollout, technical education on services, customer engagement and interaction, and other related services. Camping World is the nation’s largest retailer of recreational vehicles (“RV”) and related products and services. We intend to leverage Camping World’s growing national footprint of over 170 U.S. Service and Collision Centers, with thousands of technicians and service bays, a 24/7 tech hotline and with a Roadside Assistance Program, to provide one of the most comprehensive EV support systems ever designed.
Additionally, we are exploring with Camping World the development of new EV products and solutions for the RV marketplace based on the Endurance platform, including the first, all electric, high-volume production RV (“eRV”) and a lithium-ion battery pack for travel trailers that would replace conventional gasoline onboard generators.
Other planned initiatives. We further aim to partner with key service providers to enable to support fleet operators and other customers efficiently and effectively for aftermarket parts and service and charging infrastructure. Management believes that most fleet operators use service agreements with third-party service providers to maintain and repair their fleets and provide OEM parts, and that an arrangement with a national service provider would be attractive to fleet customers considering purchasing the Endurance. We are also evaluating partnerships with electric vehicle charging station providers to provide Endurance purchasers with access to their networks. As fleet operators also typically bring their vehicles back to a central location each day, vehicle charging infrastructure can also be installed at those locations.
Results of Operations
(in thousands)
Selling and administrative expenses (“S&A”) generally consist of personnel and facilities costs related to marketing, sales, executive, finance, human resources, information technology and legal organizations, as well as fees for professional and contract services.
S&A increased from $4.5 million for the period from April 30, 2019 to December 31, 2019 to $28.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 mainly due to transaction costs from recapitalization ($12 million) and hiring ramp up ($6 million).
R&D expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for our teams in engineering and research, manufacturing engineering and manufacturing test organizations, prototyping expense, contract and professional services.
R&D increased from $5.9 million in the period from April 30, 2019 to December 31, 2019 to $73.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 mainly due to expenditures in the completion of the design of the Endurance electric pick-up truck ($28 million) plus building of prototype vehicles and for the preparation of the construction of beta vehicles ($17 million).
Other income in the year ended December 31, 2020 mainly consisted in sale of excess equipment at the Lordstown Complex.
Interest expense in the year ended 2020 mainly is attributed to interest on Related party notes payable.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities of approximately $629.8 million. These funds were primarily the result of the PIPE Investment, the release of amounts held in DiamondPeak’s trust account following completion of the Business Combination, the sale and subsequent conversion of the Convertible Promissory Notes and Warrant exercises, offset by cash usage during the year. In January 2021, we received approximately $82.0 million in additional funding from Warrant exercises. We believe that our current level of cash and cash equivalents are sufficient to meet our liquidity needs and achieve our current production forecasts over the next twelve months.
In 2021, we are planning to significantly increase our research and development expenses and capital expenditures over 2020 levels and prior planned levels as we build capacity and invest in additional products and technologies. We expect capital expenditures of between $250 million and $275 million and R&D costs of between $180 million and $190 million in 2021.
This spending will relate primarily to:
● We are anticipating additional capital expenditures as we have accelerated our retooling plans in order to double the capacity we had previously intended to have available by the end of 2021. We continue to anticipate strong interest for the Endurance and are investing in additional capacity to maximize our ability meet demand when the Endurance is commercially available for sale.
● We are investing in research and development of our planned second vehicle, an electric van based on the Endurance platform. We expect to introduce the van in June 2021 and plan to start production in the second half of 2022. Based on the interest we are seeing for the Endurance as well as discussions with potential partners, such as Camping World, we made a strategic decision to accelerate this project.
● We are also anticipating increased capital expenditures and research and development expenses related to in-house component development. The global automotive supply chain continues to be stressed due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. As we have engaged potential third-party suppliers for certain components, the pricing and/or availability being offered was not consistent with our expectations and timing, so we made a strategic decision to bring development of certain components, such as the frame, in house. While requiring more upfront spending, we believe the return on these investments will be favorable to us and it allows us to control key components so that we can meet our projected timelines.
We believe we have more than sufficient cash resources to support the activities described above and meet our projections, while maintaining a meaningful cushion for contingencies. However, as a company with a limited operating history attempting to rapidly grow in a technologically advanced and evolving industry, there are inherent uncertainties about these projections and our funding needs. Additional funding may be required for a variety of reasons, including, but not limited to, strategic decisions to invest in additional products and technologies, delays in anticipated schedule or failure to meet projections with respect to the Endurance and additional or more prolonged impacts resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, among other factors. We may also opportunistically seek external funding, even if we do not believe it is needed in the near-term, if it can be obtained on favorable terms and would support our growth.
If we were to require additional funding or otherwise determined it was beneficial to seek additional sources of financing, there can be no assurance that such financing would be available to us on favorable terms or at all. Our ability to obtain additional financing in the debt and equity capital markets would l be subject to several factors, including market and economic conditions, our operating performance and investor sentiment with respect to us and our industry. In addition to the potential to seek traditional
sources of equity and debt capital, we are also pursuing governmental support. We accepted an invitation from the U.S. Department of Energy to start the process toward securing an ATVM loan. We are currently in the due diligence phase. If we are successful in completing this stage, we may receive a term sheet, but we cannot guarantee we will reach that stage or be approved for a loan or provide any assurance as to the amount of any loan that we may receive. Broadly speaking, prior ATVM loans were offered at Treasury rates for interest expense and required that the proceeds be spent on plant retooling or R&D activities.
Summary of Cash Flows
(in thousands)
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operating activities are significantly affected by our cash investments to support the growth of our business in areas such as research and development and selling, general and administrative expenses.
Net cash used in operating activities increased to $64.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from $5.2 million from the period from April 30, 2019 to December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to increase in R&D expenditures to bring the Endurance to market, increase in headcount for the personnel ramp up and marketing expenses.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
The net cash used in investing activities increased to $55.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $0.1 million for the period from April 30, 2019 to December 31, 2019 primarily due to purchase of capital assets related to the Lordstown Complex re-tooling in preparation for the manufacturing of the Endurance pickup truck.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash flows from financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of $671.8 million from cash received in recapitalization, net of transaction costs, $37.8 million from related party notes payable and $30.7 million from shares issued for exercise warrants. Cash flows from financing activities during the period from April 30, 2019 to December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of $7.5 million from issuance of common stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Critical Accounting Policies
Cash and cash equivalents
Cash includes cash equivalents which are highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to cash. The Company considers all liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. The Company presents cash and cash equivalents within Cash and cash equivalents on the Balance Sheet.
The Company maintains its cash in bank deposit accounts which, at times, exceed federally insured limits. The Company has not experienced any losses in such accounts and management believes it is not exposed to significant credit risk.
Property, plant and equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the related assets. Determination of useful lives and depreciation will begin once the assets are ready for their intended use.
Upon retirement or sale, the cost and related accumulated depreciation are removed from the balance sheet and the resulting gain or loss is reflected in operations. Maintenance and repair expenditures are expensed as incurred, while major improvements that increase functionality of the asset are capitalized and depreciated ratably to expense over the identified useful life. Further, interest on any debt financing arrangement is capitalized to the purchased property, plant, and equipment if the requirements for capitalization are met.
Long-lived assets, such as property, plant, and equipment are reviewed for potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset or asset group to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset or asset group. If the carrying amount of an asset or asset group exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset or asset group exceeds the fair value of the asset or asset group.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our condensed consolidated financial statements.