Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following management’s discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the historical financial statements and the related notes thereto contained in this report. The management’s discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Any statements that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. When used, the words “believe,” “plan,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “target,” “estimate,” “expect” and the like, and/or future tense or conditional constructions (“will,” “may,” “could,” “should,” etc.), or similar expressions, identify certain of these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, including those under “Risk Factors” in this Form 10-K, that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors. We do not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this report.
The following discussion highlights our results of operations and the principal factors that have affected our financial condition as well as our liquidity and capital resources for the periods described and provides information that management believes is relevant for an assessment and understanding of the statements of financial condition and results of operations presented herein. The following discussion and analysis are based on our audited financial statements contained in this Form 10-K, which we have prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. You should read this discussion and analysis together with such financial statements and the related notes thereto.
Basis of Presentation
The audited financial statements for our fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 include a summary of our significant accounting policies and should be read in conjunction with the discussion below. In the opinion of management, all material adjustments necessary to present fairly the results of operations for such periods have been included in these audited financial statements. All such adjustments are of a normal recurring nature.
The financial statements of the Company have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America and are presented in US dollars.
Going Concern
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming we will continue as a going concern. As discussed in this report and in the notes to the consolidated financial statements, we have incurred operating losses, and at December 31, 2020, we have a working capital deficiency of approximately $746,000. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our generating operating cash flow and raising capital sufficient to fund operations. We have discussed our strategy and plans relating to these matters elsewhere in this report although the consolidated financial statements included herein do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of these uncertainties. Our business strategy may not be successful in addressing these issues, however, and if we cannot continue as a going concern, our stockholders may lose their entire investment in us.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had current assets in the amount of $626,161, consisting of cash in the amount of $113,798, accounts receivable, net of allowance, of $130,301, inventory of $232,344 and other current assets of $149,718.
As of December 31, 2019, we had current assets in the amount of $46,258, consisting of cash in the amount of $26,962, prepayments of $1,436, and other current assets of $17,860.
As of December 31, 2020, we had current liabilities of $1,372,380, consisting of accounts payable of $75,586, accrued expenses of $71,695, convertible notes payable, net of discounts, of $500,189, and current portion of notes payable of $724,910.
As of December 31, 2019, we had current liabilities of $752,900, consisting of accounts payable of $38,574, accrued expenses of $271,086, other payables of $6,699, notes payable to related party of $79,468, loan payable to related party of $170,475, convertible notes payable of $175,917, and income tax payable of $10,681.
We have funded our operations to date through the issuance of notes payable and stock.
Our ability to successfully execute our business plan is contingent upon us obtaining additional financing and/or upon realizing sales revenue sufficient to fund our ongoing expenses. Until we are able to sustain our ongoing operations through sales revenue, we intend to fund operations through debt and/or equity financing arrangements, which may be insufficient to fund our capital expenditures, working capital, or other cash requirements. We do not have any formal commitments or arrangements for the sales of stock or the advancement or loan of funds at this time. There can be no assurance that such additional financing will be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Our management has considered all recent accounting pronouncements issued since the last audit of our financial statements. Our management believes that these recent pronouncements will not have a material effect on our financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
The SEC has requested that all registrants list their most "critical accounting polices" in the Management Discussion and Analysis. The SEC indicated that a "critical accounting policy" is one which is both important to the portrayal of a company's financial condition and results, and requires management's most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. We do not believe that the following accounting policies currently fit this definition.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America require management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
For purposes of reporting cash flows, the Company has defined cash and cash equivalents as all cash in banks and highly-liquid investments available for current use with an initial maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents. The Company had no cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
The Company maintains its cash balances at financial institutions that are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”). The FDIC provides coverage of up to $250,000 per depositor, per financial institution, for the aggregate total of depositors' interest and non-interest bearing accounts. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, none of the Company's cash balances were in excess of FDIC limits. The Company has not experienced any losses on these accounts and management does not believe that the Company is exposed to any significant risks.
Accounts Receivable
UMCCO’s accounts receivable are the result of contracts which require monthly billings for services, installations and maintenance provided by the Company up to the respective monthly billing date. Cross-Bo’s accounts receivable are the result of construction activity, consisting of utility system installation, provided by the Company up to the respective billing date. Accounts receivable is recorded at the invoiced amount and do not bear interest.
Some billed balances are not paid by customers pursuant to retainage provisions within their respective contracts. The balances billed but not paid by customer pursuant to retainage provisions in these contracts are generally due and paid upon completion of the contracts and acceptance by the customer. Based on contract terms and historical collections, the Company expects the retainage balances to be collected within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
The allowance for doubtful accounts is the Company’s best estimate of the probable amount of credit losses in the Company’s existing accounts receivable. A considerable amount of judgment is required in assessing the realization of receivables. Relevant assessment factors include the creditworthiness of the customer and prior collection history. Balances over 90 days past due are reviewed individually for collectability. Account balances are charged off against the allowance after all reasonable means of collection are exhausted and the potential for recovery is considered remote. The allowance requirements are based on the most current facts available and are re-evaluated and adjusted on a regular basis and as additional information is received. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded bad debt expense of 213,179. The $328,118 included in the allowance at December 31, 2020 include billed and earned balances which remain unpaid by customers.
Inventory
Inventory is composed of finished goods inventory, specifically gowns (personal protective equipment), valued using weighted average cost, and includes acquisition cost, product freight in, and packaging costs. Slow moving and obsolete inventories are written down based on a comparison of on-hand quantities to historical and projected usages. The Company utilizes a third-party service to manage and secure the Company’s inventory.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. Maintenance and repairs are charged to operations as incurred. Depreciation is based on the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the related assets. When assets are retired or otherwise disposed of, the cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts, and any resulting gain or loss is reflected in operations in the period realized.
Depreciation is computed on the straight-line method with useful lives as follows:
Buildings and improvements
15-39 years
Machinery and equipment
7 years
Vehicles
5 years
Office furniture and equipment
5 years
Software
3 years
Recoverability of Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews its long-lived assets on a periodic basis, whenever events and changes in circumstances have occurred which may indicate a possible impairment. The assessment for potential impairment will be based primarily on the Company’s ability to recover the carrying value of its long-lived assets from expected future cash flows from its operations on an undiscounted basis. If such assets are determined to be impaired, the impairment recognized is the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Fixed assets to be disposed of by sale will be carried at the lower of the then current carrying value or fair value less estimated costs to sell.
Commitments and Contingencies
Liabilities for loss contingencies arising from claims, assessments, litigation, fines, penalties and other sources are recorded when management assesses that it is probably that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonable estimated.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes utilizing the liability method of accounting. Under the liability method, deferred taxes are determined based on differences between financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities at enacted tax rates in effect in years in which differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to amounts that are expected to be realized.
The Company follows Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740-10, “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes.” This interpretation requires recognition and measurement of uncertain income tax positions using a “more-likely-than-not” approach. The Company evaluates its tax positions on an annual basis, and as of December 31, 2020, no additional accrual for income taxes is necessary. The Company’s policy is to recognize both interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits expected to result in payment of cash within one year are classified as accrued liabilities, while those expected beyond one year are classified as other liabilities. The Company has not recorded any interest or penalties since its inception. The Company is required to file income tax returns in the U.S. federal tax jurisdiction and in various state tax jurisdictions and the prior three fiscal years remain open for examination by federal and/or state tax jurisdictions. The Company is currently not under examination by any other tax jurisdictions for any tax year.
Revenue Recognition
UMCCO recognizes consulting and operational management service revenues monthly and recognizes maintenance and repair revenues as services are performed.
Cross-Bo and UMCCO recognize construction revenues, which result from utility system installations, monthly as services are performed and materials are used.
Infratech recognizes revenues from the sale of personal protective equipment when performance obligations are satisfied, which occurs when materials are shipped to the customer.
Renavotio recognizes revenues from training seminars upon completion of the training seminar when services have been provided.
The Company’s contracts require monthly billings consisting of services performed and materials used through the billing date. Accordingly, the Company does not incur expenses which are not billed or bill customers for unearned amounts. Performance obligations are satisfied as services are performed and materials used for which control has been transferred to the customer upon installation. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had no unsatisfied performance obligations. See Note 9 for disaggregated revenues and customer concentrations.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
UMCCO recognizes consulting and operational management service revenues monthly and recognizes maintenance and repair revenues as services are performed.
Cross-Bo and UMCCO recognize construction revenues, which result from utility system installations, monthly as services are performed and materials are used.
Infratech recognizes revenues from the sale of personal protective equipment when performance obligations are satisfied, which occurs when materials are shipped to the customer.
Renavotio recognizes revenues from training seminars upon completion of the training seminar when services have been provided.
Cost of Revenues
Our cost of revenues consists primarily of payroll for revenue generating operations, cost of materials, contract labor and rented equipment.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll for our administrative employees, outside consulting, legal and accounting services, insurance, facilities, and other supporting overhead costs.
Results of Operations
The results of our consolidated operations are summarized as follows:
Revenues
The following table summarizes our historical revenues:
The shift and increase in revenues were due to the acquisition of Infratech and UMC during 2020.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues increased from 2019 to 2020 due to the acquisition of Infratech and UMC during 2020. Cost of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $3,468,096, and $117,486, respectively. Cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 84%, and 50%, respectively.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased from 2019 to 2020 due to the acquisition of Infratech and UMC during 2020. General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $2,135,222, and $1,677,002, respectively. General and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 52%, and 719%, respectively.
Depreciation
During 2020, the Company incurred $80,981 in depreciation expenses on the assets acquired as part of the UMC acquisition.
Other Income
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had other income totaling $159,917 from relief payments made under the CARES Act for principal and interest on SBA notes payable.
Other Expense
During 2020, the Company incurred $195,963 in interest expenses and $156,484 in penalties and fees related to its debt obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no off-balance sheet arrangements (as that term is defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K) that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
Not applicable.