Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included herein. In addition to historical financial information, this report contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. The statements contained in this report that are not purely historical are forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act. Forward-looking statements are often identified by the use of words such as, but not limited to, “anticipate,” “believe,” “can,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “project,” “seek,” “should,” “strategy,” “target,” “will,” “would” and similar expressions or variations intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements are based on the beliefs and assumptions of our management based on information currently available to management. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other important factors that could cause actual results and the timing of certain events to differ materially from future results expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below. Furthermore, such forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this report. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statements.
“Arcadia Biosciences," "Sonova," "Sonova GLA Safflower Oil and design," “GoodHemp” and "GoodWheat" are our registered trademarks in the United States and, in some cases, in certain other countries. This report may also contain trademarks, service marks, and trade names of other companies. Solely for convenience, the trademarks, service marks and trade names referred to in this report may appear without the ®, TM, or SM symbols, but such references do not constitute a waiver of any rights that might be associated with the respective trademarks, service marks, or trade names.
Overview
We are a leader in science-based approaches to developing high value crop productivity traits primarily in hemp and wheat, designed to enhance farm economics by improving the performance of crops in the field, as well as their value as food ingredients, health and wellness products, and their viability for industrial applications. We use advanced breeding techniques to develop these proprietary innovations which we are beginning to monetize through a number of methods including seed and grain sales, product extract sales, sales of products using our patented non-GMO GoodWheat technology, trait licensing and royalty agreements.
Our commercial strategy is to link consumer’s nutrition, health and wellness demands with the superior functional benefits our crops deliver directly from the farm, enabling us to share premium economics throughout the ag-food supply chain and to build a world-class estate of high value traits and varieties. In particular, we believe the recent legalization of hemp in the U.S. and many other areas of the world has created a significant agricultural and financial opportunity. The demonstrated broad demand for industrial, nutritional, health and wellness products from hemp, coupled with its poor genetics represent a vast, new opportunity for Arcadia to add substantial value to its existing high value trait and seed estate.
The passage of the U.S. Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018 - also known as the Farm Bill - confirmed the federal legalization of hemp, the term given to non-psychoactive cannabis containing less than 0.3% tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). It also included provisions for legalizing on a federal level hemp’s cultivation, transport and sale for the first time in more than 75 years. Hemp, not previously distinguished by the federal government from cannabis, a Schedule 1 drug and banned as an agricultural crop, lacks substantive plant biology research and suffers from suboptimal genetics, highly fragmented germplasm and rampant inconsistencies. We are targeting hemp-based solutions that allow farmers to reliably and consistently achieve compliance with USDA regulations, through varieties with improved functionality and application of specific attributes such as select cannabinoid contents for health and wellness, enhanced proteins profiles for plant-based dietary applications and industrial applications such as clothing and hempcrete. Arcadia conducts its business in only federal and state markets in which its activities are legal.
On October 31, 2019, the USDA published the interim final rule as authorized by the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018 for hemp cultivation, which mandates that states test hemp crops and dispose of "hot" crops that exceed 0.3% THC. While hemp farmers will have access to crop protection options, the destruction of hot crops that fail these stringent inspections will not be a covered loss under crop insurance programs. In 2019 alone, more than 20% of U.S. hemp crops were non-compliant, representing over $2 billion in losses for growers.
Arcadia GoodHemp
In December 2019, we announced the launch of a new product line, GoodHemp, as the company's new commercial brand for delivering genetically superior hemp seeds, transplants, flower and extracts. On August 21, 2020, the Company acquired by merger Industrial Seed Innovations (ISI), an Oregon-based industrial hemp breeding and seed company. As a result of the acquisition, the Company acquired ISI’s commercial and genetic assets, including seed varieties, germplasm library and intellectual property. ISI’s Rogue and Umpqua seed varieties are now part of Arcadia’s portfolio, alongside the Company’s GoodHemp line of genetically superior hemp seeds, transplants, and extracts. The acquisition has significantly broadened and accelerated commercialization of Arcadia’s hemp-related breeding platform, as well as established a breeding research and development facility in the Pacific Northwest, a key production area in the hemp industry.
The Hemp Business Journal estimates the hemp CBD market - the primary non-psychoactive compound in hemp - totaled $190 million in U.S. sales in 2018. By 2025, the Brightfield Group, a hemp and CBD market research firm, projects U.S. sales of hemp-based CBD to reach $16.8 billion. Additionally, Markets and Markets estimates the non-cannabinoid, industrial hemp global market will exceed $26 billion by 2025.
Archipelago Ventures Hawaii, LLC
In August 2019, we formed a new joint venture to serve the Hawaiian, North American and Asian hemp markets, Archipelago Ventures Hawaii, LLC (“Archipelago”). This new venture between Arcadia and Legacy Ventures Hawaii (“Legacy”) combines Arcadia’s extensive genetic expertise and seed innovation history with Legacy’s growth capital and strategic advisory expertise in the Hawaiian markets. Additionally, Legacy brings to the partnership years of proven success in extraction, product formulation and sales of cannabinol oil and distillate products through its equity partner, Vapen CBD. Legacy was originally formed to be a vehicle for its partners to pursue hemp opportunities within the Hawaiian Islands.
Archipelago creates a vertically integrated supply chain, from seed to sale, we believe the first of its kind in Hawaii, and has three important strategic imperatives: (1) ensure a reliable supply chain during critical scale up of the global hemp market, a major risk mitigation for success, (2) ensure high quality throughout the supply chain, from genetics to the field and field to the customer and (3) ensure being well-positioned to address the unique needs and opportunities of the Hawaiian market.
Arcadia GoodWheat
In 2018, we launched our GoodWheat brand, a non-genetically modified (non-GM) portfolio of wheat products that enables food manufacturers to differentiate their consumer-facing brands. Consumer food companies are looking to simplify their food ingredient formulations and consumers are demanding “clean labeling” in their foods, paying more for foods having fewer artificial ingredients and more natural, recognizable and healthy ingredients. A 2017 survey by PR agency Ingredient Communications found that 73% of consumers are happy to pay a higher retail price for a food or drink product made with ingredients they recognize. Because GoodWheat increases the nutrient density directly in the primary grains and oils, it provides the mechanism for food formulation simplification naturally, cost effectively and in a timeframe to meet evolving consumer demands.
The brand launch is a key element of the company’s go-to-market strategy to achieve greater value for its innovations by participating in downstream consumer revenue opportunities. We designed the brand to make an immediate connection with consumers that products made with GoodWheat meet their demands for healthier wheat options that also taste great. The GoodWheat brand encompasses our current and future non-GM wheat portfolio of high fiber Resistant Starch (RS) and Reduced Gluten wheat varieties, as well as future wheat innovations. In October 2019, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office granted us the latest patents for extended shelf life wheat, the newest trait in our non-genetically modified wheat portfolio. This new trait was designed to promote whole wheat consumption by improving the shelf life and taste of whole grain wheat products.
We now hold more than 15 global patents on our high fiber Resistant Starch wheat, protecting both bread wheat and durum (pasta) wheat. Claims granted in 2020 strengthen our intellectual property for our Resistant Starch portfolio of products.
We announced in August 2020 an agreement with Bay State Milling Company and Arista Cereal Technologies to bring to market our resistant starch GoodWheat in North America and other key markets, beginning in early 2021. In the daily American diet approximately 500 calories come from wheat products, 25% of the FDA’s recommended daily caloric intake for a woman and 20% for a man. The GoodWheat portfolio of specialty wheat varieties delivers new functional value through an ingredient already an important component of the human diet.
In years to come, we expect to achieve enhanced nutritional characteristics within a number of other broad acre crops using advanced breeding and gene-editing techniques. Targets include but are not limited to higher fiber, longer shelf life and enhanced protein in crops other than wheat.
Verdeca HB4® Soybean
In 2012, we partnered with Bioceres to form Verdeca, a U.S.-based joint venture company to deploy next-generation soybean traits developed to benefit soybean producers through quality improvement, stress mitigation and management practices. The HB4® soybean varieties deliver two layers of value for growers: drought and herbicide tolerance, offering resistance to a broad-spectrum herbicide utilized to prevent growth of a wide range of annual and perennial broadleaf weeds and grasses. HB4® is the first trait offering tolerance to drought and salinity in soybeans, with 30 international patents. HB4® is currently approved in the four main countries producing this strategic crop - the U.S., Brazil, Argentina and Paraguay - representing 80% of the global soybean market. Regulatory submissions are under consideration by China, Canada, Bolivia and Uruguay.
In November 2020, the Company entered into a Master Transaction Agreement with Bioceres pursuant to which the Company sold all of its memberships interests it owned in Verdeca to Bioceres, and the Company and Bioceres entered into a license agreement for intellectual property rights related to HB4® soybean trait. Such license agreement includes milestone payments due to Arcadia commencing within thirty days of either Bioceres reaching commercial plantings of at least 200,000 hectares of HB4 or if China approves the HB4 soybean trait for “food and feed”. Import approval by China is required for commercial launch and the expectation to obtain such approval in late 2021 is under review in light of the coronavirus outbreak.
Impact of COVID-19
In early 2020, the World Health Organization ("WHO") determined the coronavirus ("COVID-19") was a worldwide pandemic. We are closely monitoring how the spread of the new strains of coronavirus are affecting our employees and business operations. We have developed preparedness plans to help protect the safety of our employees while safely continuing business operations. While management currently expects the impact of COVID-19 to be temporary, there is uncertainty around the duration and its broader impact on the economy and therefore the effects it will have on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry, and workforce.
Components of Our Statements of Operations Data
Revenues
We derive our revenues primarily from product revenues, licensing agreements, royalties and contract research agreements. Given our acute focus on selling our GoodWheat and GoodHemp products, we do not intend to continue pursuing contract research agreements and government grant projects.
Product Revenues
Our product revenues to date have consisted primarily of sales of our SONOVA products, with initial GoodWheat seed sale revenues recognized in the fourth quarter of 2019. We recognize revenue from product sales when control of the product is transferred to third-party distributors and manufacturers, collectively “our
customers,” which generally occurs upon shipment. Our revenues fluctuate depending on the timing of shipments of product to our customers.
License Revenues
Our license revenues to date consist of up-front, nonrefundable license fees, annual license fees, and subsequent milestone payments that we receive under our research and license agreements.
Milestone fees are variable consideration that is initially constrained and recognized only when it is probable that such amounts would not be reversed. Given the seasonality of agriculture and time required to progress from one milestone to the next, achievement of milestones is inherently uneven, and our license revenues are likely to fluctuate significantly from period to period.
Royalty Revenues
Royalty revenues from the Company’s agreements with third parties related to GoodWheat products and traits are recognized when the Company can reasonably determine the amounts earned. In most cases, this will be upon notification from the third-party licensee, which is typically during the quarter following the quarter in which the sales occurred.
Contract Research and Government Grant Revenues
Contract research and government grant revenues consist of amounts earned from performing contracted research primarily related to breeding programs or the genetic engineering of plants for third parties. Contract research revenue is accounted for as a single performance obligation for which revenues are recognized over time using the input method (e.g. costs incurred to date relative to the total estimated costs at completion).
We have received payments from government entities in the form of government grants. Government grant revenue is accounted for as a single performance obligation for which revenues are recognized over time using the input method (e.g. costs incurred to date relative to the total estimated costs at completion). Our obligation with respect to these agreements is to perform the research on a best-efforts basis.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Product Revenues
Cost of product revenues relates to the sale of our SONOVA and GoodWheat products and consists of in-licensing and royalty fees, any adjustments or write-downs to inventory, as well as the cost of raw materials, including inventory and third-party services costs related to procuring, processing, formulating, packaging and shipping our products.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred in the discovery, development and testing of our products and products in development incorporating our traits. These expenses consist primarily of employee salaries and benefits, fees paid to subcontracted research providers, fees associated with in-licensing technology, land leased for field trials, chemicals and supplies, and other external expenses. These costs are expensed as incurred. Additionally, we are required from time to time to make certain milestone payments in connection with the development of technologies in-licensed from third parties. Our research and development expenses may fluctuate from period to period.
Gain on sale of Verdeca
The gain on sale of Verdeca is the gain recognized for the sale our membership interests in the Verdeca joint venture to our partner Bioceres.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
Change in the fair value of contingent consideration is comprised of the gain associated with the reduction of our contingent liability as the result of a decision to abandon a program that was previously accrued.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee costs, professional service fees, and overhead costs. Our selling, general, and administrative expenses may fluctuate from period to period. In connection with our commercialization activities for our consumer ingredient products, we expect to increase our investments in sales and marketing and business development.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of contractual interest on notes payable to finance the purchase of company vehicles.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, consists of interest income and the amortization of investment premium and discount on our cash and cash equivalents and investments.
Change in the Estimated Fair Value of Common Stock Warrant Liabilities
Change in the estimated fair value of common stock warrant liabilities is comprised of the fair value remeasurement of liability classified common stock warrants.
Loss on Extinguishment of Warrant Liabilities
Loss on extinguishment of warrant liability is comprised of the difference between the reacquisition price and the carrying amount of the portion of the Warrants associated with the Warrant Exercise Transactions.
Offering Costs
Offering costs generally include placement agent, legal, advisory, accounting and filing fees.
Income Tax Benefit (Provision)
Our income tax provision has not been historically significant, as we have incurred losses since our inception. The provision for income taxes consists of state and foreign income taxes. Due to cumulative losses, we maintain a valuation allowance against our U.S. deferred tax assets as of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, including but not limited to, cumulative losses, projected future outcomes, industry and market trends and the nature of each of the deferred tax assets in assessing the extent to which a valuation allowance should be applied against our U.S. deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Product revenues accounted for 13% and 70% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $230,000, or 28%, increase in product revenues from sales of our SONOVA products was primarily driven by additional pet food orders.
License revenues accounted for 85% and 6% of our total revenues for the years ended years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $6,734,000 increase in license revenues consists primarily of the amounts allocated to the licenses granted to Bioceres for certain intellectual property rights in connection with the November 2020 transaction. See Note 9. There were no license agreements executed in 2019.
Royalty revenues accounted for 1% and 0% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $83,000 increase of royalty revenues represents minimum annual royalty fees earned.
Contract research and government grant revenues accounted for 1% and 25% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $182,000, or 63%, decrease in contract research and government grant revenues was driven by the completion of agreements and grants. Given our acute focus on selling our GoodWheat and GoodHemp products, we do not intend to continue pursuing contract research agreements and government grant projects.
Cost of Product Revenues
Cost of product revenues increased by $4,314,000, or 487%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is mainly due to write-downs in the amounts of $1,600,000 for contracted hemp seed production which did not meet quality specifications, $1,300,000 for Archipelago inventory due to regulatory changes, $850,000 for a net realizable value adjustment on seeds purchased from a third-party grower, and $397,000 for a net realizable value adjustment on wheat inventory.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $900,000, or 12%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by higher employee-related expenses as we expanded our research teams, as well as external hemp-related costs. The increase was partially offset by the less pre-commercial soybean activity, partially attributed to the sale of our share of Verdeca in November 2020.
Gain on sale of Verdeca
The gain on sale of Verdeca is the gain recognized as part of the transaction executed in November 2020 in which we sold our membership interests in the Verdeca joint venture to our partner Bioceres. See Note 9.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
There was no change in fair value of contingent consideration during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the change in the fair value of contingent consideration was due to the gain of $1.0 million associated with the reduction of our contingent liability as the result of a decision to abandon a program that was previously accrued. See Note 15.
Selling, General, and Administrative
Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased by $2.9 million, or 21%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by higher consulting activity and fees and consultants’ stock compensation expense, higher employee-related expenses including severance, higher insurance premiums, increased rent expense associated with additional leased space and increased marketing and public relations activities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $47,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to new notes payable agreements entered into during 2020. There was $5,000 of interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, increased $274,000, or 59%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to the unrealized gain of corporate securities.
Change in the Estimated Fair Value of Common Stock Warrant Liabilities
Change in the estimated fair value of common stock warrant liabilities resulted in income of $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the fair value remeasurement of the common stock warrant liabilities driven by a decrease in the stock price and risk-free rates, as well as a fewer number of warrants classified as liabilities outstanding at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019.
Loss on Extinguishment of Warrant Liability
In connection with the May and July 2020 Warrant Exercise Transactions, the Company recognized a loss on extinguishment of warrant liabilities of approximately $635,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. There were no such transactions during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Offering costs
Offering costs decreased by $708,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as all financing transactions completed during the year qualified for equity treatment and the offering costs were accounted for as a reduction to equity. Offering costs for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $708,000 were comprised of the placement agent fees, placement agent warrants, advisory fees, and legal and accounting fees related to the financing transactions that qualified for liability treatment.
Income Tax Provision
The income tax provision resulted in a $124,000 benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to an income tax expense of $2,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. A deferred tax liability arising from the difference between book purchase price allocation and tax basis has been assessed upon closing of the Industrial Seed Innovations acquisition completed in August 2020. See Note 7. The purchase accounting deferred tax liabilities enabled the realization of a portion of the existing deferred tax assets, thus allowing for a reduction in the valuation allowance in the amount of $107,000.
Seasonality
We and our commercial partners operate in different geographies around the world and conduct field trials used for data generation, which must be conducted during the appropriate growing seasons for particular crops and markets. Often, there is only one crop-growing season per year for certain crops and markets. Similarly, climate conditions and other factors that may influence the sales of our products may vary from season to season and year to year. In particular, weather conditions, including natural disasters such as heavy rains, hurricanes, hail, floods, tornadoes, freezing conditions, drought or fire, may affect the timing and outcome of field trials, which may delay milestone payments and the commercialization of products incorporating our seed traits. In the future, sales of commercial products that incorporate our seed traits will vary based on crop growing seasons and weather patterns within particular regions.
The level of seasonality in our business overall is difficult to evaluate at this time due to our relatively early stage of development, our relatively limited number of commercialized products, our expansion into new geographical markets and our introduction of new products and traits.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
We have funded our operations primarily with the net proceeds from our initial public offering, private placements of equity securities and debt, as well as proceeds from the sale of our SONOVA products and payments under license agreements, contract research agreements and government grants. Our principal use of cash is to fund our operations, which are primarily focused on completing development and commercializing our quality seed traits. This includes replicating field trials, coordinating with our partners on their development programs and scaling harvest production of wheat and hemp. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $14.0 million, restricted cash of $2.0 million and short-term investments of $11.6 million. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had net losses of $6.0 million and $28.9 million, respectively, and net cash used in operations of $30.2 million and $17.2 million, respectively.
As is disclosed in Note 23, on January 25, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors relating to the issuance and sale in a private placement of shares of Company common stock and warrants for an aggregate of $25.1 million, exclusive of any related transaction fees.
As is disclosed in Note 12 and 13, the Company obtained funding through one common stock and warrant financing and two warrant exercise financings during 2020, and two common stock and warrant financings and two
warrant exercise financings during 2019. On December 22, 2020, the Company entered into agreements with institutional investors through a registered direct offering in the amount of $8 million, exclusive of any related transaction fees. In May and July 2020, investors exercised warrants in the amount of $9.4 million, exclusive of transactions costs.
We believe that our existing cash, restricted cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements for at least the next 12 months.
We may seek to raise additional funds through debt or equity financings, if necessary. We may also consider entering into additional partner arrangements. Our sale of additional equity would result in dilution to our stockholders. Our incurrence of debt would result in debt service obligations, and the instruments governing our debt could provide for additional operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. If we do require additional funds and are not able to secure adequate additional funding, we may be forced to reduce our spending, extend payment terms with our suppliers, liquidate assets, or suspend or curtail planned development programs. Any of these actions could materially harm our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $30.2 million. Our net loss of $6.0 million, adjustments in our working capital accounts of $11.5 million, gain on sale of Verdeca of $8.8 million, corporate securities received in exchange for license agreement of $4.3 million, change in fair value of common stock warrant liabilities of $6.6 million, operating lease payments of $910,000, unrealized gain on corporate securities of $656,000 and net amortization of investment premium of $44,000 were partially offset by non-cash charges of $2.0 million for stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization of $662,000, lease amortization of $1.0 million, loss on extinguishment of warrant liability of $635,000, as well as $4.3 million of inventory write-downs.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $17.2 million. Our net loss of $28.9 million, change in fair value of contingent consideration of $1.0 million, operating lease payments of $715,000, and net amortization of investment premium and discount of $180,000 were partially offset by the change in fair value of common stock warrant liabilities and common stock adjustment feature liability of $9.2 million, non-cash charges of $2.3 million for stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization of $194,000, lease amortization of $708,000, as well as $0.7 million of offering costs incurred in connection with financing activities and adjustments in our working capital accounts of $0.1 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $17.3 million primarily consisted of $18.3 million of proceeds from sales and maturities of investments and $3.2 million of proceeds from the sale of Verdeca, partially offset by $2.3 million in purchases of property and equipment, $1.3 million of purchases of investments and $0.5 million of acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $8.4 million primarily consisted of $28.4 million in purchases of short term investments and $1.5 million in purchases of property and equipment, partially offset by $21.5 million in proceeds from sales and maturities of investments.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $20.6 million consisted of proceeds from the exercise of warrants of $9.4 million, proceeds from the issuance of stock and warrants relating to the December 2020 Offering of $8.0 million, proceeds from borrowings of $3.1 million, capital contributions from the non-controlling interest in our joint venture of $1.6 million and proceeds from the purchase of ESPP shares of $51,000. Partially offsetting these proceeds were payments of offering costs totaling $652,000 for the December 2020 Offering, as well payments of transaction costs relating to extinguishment of warrant liability of $863,000.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $21.9 million consisted of proceeds from the issuance of stock and warrants relating to the June 2019 Offering of $7.5 million and from the September 2019 Offering of $10.0 million, proceeds from the exercise of some of the June 2019 warrants of $5.3 million, capital contributions from the non-controlling interest in our joint venture of $689,000 and proceeds from the purchase of ESPP shares of $21,000. Partially offsetting these proceeds were payments of offering costs totaling $798,000 and $663,000 for the September 2019 and June 2019 Offerings, respectively, as well as $24,000 in payments of offering costs for the June 2018 Offering.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since our inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, including the use of structured finance, special purpose entities or variable interest entities, other than Verdeca. See Note 9 for further detail.
Critical Accounting Polices and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated, and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We consider our critical accounting policies and estimates to be revenue recognition, determination of the provision for income taxes, stock-based compensation, fair value of certain equity instruments, and net realizable value of inventory.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers at an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. See Note 2 for further detail.
We generally recognize product revenues once passage of title has occurred, which is generally upon shipment. Shipping and handling costs charged to customers are recorded as revenues and included in cost of product revenues at the time the sale is recognized.
We have determined that, at the inception of each license agreement, there is only one deliverable for the license for, access to and assistance with the development of the specified intellectual property. We recognize revenue up-front and annual license fees in full when it is deemed probable to be earned. See Note 2 for further detail.
We recognize royalty revenue when the Company can reasonably determine the amounts earned.
We recognize revenue related to milestone payments when it is probable that such amounts would not be reversed. See Note 2 for further detail.
Up-front license fees for newly executed agreements are recognized upon execution. Annual license fees and milestone fees are variable consideration that is initially constrained and recognized only when it is probable that such amounts would not be reversed. The evaluation and analysis of such fees is performed and once the annual license or milestone fee is deemed probable to have been earned, it is recognized in full in that period. See Note 2 for further detail.
Contract research revenue consists of amounts earned from performing contracted research activities for third parties. Activities performed are related to breeding programs or the genetic engineering of plants and are subject to an executed agreement. We generally recognize fees for research activities ratably over the contractually specified performance period.
Grant revenues are recognized as eligible research and development expenses are incurred using a proportional performance recognition methodology.
Inventories
Inventory costs are tracked on a lot-identified basis, valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value and are included as cost of product revenues when sold. We compare the cost of inventories with market value and write down inventories to net realizable value, if lower. We write down inventory when conditions indicate that the net realizable value may be less than cost due to physical deterioration, obsolescence, changes in price levels or other factors. Additionally, we provide reserves for excess and slow-moving inventory to its estimated net realizable value. The inventory write-downs are based upon estimates about future demand from our customers and distributors and market conditions. Future events that could significantly influence our judgment and related estimates include conditions in target markets, introduction of new products or changes to current or future competitor products.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation expense related to the employee stock purchase plan and stock options based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant, net of estimated forfeitures. We estimate the grant date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The grant date fair value of the stock-based awards is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective awards.
We recorded stock-based compensation expense related to equity awards of $2.0 million and $2.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In determining the fair value of stock-based awards, we use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and assumptions discussed below. Each of these inputs is subjective and generally requires significant judgment to determine.
Expected Term-The expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding and was estimated based on a simplified method allowed by the SEC due to insufficient historical data, and defines the term as the average of the contractual term of the options and the weighted-average vesting period for all open employee awards.
Expected Volatility-Since we were privately held and do not have sufficient trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average historical volatilities of common stock of comparable publicly traded entities over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle, or area of specialty. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of option.
Expected Dividend-We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
For stock options and other equity awards, our board of directors determine the fair value of each share of underlying common stock based on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the NASDAQ Stock Market on the date of grant.
In addition to the Black-Scholes assumptions, we estimate our forfeiture rate based on an analysis of our actual forfeitures and will continue to evaluate the adequacy of the forfeiture rate based on actual forfeiture experience, analysis of employee turnover behavior, and other factors. The impact from any forfeiture rate adjustment would be recognized in full in the period of adjustment and if the actual number of future forfeitures differs from our estimates, we might be required to record adjustments to stock-based compensation in future periods.
Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and the tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For discussions of the adoption and potential impacts of recently issued accounting standards, refer to Note 3 - Recent Accounting Pronouncements.