ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report o. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on July 28, 2020 as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On March 1, 2021, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger with Rocket Lab, and Prestige USA Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of Rocket Lab. The Merger Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby were unanimously approved by the boards of directors of each of the Company and Rocket Lab.
In contemplation of the Business Combination, we will domesticate as a Delaware corporation (the “Domestication” and the company following the Domestication, “Delaware Vector”) and, in connection therewith, (a) the Class A ordinary shares and the Class B ordinary shares issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Domestication will convert into an equal number of shares of common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, of Vector Delaware (the “Delaware Vector Common Stock”); (b) our warrants to purchase Class A ordinary shares issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Domestication will convert into an equal number of warrants to purchase Delaware Vector Common Stock (the “Delaware Vector Warrants”) and (c) our units that have not been separated into Class A ordinary shares and warrants issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Domestication will convert into an equal number of units of Delaware Vector (the “Delaware Vector Units”).
Immediately following the Domestication, Merger Sub will merge with and into Delaware Vector, with Delaware Vector surviving the merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of Rocket Lab (the “First Merger”), and in connection therewith, (a) the shares of Delaware Vector Common Stock (other than any treasury shares, shares held by Delaware Vector or any dissenting shares) issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the First Merger (the “First Effective Time”) will convert into an equal number of shares of Rocket Lab Common Stock; (b) the Delaware Vector Warrants that are outstanding and unexercised immediately prior to the First Effective Time will convert into an equal number of warrants to purchase Rocket Lab Common Stock (the “Assumed Warrants”) and (c) the Delaware Vector Units that are outstanding immediately prior to the First Effective Time will convert into an equal number of units of Rocket Lab (the “Assumed Units”); and immediately following the First Effective Time, Rocket Lab will merge with and into Delaware Vector, with Delaware Vector surviving the merger (Delaware Vector as the surviving corporation, “PublicCo” and such merger, the “Second Merger” and, together with the First Merger, the “Mergers”). If the closing price of PublicCo Common Stock is equal to or greater than $20.00 for a period of at least 20 days out of 30 consecutive
trading days during the period commencing on the 90th day following the closing of the Business Combination (the “Closing”) and ending on the 180th day following the Closing, the Rocket Lab stockholders will be entitled to receive additional shares of PublicCo Common Stock equal to 8% of the Aggregate Share Consideration.
For purposes of the Merger Agreement, the “Exchange Ratio” equals the quotient obtained by dividing (i) the Aggregate Share Consideration by (ii) the aggregate number of shares of Rocket Lab Common Stock outstanding immediately prior to the Charter Amendment on a fully diluted basis (other than the Management Redemption Shares). The “Aggregate Share Consideration” means the quotient obtained by dividing (i) an amount equal to $4,000,000,000 minus the Management Redemption Amount by (ii) (x) an amount equal to $10.00 plus (y) an amount equal to (a) the interest earned on funds held in Vector’s trust account divided by (b) the number of Class A ordinary shares outstanding immediately prior to the Closing.
The Domestication, the Mergers and the other transactions contemplated by the Agreement are hereinafter referred to as the “Business Combination”. The Business Combination is expected to close in the second quarter of 2021, subject to the satisfaction of certain customary closing conditions.
Concurrently with the execution of the Agreement, we entered into subscription agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors (the “PIPE Investors”), pursuant to which the PIPE Investors agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and the company agreed to issue and sell to such PIPE Investors, immediately prior to Closing, an aggregate of 46,700,000 shares of PublicCo Common Stock for a purchase price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $467,000,000 (the “PIPE Financing”).
The closing of the PIPE Financing is contingent upon, among other things, the substantially concurrent consummation of the Business Combination. The Subscription Agreements provide that the company will grant the investors in the PIPE Financing certain customary registration rights.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below, and, after the initial public offering, identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a business combination.
For the period from July 28, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $352,617, which consisted of formation and operating expenses of $357,463 offset by interest earned on investment held in the trust account of $4,846.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On September 29, 2020, we consummated the initial public offering of 30,000,000 units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $300,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the I initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 5,333,333 private placement warrants to our sponsor at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant generating gross proceeds of $8,000,000.
On October 20, 2020, in connection with the underwriters’ election to partially exercise of their over-allotment option, we consummated the sale of an additional 2,000,000 units and the sale of an additional 266,667 private placement warrants, generating total gross proceeds of $20,400,000.
Following our initial public offering, the partial exercise of their over-allotment option and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $320,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $18,252,382 in transaction costs, including $6,400,000 of underwriting fees, $11,200,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $652,382 of other offering costs.
For the period from July 28, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $506,715, which consisted of our net loss of $352,617 affected by interest earned on investment held in the trust account of $4,846 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $149,252 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had investments held in the trust account of $320,004,846. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account, which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our business combination. We may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash of $865,903 held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay our sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, administrative and support services, provided to the company. We began incurring these fees on September 24, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a business combination or the company’s liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $11,200,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the trust account by the weighted average number of Class A redeemable ordinary shares outstanding since original issuance. Net loss per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class B non-redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net income (loss), less income attributable to Class A redeemable ordinary shares, by the weighted average number of Class B non-redeemable ordinary shares outstanding for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.