ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This section includes several forward-looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that reflect our current views with respect to future events and financial performance. All statements that address expectations or projections about the future, including, but not limited to, statements about our plans, strategies, adequacy of resources and future financial results (such as revenue, gross profit, operating profit, cash flow), are forward-looking statements. Some of the forward-looking statements can be identified by words like “anticipates,” “believes,” “expects,” “may,” “will,” “can,” “could,” “should,” “intends,” “project,” “predict,” “plans,” “estimates,” “goal,” “target,” “possible,” “potential,” “would,” “seek,” and similar references to future periods. These statements are not a guarantee of future performance and involve a number of risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict. Because these forward-looking statements are based on estimates and assumptions that are subject to significant business, economic and competitive uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control or are subject to change, actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what is expressed or forecasted in these forward-looking statements. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from these forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to: the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on us and our clients; our ability to access the capital markets by pursuing additional debt and equity financing to fund our business plan and expenses; our continued inability to issue additional shares of equity securities; negative outcome of pending and future claims and litigation and our ability to comply with our contractual covenants, including in respect of our debt; potential loss of clients and possible rejection of our business model and/or sales methods; weakness in general economic conditions and levels of capital spending by customers in the industries we serve; weakness or volatility in the financial and capital markets, which may result in the postponement or cancellation of our customers’ projects or the inability of our customers to pay our fees; delays or reductions in U.S. government spending; credit risks associated with our customers; competitive market pressures; the availability and cost of qualified labor; our level of success in attracting, training and retaining qualified management personnel and other staff employees; changes in tax laws and other government regulations, including the impact of health care reform laws and regulations; the possibility of incurring liability for our business activities, including, but not limited to, the activities of our temporary employees; our performance on customer contracts; and government policies, legislation or judicial decisions adverse to our businesses. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date hereof. We assume no obligation to update such statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. We recommend readers to carefully review the entirety of this Annual Report, including the “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report and the other reports and documents we file from time to time with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), particularly our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and our reports on Form 8-K.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations, our expectations regarding the future performance of our business and the other non-historical statements in the discussion and analysis are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors including those described in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. You should read the following discussion together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto and other financial information included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our financial information may not be indicative of our future performance.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Demand for Maslow EOR services and field talent is dependent upon general economic conditions and labor trends. The United States economic backdrop during the first quarter 2020 was positive until the rise in COVID 19 cases changed the business landscape profoundly. Before the pandemic, the United States marked a 50-year unemployment low in February 2020, with just 3.5% of Americans unemployed. Starting the week of March 9, 2020, numerous U.S. state and federal governments began urging or requiring residents to stay home and banning large gatherings and restricted travel. Schools were closed and all sporting events across the United States were either cancelled or postponed indefinitely. Many companies mandated that their employees work from home and discontinued use of many workers who could not perform their type of work from home (e.g., video, sound, lighting crew, makeup-artists). Maslow began seeing the effects the week of March 16, 2020 as its contracted employee and freelance payroll hours dropped as much as 49% during the second quarter. This was because a large portion of Maslow employees were assigned to field, location, or studio filming projects for our clients that require close contact with others. These projects were placed on indefinite hold and these employees who saw their hours dramatically reduced. Those who could continue to work from their homes for our clients, have continued to log hours. Not surprisingly the months of April and May 2020 saw the largest drop in comparative 2020 revenue to 2019 at 49% ($3,379 from $6,673). Second quarter 2020 revenue of $5,197 was 46% off the pace of 2019’s $9,617 comparative. In the third quarter of 2020, that loss dwindled to approximately 38%, as the Company generated $6,201 in third quarter revenues vs. $10,089 in the same period in 2019.
However, our fourth quarter revenue of $9,003 was only 13.7% less than the fourth quarter in 2019 when it was $10,438. This was due to our clients increasing their payrolls as COVID-19 restrictions by state began to wane, and seasonal fall business activities such as the U.S. elections were held, and the 17-week regular season of the National Football League (“NFL”) season commenced and proceeded.
We are hopeful that the dissemination of vaccines will result in resumption of a normally functioning economy which will continue to enable our clients to return their payrolls to normal levels that in turn, will continue ours and an overall economic rebound. However, no assurance can be given on if and when this will happen or what impact it will have on our business.
As far as cash is concerned, in 2020 although COVID-19 exacerbated our already precarious cash position as explained more thoroughly below (see Liquidity and Capital Resources), we received a $250 short term loan from Triumph at 10% annual percentage rate (“APR”), in February,2020 and then in May 2020, $5,215 in Payroll Protection Plan (PPP) funds which assisted us in weathering the storm, especially through the lean months from May through August 2020. By the end of August 2020, we had exhausted our use of PPP funds, but our working capital remained strong at $5,693.
Because our larger clients scaled back media related activities in 2020 due to COVID-19, our revenue became more diverse as reliance on our top 2 clients dropped from 49% in 2019 to 39% in 2020. Four clients with revenues greater than $500 actually increased revenue in 2020 by $2,111.
Our working capital though has assumed repayment of Vivos Holdings debt which as of December 31, 2020 was $5,970. We had expected repayment in early 2020 after Vivos Holdings defaulted on two of their notes at the end of December 2019.
From a technology perspective, we updated our finance and accounting system from Sage 50 which was a client server version, to Sage Intaact, a cloud-based application. We also bolstered our automated sales and marketing capabilities by adding SaaS applications Salesforce.com and ZoomInfo. So, although we still do not possess an integrated ERP, we improved our business intelligence, CRM, Finance and Accounting capabilities.
On February 17, 2020, after several attempts to negotiate a payment plan with Suresh Venkat Doki (brother of Mr. Doki) and Mr. Doki, Maslow, as plaintiff, filed a complaint with the Circuit Court of Montgomery County, Maryland against Mr. Doki and other Vivos Debtors.
In February 2020, the shortage of cash at this juncture resulted from, among other things, the Company being unable to finance IQS invoices through Triumph because a lien was discovered to exist on IQS assets delaying utilization of Maslow’s much more favorable factoring relationship with Triumph. As for the lien, it was not disclosed to Maslow by Vivos Holdings, the seller, before or after the transaction closed. This is when Maslow sought $250 from Triumph and later made a payment to buy its way out of the unfavorable factoring arrangement and take on other actions to move IQS financing to Triumph.
The Company’s executives and its board of directors worked together on managing costs and implementing measures to facilitate the rapid ramp-up of operations once the governmental restrictions began being lifted in June 2020. But we did not see our clients return to better than 60% of their customary levels of demand until September 2020.
Cash and working capital began stabilizing in late September 2020 after the PPP funds had been exhausted for their intended purpose, payroll only in our case, and we began utilizing our factoring facility again, but not the 93% level we have over the past 2 years.
and Beyond
The continued impact of this pandemic cannot be precisely predicted. We believe that the short to mid-term impacts on how our clients conduct work will continue to be aligned with our strategic path.
As a result, we have continued to move forward with our diversified offerings and future specialization staffing strategy, updating our already expert operating model and organizing our business to more easily acquire and maintain client accounts.
We believe given the changing nature in specialized staffing due to the pandemic that there likes a greater opportunity to expand our EOR business as it offers businesses of all types and industries, more flexibility in on and off boarding employees as well as managing 1099 risk. As far as staffing, media staffing, we believe it will grow but there are also opportunities to get into staffing specialties which represent areas where we see the most rebound for a robust demand. We will continue to focus on growing the contingent staffing side of our business. Our IT Staffing brand, Intelligent Quality Solutions, will be a primary focus moving forward. Bringing on new segments whether organically or through M&A reflect our desire to shift our portfolio toward a higher margin, higher value proposition.
COMPANY OVERVIEW
Maslow is a national provider of employer of record, recruiting and staffing services, consisting of media and IT resources. We provide services to client primarily within the United States of America.
Our services consist of:
● Employer of Record (“EOR”): A unique workforce solution for any organization who seeks efficiency in employee administrative management including payroll and benefits, labor risk associated with compliance with federal-state and local regulations including Fair Labor Standards Act (“FLSA”), in onboarding and offboarding employees, and in managing benefit costs.
● Recruiting and Staffing: Staffing covering a wide variety of specialties. Currently Media and Information Technology (“IT”) encompass most of our placements.
● Video and Multimedia Production: With 32 years of experience, the Company’s subsidiary, Maslow, offer script to screen expertise including producers, audio engineers, editors, broadcasters, makeup artists, camera crews, Gaffers and grips, drone operators and more.
The Company’s subsidiary, The Maslow Media Group, Inc. (“Maslow”) is currently the only earning entity for the business. After our Merger in October 2019, non-operational expenses (e.g., public company fees, D&O insurance, investor relations, etc.) were assigned at the corporate level. This enables a more pristine focused view of the operational side of the business we refer to as Operational Income Before Depreciation, Interest, and Amortization.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Maslow had revenues totaling $29,202 in 2020, which was a 24% decrease over $38,444 in 2019. IQS, our IT Staffing business segment, which was acquired on December 1, 2019, accounted for $2,571, or 8.8%. The COVID-19 impact to revenue was undoubtedly profound but difficult to measure given there is no way to know what level of growth existing clients may have had or revenue potential of new clients.
Overall, Maslow lost $7,611 to accounts with declining revenues => $500, but conversely added $2,111 from new or growing accounts that had at least $500 more in revenue in 2020 from 2019. AT&T’s DirecTV cancelled Sirius-XM programming in February 2020 that we believe had a negative impact of $3,400 on revenue. Overall DirecTV year over year revenue declined by $4,759.
If we assume that those clients who had revenues in 2019 and zero in 2020 and include those with steep declines > $500 and 2020 revenues < $10, the total in attrition is approximately $3,874. This attrition may not be permanent as many clients hire Maslow for special events. The decision to leave Maslow or not use Maslow services in 2020 by these three clients was not attributable to Maslow’s pricing, service, or performance.
Overall, the top 10 clients represented $24,242 which is 82% of 2020 revenues, which was a decrease by approximately $7,249 to 2019’s top 10 at approximately $31,491. $24 in rebates were issued in December 2020 which was $24 less than a year ago when they were $48 in 2019.
The following tables summarize key components of our results of operations for the periods indicated, both in dollars and as a percentage of revenues, and have been derived from our consolidated financial statements.
The 2019 consolidated statement of income includes only 1 month of IQS operations versus 12 months in 2020.
Revenues: By Segment
Employer of Record (EOR) Revenues: EOR represented 80.7% of our revenue in 2020 as opposed to 89.6% in 2019. This can be attributed to this business segment being hit the hardest by COVID-19 as our large corporate clients curtailed non-essential media activities and AT&T announced the cancellation of two (2) live anchor multiple hour DirecTV sports programs, which we estimate reduced revenue by $4,000. Additionally, our IT staffing business which we enjoyed for its first full year, contributed 8% of revenue, thus also reducing EOR concentration.
Recruiting and Staffing Revenues: Staffing revenues buoyed by having a full year of IT Staffing capabilities increased revenue by $2,288, or 104%. The IT Staffing (IQS) contributing the vast majority, but Media Staffing despite COVID-19 headwinds, managed to eke out a slight increase in 2020 of $17 over 2019, finishing year with $1,904 in revenue.
IQS, our IT Staffing division although contributing $2,571 in revenue and $784 in gross profit (30.5%) in 2020, saw a decline in business from its 2019 full year levels (including pre-acquisition as it was acquired December 2019) of $3,206 in revenue and $908 in gross profit. These are declines at levels of $723 or 28% and $131 or 17% in revenue and gross profit, respectively. The decline in IQS business was most poignant in Q4 with revenue coming in at $478 compared to $751 in Q4 2019; a drop of 36.4%. When IQS Q4 2020 revenue is compared to Q1 2020, the decline is comparative at 39.5%. The drop in revenue began in April 2020 due to COVID-19 as the next 6 months saw an approximate decline of 27% compared to same period a year ago. The decline however was not as steep as the EOR, Video Production and Media Staffing comparative declines because a few clients had essential business exceptions and accommodations to keep their IT projects active. The reason there was no bounce back for this business segment in Q4 was a combination of losing 7 staffing positions to permanent offers and what we believe is the temporary loss of two clients, Inspire Brands and Accruent who both began implementing temporary hiring freezes in early 2020. This resulted in a $745 revenue loss in 2020. Conversely, Abbott Labs through vendor management firm Tapfin, had a 57% increase in revenues going from $691 in 2019 to $1,083 in 2020.
Video and Multimedia Production Revenues: Video Production by nature of the freelance work our clients undertake, did see a decline in revenue by $516 or 31.4%, from $1,641 in 2019 to revenues of $1,125 in 2020.
Gross Profit: Gross profit represents revenues from services less cost of services expenses, which consist of payroll, payroll taxes, benefits, payroll-related insurance, union benefits, field talent and reimbursable costs for out-of-pocket items.
Overall, our gross profit declined $595, or 14.6% to $3,474 from $4,069 in 2019; but the decline was not proportionate and as steep as our revenue’s decline by 24%. This was due primarily to an increase in higher margin activities such as IT staffing which garnered 30.5% as it represented 8.8% of the overall revenue. This coupled with a reduction in the low margin EOR business at 9.2%and increase in Media Staffing at 22.8% drove an overall margin of 11.9% which was 1.3% higher than 2019’s margin of 10.6%.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (“SG&A”): SG&A expenses increased $1,477, or 49.5%, to $4,462, $1,567 of which were related to non-operational corporate costs, with $1,109 of which were public company based and $446 were for outside legal fees associated with our Vivos Group dispute. Otherwise, our operational SG&A increase in 2020 over 2019 was only $63.
Operational SG&A increases were in salary of $381 in 2020 over 2019, which can be attributed to having IQS IT Staffing unit for full year which added approximately $453 to 2020’s salary demonstrating that when comparing MMG pre IQS salaries from 2020 to 2019, there was actually a savings of $72. The savings in salaries was attained despite adding business development personnel.
IQS salaries were trimmed to be in line with reduction in revenue, which included a change in senior management. For the first 8 months of 2020, SG&A salary, payroll tax and benefits averaged $40 a month, in contrast to the last 5 months of 2020 where salaries averaged $28, without a loss in productivity. This staff realignment was implemented to position this division for success and growth moving forward.
Non-operational corporate costs for 2020 totaled $1,567, which are not comparable to 2019 as these costs only were classified as such after the Company went public via the reverse merger in October 2019. The 2020 cost drivers were salary, payroll tax, and benefits at $738 and D&O insurance totaling $115. The former consists of our general counsel and allocated executive and senior management loaded salaries.
Depreciation and Amortization: Depreciation and amortization charges were $79 compared to $25 in 2019, with the increase coming from capitalized software and IQS brand name and client relationships amortization.
Interest Income: Interest income from related parties increased from $68 to $120, as a result of the Vivos Holdings 2019 tax note accruing interest for a full year.
Other Expense: Other expenses decreased by $205 from $206 to $1 primarily due to elimination of these non- essential, non-operational costs the Company had incurred in 2019.
Interest Expense: Interest expense, decreased by $157 from $438 to $281 as reliance on factoring was minimized as a benefit of having PPP loan proceeds, managing expenses downward and business picking up in Q4. Additionally, interest accrual at 12% on $890 in convertible notes began subsiding as notes were repaid from July through September 2020. Conversely PPP loan interest was carried at 1% starting in May 2020 through end of the year, and interest of 10% on a $250 loan from Triumph Capital.
Income Taxes: Income tax expense improved from $156 in income tax expense to an income tax benefit of $230 due to the net loss recorded in 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our working capital requirements are driven predominantly by EOR field talent payments, SG&A salaries, public company costs, interest associated with factoring, and client accounts receivable receipts. Since receipts from client payments are on average 70 days behind payments to field talent, working capital requirements can be periodically challenged. We have a Factoring Facility with Triumph Business Capital (TBC). TBC advances 93% of our eligible receivables at an advance rate of 15 basis points, an interest rate of prime plus 2%., and our prime floor rate at 4%. As a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, our clients may be more likely to be delinquent in their payments. As of December 31, 2020, 63% of our $6,629 were current, 26% 1 to 30 days past due, 8% between 31 and 60 days past due and 3% ($202) greater than 60 days.
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash generated from operations via accounts receivable and borrowings under our Factoring Facility with Triumph enabling access to the 7% unfactored portion. Because certain large clients have changed their payment practices announcing 60- and 90-day terms amounting to a unilateral extension to contractual terms by 30-60 days, we can be adversely impacted since Triumph no longer provides credit if an account obligor pays more than 120 days after the invoice date.
Our primary uses of cash are for payments to field talent, corporate and staff employees, related payroll liabilities, operating expenses, public company costs, including but not limited to general and professional liability and directors and officer’s liability insurance premiums, legal fees, filing fees, auditor and accounting fees, stock transfer services, and board compensation; followed by cash factoring and other borrowing interest; cash taxes; and debt payments.
Since we are an EOR with the majority of contracted talent paid as W-2 employees who are paid known amounts on a consistent schedule; our cash inflows do not typically align with these required payments, resulting in temporary cash challenges, which is why in the past we have employed factoring.
Vivos Debtors as of December 31, 2020, had notes receivable totaling $4,258 including default on a $3,000 promissory note and on a $750 tax obligation in December 2019. After numerous failed collection attempts, on February 17, 2020 the Company initiated an action in the Circuit Court of Montgomery County Maryland against Naveen Doki and the Vivos Holdings for nonpayment.
It was also anticipated that following the Merger, the Company would both access the capital markets by selling additional shares of Company Common Stock and use shares of Company Common Stock as currency to acquire other business revenues. However, all 300 million authorized shares of Company Common Stock were issued in connection with the Merger. No shares are expected to become available to the Company until the legal dispute with the Vivos Debtors and Vivos Group is resolved. At that point the Company can decide whether to amend the Company’s Certificate of Formation to increase the number of authorized shares of Company Common Stock or approve a reverse-split of the outstanding shares of Company Common Stock to provide additional shares for these purposes. No assurance can be given as to when this might take place.
On May 5, 2020, Maslow received $5,216 loan through the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) with a term of two (2) years and an interest rate of 1% per annum. The PPP provides that the Company may apply for forgiveness of this loan if the loan proceeds were used for payroll and certain other specified operating expenses while maintaining specified headcount requirements. The accrued interest on the PPP loan as of December 31, 2020 was $34.
On June 5, 2020, The Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act (the “PPPF Act”) went into effect providing more flexibility to participants in the PPP which included extending the time to begin repayment of the PPP loan until the amount of forgiveness, if any, is determined, which could be as late as December 31, 2020. The Company may apply for forgiveness earlier if they determine that doing so will maximize the amount of loan forgiveness.
On December 22, 2020, the United States Congress passed an omnibus spending bill (the December relief bill) that included significant revisions and additions to the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) established by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (CARES Act), and previously amended by the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act (PPP Flexibility Act). President Trump signed the bill on December 27, 2020. The December relief bill permits expenses paid with PPP loan funds to be deductible.
On December 27, 2020, the Economic Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues ‎Act (the “PPP2 Act”) contained in the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (“2021 Appropriations Act”) ‎was enacted. The PPP2 Act and 2021 Appropriations Act included several changes to the forgiveness ‎deadline process and deadlines allowing PPP borrowers up to 10 months to apply for loan forgiveness after the covered period ends.
The Company utilized PPP funds for their intended purpose, in this case for payroll only following guidelines for wage earners > $100.
The funds bolstered our working capital and enabled us to bring back employees and continue to serve our clients even though their requirements had lessened.
As of December 31, 2020, our working capital was $5,970, compared to $784 a year ago as the PPP funds enabled the Company to build A/R reserves since PPP funds were employed to pay salaries of both outsourced and SG&A employees, while approximately 58% of 2019 revenue was still attained and collectible during the covered 24-week period between May and October 2020.
We anticipate approximately $300 in additional SG&A costs in 2021, when compared with 2020 relating to increase in sales and marketing head count to meet growth objectives.
A summary of our operating, investing and financing activities are shown in the following table:
Operating Activities
Cash employed by operating activities consists of net income (loss), adjusted for non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization, and the effect of working capital changes. The primary drivers of cash inflows and outflows are factoring, accounts receivable and accrued payroll and expenses.
During 2020, net cash used in operating activities was ($2,070), a decrease of $2,071 compared with $1 for 2019. This decrease is primarily attributable to our net loss of ($789), and changes in income tax payable by ($525), accrued payroll ($455), and accounts payable ($401).
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities consists primarily of cash paid for capital expenditures.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was $1,915 as compared to cash used for same purpose totaling $284 in 2019. The increase was due to the Company receiving $5,216 in PPP offset by $853 in repayments from the issuance of convertible notes starting in June of 2019 and return of cash flows from short-term borrowing via our factoring vehicle.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We had no material off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are likely to have, a current or future material effect on our operations.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
We have identified the policies listed below as critical to our business and the understanding of our results of operations. For a detailed discussion of the application of these and other accounting policies, see Note 3 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP, requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, collectability of accounts receivable, impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, contingencies, litigation, income taxes, stock option expense, and other liabilities. Management based its estimates and judgments on historical experiences and on various other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results under circumstances and conditions different than those assumed could result in differences from the estimated amounts in the consolidated financial statements.
REVENUE RECOGNITION
On January 1, 2019 the Company adopted the new accounting standard ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, for all open contracts and related amendments as of December 31, 2019 using the modified retrospective method. The adoption had no impact to the reported results.
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with ASC 606, the core principle of which is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To achieve this core principle, five basic criteria must be met before revenue can be recognized: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligation(s) in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to performance obligation(s) in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when or as the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
The Company accounts for revenues when both parties to the contract have approved the contract, the rights and obligations of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, and collectability of consideration is probable. Payment terms vary by client and the services offered.
We derive our revenues from three segments: EOR, Recruiting and Staffing, and Video and Multimedia Production. We provide temporary staffing and permanent placement services. Revenues are recognized when promised services are delivered to client, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. Revenues as presented on the consolidated statements of operations represent services rendered to client less variable consideration, such as sales adjustments and allowances. Reimbursements, including those related to out-of-pocket expenses, are also included in revenues, and equivalent amounts of reimbursable expenses are included in cost of services.
We record revenue on a gross basis as a principal versus on a net basis as an agent in the presentation of revenues and expenses. We have concluded that gross reporting is appropriate because we (i) have the risk of identifying and hiring qualified workers, (ii) have the discretion to select the workers and establish their price and duties and (iii) we bear the risk for services that are not fully paid for by client.
Temporary staffing revenues is accounted for as a single performance obligation satisfied over time because the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the Company’s performance on an hourly basis. The contracts stipulate weekly billing, and the Company has elected the “as invoiced” practical expedient to recognize revenue based on the hours incurred at the contractual rate as we have the right to payment in an amount that corresponds directly with the value of performance completed to date.
Permanent placement revenue is recognized on the date the candidate’s full-time employment with the customer has commenced. The customer is invoiced on the start date, and the contract stipulates payment due under varying terms, typically 90 days. The contract with the customer stipulates a guarantee period whereby the Company will replace the candidate for free of charge if the employee is terminated within that 90-day period. As such, the Company’s performance obligations are satisfied upon commencement of the employment, at which point control has transferred to the customer.
Allowances, recorded as a liability, are established to estimate these losses. Fees to client are generally calculated as a percentage of the new worker’s annual compensation. No fees for permanent placement services are charged to employment candidates.
Video and Multimedia Production revenues from contracts with client are recognized in the amount to which we have a right to invoice when the services are rendered by our field talent.
INTANGIBLE ASSETS
The Company holds intangible assets with finite lives. Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortized over their respective estimated useful lives, ranging from three to ten years, based on a pattern in which the economic benefit of the respective intangible asset is realized.
Identifiable intangible assets recognized in conjunction with acquisitions are recorded at fair value. Significant unobservable inputs are used to determine the fair value of the identifiable intangible assets based on the income approach valuation model whereby the present worth and anticipated future benefits of the identifiable intangible assets were discounted back to their net present value.
The Company evaluates the recoverability of intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an intangible asset’s carrying amount may not be recoverable. The Company annually evaluates the remaining useful lives of all intangible assets to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining period of amortization. The Company determined that there were no impairment indicators for these assets during the year ended December 31, 2020.
GOODWILL
Goodwill represents the difference between the enterprise value/cash paid less the fair value of all recognized net asset fair values including identifiable intangible asset values in a business combination. The Company reviews goodwill for impairment annually during the fourth quarter or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. Based on annual testing, the Company has determined that there was no goodwill impairment during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company first evaluates qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not (that is, a likelihood of more than 50 percent) that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. If after qualitatively assessing the totality of events or circumstances, the Company determines that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then further testing is unnecessary. If after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, the Company determines that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, the Company then estimates the fair value of the reporting unit and compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill, as discussed below.
In assessing whether it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired, the Company assesses relevant events and circumstances that could affect the significant inputs used to determine the fair value.
The quantitative impairment test for an indefinite-lived intangible asset consists of a comparison of the fair value of the asset with its carrying amount. If the carrying amount of an intangible asset exceeds its fair value, the Company shall recognize an impairment loss in an amount equal to that excess.
The quantitative goodwill impairment test involves a two-step process. In the first step, the Company compares the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill is not impaired, and no further testing is required. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, The Company must perform the second step of the impairment test to measure the amount of impairment loss. In the second step, the reporting unit’s fair value is allocated to all of the assets and liabilities of the reporting unit, including any unrecognized intangible assets, in a hypothetical analysis that calculates the implied fair value of goodwill in the same manner as if the reporting unit was being acquired in a business combination. If the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill is less than the carrying value, the difference is recorded as an impairment loss.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUCEMENTS
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and their potential effect on our results of operations and financial condition, refer to Note 3 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.