ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and result of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other information included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We operate as a third-party logistics company, providing multi-modal transportation and logistics services primarily in the United States and Canada. We service a large and diversified account base consisting of consumer goods, food and beverage, manufacturing and retail customers, which we support from an extensive network of operating locations across North America as well as an integrated international service partner network located in other key markets around the globe. We provide these services through a multi-brand network, which includes over 100 operating locations, which includes a number of independent agents, who we also refer to as our "strategic operating partners" that operated exclusively on our behalf as well as approximately 20 Company-owned offices. As a third-party logistics company, we have a vast carrier network of asset-based transportation companies, including motor carriers, railroads, airlines and ocean lines in our carrier network. We believe shippers value our services because we are able to objectively arrange the most efficient and cost-effective means, type and provider of transportation service without undue influence caused by the ownership of transportation assets. In addition, our minimal investment in physical assets affords us the opportunity for a higher return on invested capital and net cash flows than our asset-based competitors.
Through our operating locations across North America, we offer domestic, international air and ocean freight forwarding services and freight brokerage services, including truckload services, LTL services, and intermodal services, which is the movement of freight in trailers or containers by combination of truck and rail. Our primary business operations involve arranging the shipment, on behalf of our customers, of materials, products, equipment and other goods that are generally larger than shipments handled by integrated carriers of primarily small parcels, such as FedEx, DHL and UPS. Our services include arranging and monitoring all aspects of material flow activity utilizing advanced information technology systems. We also provide other value-added logistics services, including MM&D and CHB solutions to complement our core transportation service offering.
The Company expects to grow its business organically and by completing acquisitions of other companies with complementary geographical and logistics service offerings. The Company’s organic growth strategy will continue to focus on strengthening existing and expanding new customer relationships leveraging the benefit of the Company’s truck brokerage and intermodal service offerings, while continuing its efforts on the organic build-out of the Company’s network of strategic operating partner locations. In addition, as the Company continues to grow and scale its business, the Company believes that it is creating density in its trade lanes, which creates opportunities for the Company to more efficiently source and manage its transportation capacity.
In addition to its focus on organic growth, the Company will continue to search for acquisition candidates that bring critical mass from a geographic and purchasing power standpoint, along with providing complementary service offerings to the current platform. As the Company continues to grow and scale its business, it also remains focused on leveraging its back-office infrastructure and technology systems to drive productivity improvement across the organization.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have widespread implications and while we see improvements in the broader economy, it is difficult to predict how COVID-19 will impact the overall economy in the future. Many countries have begun the process of vaccinating their residents against COVID-19. However, the large scale and challenging logistics of distributing the vaccines, as well as uncertainty over the efficacy of the vaccines against new variants of the virus, may impact the economy as well as our operations in the future. Our results for the fiscal year 2021 showed encouraging recovery as we navigate through this unique environment. While we are seeing positive results despite the current COVID-19 environment, there remains uncertainty regarding how COVID-19 will impact the Company's results in the future.
The effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may last for a significant period of time and may continue to adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition even after the COVID-19 outbreak has subsided. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts us will depend on numerous evolving factors and future developments that we are not able to predict, including the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental, business, and individuals' actions in response to the pandemic; and the impact on economic activity including the possibility of recession or financial market instability. These factors may adversely impact consumer, business, and government spending as well as customers' ability to pay for our services on an ongoing basis. This uncertainty also affects management’s accounting estimates and assumptions, which could result in greater variability in a variety of areas that depend on these estimates and assumptions, including receivables and forward-looking guidance.
Performance Metrics
Our principal source of income is derived from freight forwarding and freight brokerage services we provide to our customers. As a third-party logistics provider, we arrange for the shipment of our customers’ freight from point of origin to point of destination. Generally, we quote our customers a turnkey cost for the movement of their freight. Our price quote will often depend upon the customer’s time-definite needs (first day through fifth day delivery), special handling needs (heavy equipment, delicate items, environmentally sensitive goods, electronic components, etc.), and the means of transport (motor carrier, air, ocean or rail). In turn, we assume the responsibility for arranging and paying for the underlying means of transportation.
Our transportation revenue represents the total dollar value of services we sell to our customers. Our cost of transportation includes direct costs of transportation, including motor carrier, air, ocean, and rail services. Our net transportation revenue (gross transportation revenue less the direct cost of transportation) is the primary indicator of our ability to source, add value and resell services provided by third parties, and is considered by management to be a key performance measure. In addition, management believes measuring its operating costs as a function of net transportation revenue provides a useful metric, as our ability to control costs as a function of net transportation revenue directly impacts operating earnings.
Our operating results will be affected as acquisitions occur. Since all acquisitions are made using the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations, our financial statements will only include the results of operations and cash flows of acquired companies for periods subsequent to the date of acquisition.
Net revenues, a non-GAAP financial measure, is our total revenue minus our total cost of transportation and other services (excluding depreciation and amortization, which are reported separately) and net margin is net revenues as a percentage of our total revenue. We believe that these provide investors meaningful information to understand our results of operations and the ability to analyze financial and business trends on a period-to-period basis.
Our GAAP-based net income will be affected by non-cash charges relating to the amortization of customer related intangible assets and other intangible assets attributable to completed acquisitions. Under applicable accounting standards, purchasers are required to allocate the total consideration in a business combination to the identified assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their fair values at the time of acquisition. The excess of the consideration paid over the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired is to be allocated to goodwill, which is tested at least annually for impairment. Applicable accounting standards require that we separately account for and value certain identifiable intangible assets based on the unique facts and circumstances of each acquisition. As a result of our acquisition strategy, our net income will include material non-cash charges relating to the amortization of customer related intangible assets and other intangible assets acquired in our acquisitions. Although these charges may increase as we complete more acquisitions, we believe we will be growing the value of our intangible assets (e.g. customer relationships). Thus, we believe that earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or EBITDA, is a useful financial measure for investors because it eliminates the effect of these non-cash costs and provides an important metric for our business.
EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure of income and does not include the effects of preferred stock dividends, interest, and taxes, and excludes the “non-cash” effects of depreciation and amortization on long-term assets. Companies have some discretion as to which elements of depreciation and amortization are excluded in the EBITDA calculation. We exclude all depreciation charges related to property, technology, and equipment and all amortization charges (including amortization of leasehold improvements). We then further adjust EBITDA to exclude changes in fair value of contingent consideration, expenses specifically attributable to acquisitions, transition and lease termination costs, foreign currency transaction gains and losses, share-based compensation expense, litigation expenses unrelated to our core operations, and other non-cash charges. While management considers EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA useful in analyzing our results, it is not intended to replace any presentation included in our consolidated financial statements.
Our operating results are also subject to seasonal trends when measured on a quarterly basis. The impact of seasonality on our business will depend on numerous factors, including the markets in which we operate, holiday seasons, consumer demand, and economic conditions. Since our revenue is largely derived from customers whose shipments are dependent upon consumer demand and just-in-time production schedules, the timing of our revenue is often beyond our control. Factors such as shifting demand for retail goods and/or manufacturing production delays could unexpectedly affect the timing of our revenue. As we increase the scale of our operations, seasonal trends in one area of our business may be offset to an extent by opposite trends in another area. We cannot accurately predict the timing of these factors, nor can we accurately estimate the impact of any particular factor, and thus we can give no assurance any historical seasonal patterns will continue in future periods.
Critical Accounting Policies
Accounting policies, methods and estimates are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements prepared by management and are based upon management’s current judgments. These judgments are normally based on knowledge and experience regarding past and current events and assumptions about future events. Certain accounting policies, methods and estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to the financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting them may differ from management’s current judgments. While there are a number of accounting policies, methods and estimates that affect our financial statements, the areas that are particularly significant include revenue recognition; accruals for the cost of purchased transportation; the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities; fair value of contingent consideration; and the assessment of the recoverability of long-lived assets, goodwill and intangible assets.
We perform an annual impairment test for goodwill as of April 1 of each year unless events or circumstances indicate impairment may have occurred before that time. We assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying amount. After assessing qualitative factors, if further testing is necessary, we would determine the fair value of each reporting unit and compare the fair value to the reporting unit’s carrying amount.
Intangible assets consist of customer related intangible assets, trade names and trademarks, and non-compete agreements arising from our acquisitions. Customer related intangible assets are amortized using the straight-line method over a period of up to ten years, trademarks and trade names are amortized using the straight-line method over 15 years, and non-compete agreements are amortized using the straight-line method over the term of the underlying agreements.
We review long-lived assets to be held-and-used for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. If the sum of the undiscounted expected future cash flows over the remaining useful life of a long-lived asset is less than its carrying amount, the asset is considered to be impaired. Impairment losses are measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. When fair values are not available, we estimate fair value using the expected future cash flows discounted at a rate commensurate with the risks associated with the recovery of the asset. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
As a non-asset-based carrier, we do not generally own transportation assets. We do, however, own certain trailers and refrigerated trailers that we use in our business. We generate the majority of our air and ocean freight forwarding and freight brokerage revenues by purchasing transportation services from direct (asset-based) carriers and reselling those services to our customers. Freight forwarding revenues related to shipments where we issue a House Airway Bill or a House Ocean Bill of Lading are recognized over the transit period as customers’ goods move from origin to destination. Costs related to the shipments are also recognized at this same time based upon anticipated margins, contractual arrangements with direct carriers, and other known factors. The estimates are routinely monitored and compared to actual invoiced costs. The estimates are adjusted as deemed necessary by us to reflect differences between the original accruals and actual costs of purchased transportation. All other revenue, including revenue from other value-added services including freight brokerage services, customs brokerage services and warehousing and fulfillment services, is recognized upon completion of the service.
The Company has contingent obligations to transfer cash payments and equity shares to former shareholders of acquired operations in conjunction with certain acquisitions if specified operating results and financial objectives are met over the next four fiscal years. The Company uses projected future financial results based on recent and historical data to value the anticipated future earn-out payments. To calculate fair value, the future earn-out payments were then discounted using Level 3 inputs.
Results of Operations
Fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, compared to fiscal year ended June 30, 2020
The following table summarizes revenues, cost of transportation and other services, and net revenues by reportable operating segments for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020:
(1)	Net revenues are revenues net of cost of transportation and other services.
Transportation revenue was $858.8 million and $824.5 million for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $34.3 million, or 4.2%, is primarily attributable to increased volume with certain customers offset by lower disaster relief project work enjoyed in the prior year. Net transportation revenue was $200.9 million and $190.4 million for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net transportation revenue margins increased slightly from 23.1% to 23.4%, primarily due to a significant decrease in the current year of low margin disaster relief project work, somewhat offset by surcharges on certain trade lanes due to the tightness of capacity as well as general shifts in product mix.
Value added services revenue was $30.3 million and $30.7 million for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease of $0.4 million, or 1.3%, is primarily attributable to slowdown in our contract logistics and custom brokerage services offerings. Net value added services revenue was $20.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to $19.0 million for the comparable prior year period. Net value added services revenue margins increased from 61.9% to 65.9%, primarily due to lower personnel and warehousing costs as a percentage of revenue.
The following table provides a reconciliation for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 of net revenues to gross profit, the most directly comparable GAAP measure:
The following table compares consolidated statements of comprehensive income data by reportable operating segments for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020:
(1)	Net revenues are revenues net of cost of transportation and other services.
Operating partner commissions increased $8.2 million, or 9.6%, to $94.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase is primarily due to increased net revenues from operating partners. As a percentage of net revenues, operating partner commissions increased 160 basis points to 42.6% from 41.0% for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily due to significantly lower disaster relief project work, which resulted in smaller operating partner commission payments in the year ended June 30, 2020.
Personnel costs decreased $2.3 million, or 4.0%, to $55.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease is primarily due to temporary work force reductions and temporary compensation reductions as a result of management response to COVID-19, particularly for the first two quarters of the year. As a percentage of net revenues, personnel costs decreased 247 basis points to 25.1% from 27.5% for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses decreased $5.1 million, or 17.3%, to $24.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease is primarily attributable to decreased bad debt expense, claims, professional services and travel. As a percentage of net revenues, SG&A decreased 305 basis points to 11.1% from 14.1% for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Depreciation and amortization costs remained around $16.6 million for both years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. As a percentage of net revenues, depreciation and amortization decreased 38 basis points to 7.5% from 7.9% for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The transition, lease termination, and other costs increased $0.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration was a loss of $4.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to a loss of $1.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The change in each year is attributable to a change in management’s estimates of future earn-out payments through the remainder of the respective earn-out periods.
Net other income (expenses) increased by $5.4 million, or 270.5%, to net other income of $3.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 primarily due to gain on the forgiveness of the PPP loans offered under the CARES Act as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our change in net income is driven principally by increased net revenues, partially offset by increased operating expenses and increased income taxes compared to the prior year.
Our future financial results may be impacted by amortization of intangible assets resulting from acquisitions as well as gains or losses from changes in fair value of contingent consideration that are difficult to predict.
The following table provides a reconciliation for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 of adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), the most directly comparable GAAP measure:
(1)Net revenues are revenues net of cost of transportation and other services.
Adjusted EBITDA increased $10.5 million, or 27.5% to $48.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Generally, our primary sources of liquidity are cash generated from operating activities and borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility, as described below. These sources also fund a portion of our capital expenditures and contractual contingent consideration obligations. Adapting to COVID-19, we have curtailed mergers and acquisitions activities and suspended the stock buy-back program through our third fiscal quarter, but reinitiated the stock buy-back program starting in the fourth quarter of the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. Our level of cash and financing capabilities along with cash flows from operations have historically been sufficient to meet our operating and capital needs. As of June 30, 2021, we have $13.7 million in cash on hand to serve as adequate working capital.
Fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to fiscal year ended June 30, 2020
Net cash provided by operating activities were $14.1 million and $29.9 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The cash provided primarily consisted of net income adjusted for depreciation and amortization and changes in accounts payable and accounts receivable. Compared to the prior fiscal year, cash provided by operating activities decreased mainly due to increased accounts receivable balance from customers and partially offset by increased payables to vendors.
Net cash used for investing activities were $11.1 million and $14.1 million for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The primary uses of cash were for acquisition and purchases of technology and equipment. Cash paid for acquisitions was $9.2 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. Cash paid for purchases of technology and equipment were $11.4 million and $5.2 million for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net cash used for financing activities was $23.7 million and net cash provided by financing activities was $12.3 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Gross proceeds from the credit facility was $6.4 million and gross repayments from the credit facility was $21.4 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. Gross proceeds from the credit facility was $586.3 million and gross repayments to the credit facility was $570.1 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. Proceeds from the PPP loans was $5.9 million received during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. Payments of debt issuance costs was $1.9 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. Repayments of notes payable and finance lease liability were $4.7 million and $4.3 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Repurchases of common stock were $1.9 million and $2.5 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Payments of contingent consideration was $2.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. Distributions to non-controlling interest were $1.0 million and $1.3 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Proceeds from employees’ exercise of stock options were $1.4 million and $0.6 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Payments of employee tax withholdings related to vesting of restricted stock awards were $0.3 million for each of the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. Payments of employee tax withholdings related to the cashless exercise of stock option were $0.2 million for each of the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
Working Capital
We believe that our current working capital, anticipated cash flow from operations, and access to financing through the Revolving Credit Facility are adequate for funding existing operations for the next twelve months.
Acquisitions
Below are descriptions of recent acquisitions in the last two fiscal years.
On February 7, 2020 the Company acquired the assets and operations of two of its Adcom agency locations: Alexandria, Virginia based Friedway Enterprises, Inc. (“Friedway”) and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania based CIC2, Inc. (“CIC2”). The acquired agencies are expected to strengthen and diversify Radiant’s network of Company-owned operations and will continue to provide a full range of hyper-care domestic and international transportation and logistics service to customers in medical device, high-tech and trade-show industries. As consideration for the acquisition, the Company paid $9.2 million in cash upon closing and issued 45,086 shares of common stock recorded at fair value, and the seller is entitled to additional contingent consideration payable in subsequent periods based on future performance of the acquired operation. The maximum contingent consideration payable is $10 million.
Technology
A primary component of our business strategy is to provide robust and advanced technology offerings to our customers, while providing advanced technology to our operations, strategic operating partners and management. To accomplish this, we will continuously develop and enhance our technology platform to align with current and future business requirements. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we spent approximately $2.1 million on technology enhancements and software systems in order to increase our operating efficiency and improve technology offerings. We intend to spend in excess of $3.5 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 in order to continue enhancing our technology platform, which we expect will include elements focused on customer facing, vendor facing, and user facing tools and systems that will be integrated into our existing platform and support our continued growth.
Revolving Credit Facility
The Company entered into a $150 million syndicated, revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”) pursuant to a Credit Agreement dated as of March 13, 2020. On June 30, 2021, the borrowings outstanding on the Revolving Credit Facility was $15 million. The Revolving Credit Facility was entered into with Bank of America Securities, Inc. as sole book runner and sole lead arranger, Bank of Montreal Chicago Branch, as lender and syndication agent, MUFG Union Bank, N.A as lender and documentation agent and Bank of America, N. A., KeyBank National Association and Washington Federal Bank, National Association as lenders (such named lenders are collectively referred to herein as “Lenders”). This replaces the Company’s $75 million facility dated June 14, 2017.
The Revolving Credit Facility has a term of five years, matures on March 13, 2025, and is collateralized by a first-priority security interest in the accounts receivable and other assets of the Company. Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility accrue interest (at the Company’s option), at the Lenders’ base rate plus 1.00% or LIBOR plus 2.00% and can be subsequently adjusted based on the Company’s consolidated leverage ratio under the facility at the Lenders’ base rate plus 1.00% to 1.75% or LIBOR plus 2.00% to 2.75%.
The Revolving Credit Facility includes a $50 million accordion feature to support future acquisition opportunities. For general borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility, the Company is subject to the maximum consolidated leverage ratio of 3.00 and minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.25. Additional minimum availability requirements and financial covenants apply in the event the Company seeks to use advances under the Revolving Credit Facility to pursue acquisitions or repurchase its common stock.
In conjunction with the Revolving Credit Facility, Radiant entered into two interest rate swap contracts. On March 20, 2020, and effective April 17, 2020, Radiant entered into an interest rate swap contract with Bank of America to trade variable interest cash inflows at one-month LIBOR for a $20 million notional amount, for fixed interest cash outflows at 0.635%. On April 1, 2020, and effective April 2, 2020, Radiant entered into an interest rate swap contract with Bank of America to trade the variable interest cash inflows at one-month LIBOR for a $10 million notional amount, for fixed interest cash outflows at 0.5865%. Both interest rate swap contracts mature and terminate on March 13, 2025.
Senior Secured Loan
On April 2, 2015, Radiant Canada obtained a CAD$29.0 million senior secured Canadian term loan from Fiera Private Debt Fund IV LP (“FPD IV” formerly, Integrated Private Debt Fund IV LP) pursuant to a CAD$29,000,000 Credit Facilities Loan Agreement (the “FPD IV Loan Agreement”). The Company and its U.S. and Canadian subsidiaries are guarantors of the Radiant Canada obligations thereunder. The loan matures on April 1, 2024 and accrues interest at a rate of 6.65% per annum. We made interest-only payments for the first twelve months and blended principal and interest payments through maturity. In connection with the loan, we paid an amount equal to five months of interest payments into a debt service reserve account controlled by FPD IV.
In connection with our acquisition of Lomas, Radiant Canada obtained a CAD$10.0 million senior secured Canadian term loan from Fiera Private Debt Fund V LP (“FPD V” formerly, Integrated Private Debt Fund V LP) pursuant to a CAD$10,000,000 Credit Facilities Loan Agreement (the “FPD V Loan Agreement,” and together with the FPD IV Loan Agreement, the “FPD Loan Agreements”). The Company and its U.S. and Canadian subsidiaries are guarantors of the Radiant Canada obligations thereunder. The loan matures on June 1, 2024 and accrues interest at a rate of 6.65% per annum. The loan repayment consists of monthly blended principal and interest payments.
The loans may be prepaid in whole at any time upon providing at least 30 days prior written notice and paying the difference between (i) the present value of the loan interest and the principal payments foregone discounted at the Government of Canada Bond Yield for the term from the date of prepayment to the maturity date and (ii) the face value of the principal amount being prepaid.
For additional information regarding our indebtedness, see Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements.
Paycheck Protection Program Loans
On May 4, 2020, the Company received loan proceeds of $5.9 million pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”). The application for these funds required the Company to, in good faith, certify that the current economic uncertainty made the loan request necessary to support the ongoing operations of the Company. This certification further required the Company to take into account our current business activity and our ability to access other sources of liquidity sufficient to support ongoing operations in a manner that is not significantly detrimental to the business. On April 28, 2020, the Secretary of the U.S. Department of the Treasury stated that the Small Business Administration will perform a full review of any PPP loan over $2 million before forgiving the loan. The certification made by the Company did not contain any objective criteria and is subject to interpretation. Despite the good-faith belief that given the Company’s circumstances all eligibility requirements for the PPP loans were satisfied, if it is later determined that the Company had violated any applicable laws or regulations or it is otherwise determined the Company was ineligible to receive the PPP loans, it may be required to repay the PPP loans in its entirety and/or be subject to additional penalties.
The term of the Company’s PPP loans was two years. The annual interest rate on the PPP loans was 1% and no payments of principal or interest would have been due until the conclusion of the deferral period. The deferral period would end on the earlier of (i) the date that Small Business Administration remits the loan forgiveness amount to the lender, or (ii) if the loan were not forgiven, ten months after the end of the 24-week loan forgiveness covered period. Under the terms of the PPP loans, all or a portion of the principal could be forgiven if the loan proceeds were used for qualifying expenses as described in the CARES Act, such as payroll costs, benefits, rent, and utilities. The PPP loan was recognized on the Company’s June 30, 2020 consolidated balance sheet as notes payable and was derecognized when forgiven during the year ended June 30, 2021.
As of June 30, 2021, all PPP loans totaling $5.9 million were forgiven, including $0.06 million of interest previously accrued.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of June 30, 2021, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partners, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which had been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As such, we are not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in such relationships.
Recent Accounting Guidance
The recent accounting guidance is discussed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements contained in this report.