Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
OVERVIEW
RLI Corp. is a U.S. based, specialty insurance company that underwrites select property and casualty insurance through major subsidiaries collectively known as RLI Insurance Group (Group). Our focus is on niche markets and developing unique products that are tailored to customers’ needs. We hire underwriters and claim examiners with deep expertise and provide exceptional customer service and support. We maintain a highly diverse product portfolio and underwrite for profit in all market conditions. In 2020, we achieved our 25th consecutive year of underwriting profitability. Over the 25-year period, we averaged an 88.4 combined ratio. This drives our ability to provide shareholder returns in three different ways: the underwriting income itself, net investment income from our investment portfolio and long-term appreciation in our equity portfolio.
We measure the results of our insurance operations by monitoring growth and profitability across three distinct business segments: casualty, property and surety. Growth is measured in terms of gross premiums written, and profitability is analyzed through combined ratios, which are further subdivided into their respective loss and expense components.
GAAP, NON-GAAP AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES
Throughout this annual report, we include certain non-generally accepted accounting principles (non-GAAP) financial measures. Management believes that these non-GAAP measures further explain the Company’s results of operations and allow for a more complete understanding of the underlying trends in the Company’s business. These measures should not be viewed as a substitute for those determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (GAAP). In addition, our definitions of these items may not be comparable to the definitions used by other companies.
Following is a list of non-GAAP measures found throughout this report with their definitions, relationships to GAAP measures and explanations of their importance to our operations.
Underwriting Income
Underwriting income or profit represents one measure of the pretax profitability of our insurance operations and is derived by subtracting losses and settlement expenses, policy acquisition costs and insurance operating expenses from net premiums earned, which are all GAAP financial measures. Each of these captions is presented in the statements of earnings but is not subtotaled. However, this information is available in total and by segment in note 12 to the consolidated financial statements within Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. The nearest comparable GAAP measure is earnings before income taxes which, in addition to underwriting income, includes net investment income, net realized gains or losses, net unrealized gains or losses on equity securities, general corporate expenses, debt costs and our portion of earnings from unconsolidated investees. A reconciliation of net earnings to underwriting income follows:
Combined Ratio
The combined ratio, which is derived from components of underwriting income, is a common industry performance measure of profitability for underwriting operations and is calculated in two components. First, the loss ratio is losses and settlement expenses divided by net premiums earned. The second component, the expense ratio, reflects the sum of policy acquisition costs and insurance operating expenses divided by net premiums earned. All items included in these components of the combined ratio are presented in our GAAP consolidated financial statements. The sum of the loss and expense ratios is the combined ratio. The difference between the combined ratio and 100 reflects the per-dollar rate of underwriting income or loss.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
In preparing the consolidated financial statements, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses for the reporting period. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
The most critical accounting policies involve significant estimates and include those used in determining the liability for unpaid losses and settlement expenses, investment valuation, recoverability of reinsurance balances, deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred taxes.
LOSSES AND SETTLEMENT EXPENSES
Overview
Loss and loss adjustment expense (LAE) reserves represent our best estimate of ultimate payments for losses and related settlement expenses from claims that have been reported but not paid, and those losses that have occurred but have not yet been reported to the Company. Loss reserves do not represent an exact calculation of liability, but instead represent our estimates, generally utilizing individual claim estimates, actuarial expertise and estimation techniques at a given accounting date. The loss reserve estimates are expectations of what ultimate settlement and administration of claims will cost upon final resolution. These estimates are based on facts and circumstances then known to the Company, review of historical settlement patterns, estimates of trends in claims frequency and severity, projections of loss costs, expected interpretations of legal theories of liability and many other factors. In establishing reserves, we also take into account estimated recoveries from reinsurance, salvage and subrogation. The reserves are reviewed regularly by a team of actuaries we employ.
The process of estimating loss reserves involves a high degree of judgment and is subject to a number of variables. These variables can be affected by both internal and external events, such as changes in claim handling procedures, claim personnel, economic inflation, legal trends and legislative changes, among others. The impact of many of these items on ultimate costs for loss and LAE is difficult to estimate. Loss reserve estimations also differ significantly by coverage due to differences in claim complexity, the volume of claims, the policy limits written, the terms and conditions of the underlying policies, the potential severity of individual claims, the determination of occurrence date for a claim and reporting lags (the time between the occurrence of the policyholder event and when it is actually reported to the insurer). Informed judgment is applied throughout the process. We continually refine our loss reserve estimates as historical loss experience develops and additional claims are reported and settled. We rigorously attempt to consider all significant facts and circumstances known at the time loss reserves are established.
Due to inherent uncertainty underlying loss reserve estimates, including, but not limited to, the future settlement environment, final resolution of the estimated liability may be different from that anticipated at the reporting date. Therefore, actual paid losses in the future may yield a significantly different amount than currently reserved - favorable or unfavorable.
The amount by which current estimated losses differ from those estimated for a period at a prior valuation date is known as development. Development is unfavorable when the losses ultimately settle for more than the levels at which they were reserved or subsequent estimates indicate a basis for reserve increases on unresolved claims. Development is favorable when losses ultimately settle for less than the amount reserved or subsequent estimates indicate a basis for reducing loss reserves on unresolved claims. We reflect favorable or unfavorable development of loss reserves in the results of operations in the period the estimates are changed.
We record two categories of loss and LAE reserves: case-specific reserves and IBNR reserves.
Within a reasonable period of time after a claim is reported, our claim department completes an initial investigation and establishes a case reserve. This case-specific reserve is an estimate of the ultimate amount we will have to pay for the claim, including related legal expenses and other costs associated with resolving and settling it. The estimate reflects all of the current information available regarding the claim, the informed judgment of our professional claim personnel regarding the nature and value of the specific type of claim and our reserving practices. During the life cycle of a particular claim, as more information becomes available, we may revise the estimate of the ultimate value of the claim either upward or downward. We may determine that it is appropriate to pay portions of the reserve to the claimant or related settlement expenses before final resolution of the claim. The amount of the individual case reserve will be adjusted accordingly and is based on the most recent information available.
We establish IBNR reserves to estimate the amount we will have to pay for claims that have occurred, but have not yet been reported to the Company, claims that have been reported to the Company that may ultimately be paid out differently than reflected in our case-specific reserves and claims that have been closed but may reopen and require future payment.
Our IBNR reserving process involves three steps: (1) an initial IBNR generation process that is prospective in nature, (2) a loss and LAE reserve estimation process that occurs retrospectively and (3) a subsequent discussion and reconciliation between our prospective and retrospective IBNR estimates, which includes changes in our provisions for IBNR where deemed appropriate. These three processes are discussed in more detail in the following sections.
LAE represents the cost involved in adjusting and administering losses from policies we issued. The LAE reserves are frequently separated into two components: allocated and unallocated. Allocated loss adjustment expense (ALAE) reserves represent an estimate of claims settlement expenses that can be identified with a specific claim or case. Examples of ALAE would be the hiring of an outside adjuster to investigate a claim or an outside attorney to defend our insured. The claim adjuster typically estimates this cost separately from the loss component in the case reserve. Unallocated loss adjustment expense (ULAE) reserves represent an estimate of claims settlement expenses that cannot be identified with a specific claim. An example of ULAE would be the cost of an internal claim examiner to manage or investigate claims.
Our best estimate of ultimate loss and LAE reserves are proposed by our lead reserving actuary and approved by our Loss Reserve Committee (LRC). The LRC is made up of various members of the management team including the lead reserving actuary, chief executive officer, chief operating officer, chief financial officer, chief legal officer and other selected executives. We do not use discounting (recognition of the time value of money) in reporting our estimated reserves for losses and settlement expenses. Based on current assumptions used in calculating reserves, we believe that our reserve levels at December 31, 2020, make a reasonable provision to meet our future obligations.
Initial IBNR Generation Process
Initial carried IBNR reserves are determined through a reserve generation process. The intent of this process is to establish an initial total reserve that will provide a reasonable provision for the ultimate value of all unpaid loss and ALAE liabilities. For most casualty and surety products, this process involves the use of an initial loss and ALAE ratio that is applied to the earned premium for a given period. The result is our best initial estimate of the expected amount of ultimate loss and ALAE for the period by product. Payments and case reserves are subtracted from this initial estimate of ultimate loss and ALAE to determine a carried IBNR reserve.
For certain property products, we use an alternative method of determining an appropriate provision for initial IBNR. Since this segment is characterized by a shorter period of time between claim occurrence and claim settlement, the IBNR reserves are determined by IBNR percentages applied to premium earned. The percentages are determined based on expected loss ratios and loss development assumptions. The loss development assumptions are typically based on historical reporting patterns but could consider alternative sources of information. The IBNR percentages are reviewed and updated periodically. No deductions for paid or case reserves are made. This alternative method of determining initial IBNR allows incurred losses and ALAE to react more rapidly to the actual emergence, and is more appropriate for our property products where final claim resolution occurs over a shorter period of time.
We do not reserve for natural or man-made catastrophes until an event has occurred. Shortly after such occurrence, we review insured locations exposed to the event and industry loss estimates of the event. We also consider our knowledge of frequency and severity from early claim reports to determine an appropriate reserve for the catastrophe. These reserves are reviewed frequently to consider actual losses reported and appropriate changes to our estimates are made to reflect the new information.
The initial loss and ALAE ratios that are applied to earned premium are reviewed at least semi-annually. Prospective estimates are made based on historical loss experience adjusted for exposure mix, price change and loss cost trends. The initial loss and ALAE ratios also reflect our judgment as to estimation risk. We consider estimation risk by product and coverage within product, if applicable. A product with greater volatility and uncertainty has greater estimation risk. Products or coverages with higher estimation risk include, but are not limited to, the following characteristics:
•
Significant changes in underlying policy terms and conditions,
•
A new business or one experiencing significant growth and/or high turnover,
•
Small volume or lacking internal data requiring significant utilization of external data,
•
Unique reinsurance features including those with aggregate stop-loss, reinstatement clauses, commutation provisions or clash protection,
•
Longer emergence patterns with exposures to latent unforeseen mass tort,
•
Assumed reinsurance businesses where there is an extended reporting lag and/or a heavier utilization of ceding company data and claims and product expertise,
•
High severity and/or low frequency,
•
Operational processes undergoing significant change and/or
•
High sensitivity to significant swings in loss trends, economic change or judicial change.
The historical and prospective loss and ALAE estimates, along with the risks listed, are the basis for determining our initial and subsequent carried reserves. Adjustments in the initial loss ratio by product and segment are made where necessary and reflect updated assumptions regarding loss experience, loss trends, price changes and prevailing risk factors. The LRC approves changes in the initial loss and ALAE ratios.
Loss and LAE Reserve Estimation Process
Estimates of the expected value of the unpaid loss and LAE are derived using standard actuarial methodologies on a quarterly basis. In addition, an emergence analysis is completed quarterly to determine if further adjustments are necessary. These estimates are then compared to the carried loss reserves to determine the appropriateness of the current reserve balance.
The process of estimating ultimate payment for claims and claim expenses begins with the collection and analysis of current and historical claim data. Data on individual reported claims, including paid amounts and individual claim adjuster estimates, are grouped by common characteristics. There is judgment involved in this grouping. Considerations when grouping data include the volume of the data available, the credibility of the data available, the homogeneity of the risks in each cohort and both settlement and payment pattern consistency. We use this data to determine historical claim reporting and payment patterns, which are used in the analysis of ultimate claim liabilities. In some analyses, including business without sufficiently large numbers of policies or that have not accumulated sufficient historical statistics, our own data is supplemented with external or industry average data as available and when appropriate. For liabilities arising out of directors and officers, management liability, workers’ compensation and medical errors and omissions exposures, we utilize external data extensively.
In addition to the review of historical claim reporting and payment patterns, we also incorporate estimated losses relative to premium (loss ratios) by year into the analysis. The expected loss ratios are based on a review of historical loss performance, trends in frequency and severity and price level changes. The estimates are subject to judgment including consideration given to available internal and industry data, growth and policy turnover, changes in policy limits, changes in underlying policy provisions, changes in legal and regulatory interpretations of policy provisions and changes in reinsurance structure. For the most current year, these are equivalent with the ratios used in the initial IBNR generation process. Increased recognition is given to actual emergence as the years age.
We use historical development patterns, expected loss ratios and standard actuarial methods to derive an estimate of the ultimate level of loss and LAE payments necessary to settle all the claims occurring as of the end of the evaluation period.
Our reserve processes include multiple standard actuarial methods for determining estimates of IBNR reserves. Other supplementary methodologies are incorporated as necessary. Mass tort and latent liabilities are examples of exposures for which supplementary methodologies are used. Each method produces an estimate of ultimate loss by accident year. We review all of these various estimates and assign weights to each based on the characteristics of the product being reviewed.
Our estimates of ultimate loss and LAE reserves are subject to change as additional data emerges. This could occur as a result of change in loss development patterns, a revision in expected loss ratios, the emergence of exceptional loss activity, a change in weightings between actuarial methods, the addition of new actuarial methodologies, new information that merits inclusion or the emergence of internal variables or external factors that would alter our view.
There is uncertainty in the estimates of ultimate losses. Significant risk factors to the reserve estimate include, but are not limited to, unforeseen or unquantifiable changes in:
•
Loss payment patterns,
•
Loss reporting patterns,
•
Frequency and severity trends,
•
Underlying policy terms and conditions,
•
Business or exposure mix,
•
Operational or internal processes affecting the timing of loss and LAE transactions,
•
Regulatory and legal environment and/or
•
Economic environment.
Our actuaries engage in discussions with senior management, underwriters and the claim department on a regular basis to ascertain any substantial changes in operations or other assumptions that are necessary to consider in the reserving analysis.
A considerable degree of judgment in the evaluation of all these factors is involved in the analysis of reserves. The human element in the application of judgment is unavoidable when faced with uncertainty. Different experts will choose different assumptions based on their individual backgrounds, professional experiences and areas of focus. Hence, the estimates selected by various qualified experts may differ significantly from each other. We consider this uncertainty by examining our historic reserve accuracy and through an internal and external review process.
Given the substantial impact of the reserve estimates on our financial statements, we subject the reserving process to significant diagnostic testing and reasonability checks. In addition, there are data validity checks and balances in our front-end processes. Data anomalies are researched and explained to reach a comfort level with the data and results. Leading indicators such as actual versus expected emergence and other diagnostics are also incorporated into the reserving processes.
Determination of Our Best Estimate
Upon completion of our loss and LAE estimation analysis, the results are discussed with the LRC. As part of this discussion, the analysis supporting the actuarial central estimate of the IBNR reserve by product is reviewed. The actuaries also present explanations supporting any changes to the underlying assumptions used to calculate the indicated central estimate. A review of the resulting variance between the indicated reserves and the carried reserves takes place. Our actuaries make a recommendation to management in regards to booked reserves that reflect both their analytical assessment and relevant qualitative factors, such as their view of estimation risk. After discussion of these analyses, recommendations and all relevant risk factors, the LRC determines whether the reserve balances require adjustment. Resulting reserve balances have always fallen within our actuaries’ reasonable range of estimates.
As a predominantly excess and surplus lines and specialty admitted insurer serving niche markets, we believe we are subject to above-average variation in estimates and that this variation is not symmetrical around the actuarial central estimate.
One reason for the variation is the above-average policyholder turnover and changes in the underlying mix of exposures typical of an excess and surplus lines business. This constant change can cause estimates based on prior experience to be less reliable than estimates for more stable, admitted books of business. Also, as a niche market insurer, there is little industry-level information for direct comparisons of current and prior experience and other reserving parameters. These unknowns create greater-than-average variation in the actuarial central estimates.
Actuarial methods attempt to quantify future outcomes. However, insurance companies are subject to unique exposures that are difficult to foresee at the point coverage is initiated and, often, many years subsequent. Judicial and regulatory bodies involved in interpretation of insurance contracts have increasingly found opportunities to expand coverage beyond that which was intended or contemplated at the time the policy was issued. Many of these policies offer broad coverages (with named exclusion) and are issued on an occurrence basis. Claimants have at times sought coverage beyond the insurer’s original intent, including seeking to void or limit exclusionary language.
Because of the variation and the likelihood that there are unforeseen and under-quantified liabilities absent from the actuarial estimate, we believe there are circumstances where it is prudent to enhance our normal reserving process. Generally, these are circumstances where we have qualitative information and knowledge of increased risk, but those circumstances have not occurred within the history of our quantitative data. In these situations, we will rely on that qualitative information, usually from our claim team or underwriting staff, and make an enhancement to our normal process. In general, these enhancements will result in an increased overall reserve level compared to reserves based only on quantitative information. In the cases where these risks fail to materialize, favorable loss development will likely occur in subsequent periods. It is also possible that the risks materialize above the enhanced reserve level, in which case unfavorable loss development will likely occur in subsequent periods.
Our best estimate of loss and LAE reserves may change as a result of a revision in the actuarial central estimate, the actuary’s certainty in the estimates and processes and our overall view of the underlying risks. From time to time, we benchmark our reserving policies and procedures and refine them by adopting industry best practices where appropriate. A detailed, ground-up analysis of the reserve estimation risks associated with each of our products and segments, including an assessment of industry information, is performed annually. This information is used when determining management’s best estimate of booked reserves.
Loss reserve estimates are subject to a high degree of variability due to the inherent uncertainty of ultimate settlement values. Periodic adjustments to these estimates will likely occur as the actual loss emergence reveals itself over time. Our loss reserving processes reflect accepted actuarial practices and our methodologies result in a reasonable provision for reserves as of December 31, 2020.
INVESTMENT VALUATION
Throughout each year, we and our investment managers buy and sell securities to achieve investment objectives in accordance with investment policies established and monitored by our board of directors and executive officers.
Equity securities are carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses recorded within net earnings. We classify our investments in fixed income securities into one of three categories: trading, held-to-maturity or available-for-sale. We do not hold any securities classified as trading or held-to-maturity. Available-for-sale securities are carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses recorded as a component of comprehensive earnings and shareholders’ equity, net of deferred income taxes.
Fair value is defined as the price in the principal market that would be received for an asset to facilitate an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. We determined the fair value of certain financial instruments based on their underlying characteristics and relevant transactions in the marketplace. We maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value.
RECOVERABILITY OF REINSURANCE BALANCES
Ceded unearned premiums and reinsurance balances recoverable on paid and unpaid losses and settlement expenses are reported separately as assets, rather than being netted with the related liabilities, since reinsurance does not relieve the Company of its liability to policyholders. Such balances are subject to the credit risk associated with the individual reinsurer. We continually monitor the financial condition of our reinsurers and actively follow up on any past due or disputed amounts. As part of our monitoring efforts, we review their annual financial statements and Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) filings for reinsurers that are publicly traded. We also review insurance industry developments that may impact the financial condition of our reinsurers. We analyze the credit risk associated with our reinsurance balances recoverable by monitoring the AM Best and Standard & Poor’s (S&P) ratings of our reinsurers. Additionally, we perform an in-depth reinsurer financial condition analysis prior to the renewal of our reinsurance placements.
Once regulatory action (such as receivership, finding of insolvency, order of conservation or order of liquidation) is taken against a reinsurer, the paid and unpaid balance recoverable from the reinsurer are specifically identified and charged to earnings in the form of an allowance for uncollectible amounts. We subject our remaining reinsurance balances receivable to detailed recoverability tests, including a segment-based analysis using the average default rating percentage by S&P rating, and record an additional allowance for unrecoverable amounts from reinsurers. This credit allowance is reviewed on an ongoing basis to ensure that the amount makes a reasonable provision for reinsurance balances that we may be unable to recover.
DEFERRED POLICY ACQUISITION COSTS
We defer incremental direct costs that relate to the successful acquisition of new or renewal insurance contracts, including commissions and premium taxes. Acquisition-related costs may be deemed ineligible for deferral when they are based on contingent or performance criteria beyond the basic acquisition of the insurance contract, or when efforts to obtain or renew the insurance contract are unsuccessful. All eligible costs are capitalized and charged to expense in proportion to premium revenue recognized. The method followed in computing deferred policy acquisition costs limits the amount of such deferred costs to their estimated realizable value. This process contemplates the premiums to be earned, anticipated losses and settlement expenses and certain other costs expected to be incurred, but does not consider investment income. Judgments as to the ultimate recoverability of such deferred costs are reviewed on a segment basis and are highly dependent upon estimated future loss costs associated with the premiums written. This deferral methodology applies to both gross and ceded premiums and acquisition costs.
DEFERRED TAXES
We record deferred tax assets and liabilities to the extent that temporary differences between the tax basis and GAAP basis of an asset or liability result in future taxable or deductible amounts. Our deferred tax assets relate to expected future tax deductions arising from claim reserves and future taxable income related to changes in our unearned premium. We also have a significant amount of deferred tax liabilities from unrealized gains on the investment portfolio and deferred acquisition costs.
Periodically, management reviews our deferred tax positions to determine if it is more likely than not that the assets will be realized. These reviews include, among other things, the nature and amount of the taxable income and expense items, the expected timing of when assets will be used or liabilities will be required to be reported, as well as the reliability of historical profitability of
businesses expected to provide future earnings. Furthermore, management considers tax planning strategies it can use to increase the likelihood that the tax assets will be realized. After conducting the periodic review, if management determines that the realization of the tax asset does not meet the more likely than not criteria, an offsetting valuation allowance is recorded, thereby reducing net earnings and the deferred tax asset in that period. In addition, management must make estimates of the tax rates expected to apply in the periods in which future taxable items are realized. Such estimates include determinations and judgments as to the expected manner in which certain temporary differences, including deferred amounts related to our equity method investment, will be recovered. These estimates enter into the determination of the applicable tax rates and are subject to change based on the circumstances.
We consider uncertainties in income taxes and recognize those in our financial statements as required. As it relates to uncertainties in income taxes, our unrecognized tax benefits, including interest and penalty accruals, are not considered material to the consolidated financial statements. Also, no tax uncertainties are expected to result in significant increases or decreases to unrecognized tax benefits within the next 12-month period. Penalties and interest related to income tax uncertainties, should they occur, would be included in income tax expense in the period in which they are incurred.
Additional discussion of other significant accounting policies may be found in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements within Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
IMPACT OF COVID-19
The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has impacted individuals, businesses and the economy throughout 2020. As an employee-owned company, the health and well-being of our customers, partners and associates is our highest priority. While a large percentage of our associates are still working from home, our processes and controls continue to operate effectively and we have been able to maintain the highest service and support levels possible for our customers.
It is difficult to predict how and to what extent the economic slowdown will impact our revenues in the coming quarters. To date, the product line that has experienced the greatest impact has been public transportation. Many of our passenger transportation customers have been unable to effectively operate under social-distancing protocols and stay-at-home orders. For the year ended December 31, 2020, transportation gross written premium was down $42.2 million when compared to 2019. We expect transportation premium to continue to be down from prior periods until the use of public transportation increases, which may not be until after a vaccine or effective treatment is readily available or there is a significant reduction in cases. Additionally, slowdowns in the construction industry contributed to premium declines for our general liability and surety products. A number of our products support the construction industry, and revenues may continue to be impacted as long as this sector experiences disruption. However, our personal lines products, management liability products and property businesses have seen little to no impact on premium from the pandemic.
We have been fair and flexible with our customers in modifying exposures and payment terms, and are in compliance with any applicable state regulatory directives on such changes. Insureds continue to make payments in accordance with the agreed upon schedules, and we have not experienced a material increase in the amount of expense associated with uncollectible receivables.
The loss exposure arising out of the spread of COVID-19 and resulting shutdown will take time to resolve. We do not offer event cancellation, travel, trade credit or pandemic-related coverages, which would be more directly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company has received a number of claims, the majority of which relate to business interruption. We are reviewing the individual circumstances of each claim submitted and will fulfill our obligation to pay if coverage applies. The derivative implications that COVID-19 has on the economy may have negative implications on products that are correlated with the credit cycle, including, but not limited to, some of our executive products and surety offerings. Additionally, the professional services and executive product groups may be affected by claims made against companies who are reopening or returning to work. In 2020, $18.3 million of net reserves were established to address the increased risk of loss and expense that emanated from the economic downturn brought on by the pandemic.
Actuarial models base future emergence on historic experience, with adjustments for current trends, and the appropriateness of these assumptions involved greater uncertainty as of December 31, 2020. We expect there will be impacts to the timing of loss emergence and ultimate loss ratios for certain coverages. The industry is experiencing new issues, including the postponement of civil court cases, the extension of various statutes of limitations, changes in settlement trends and a significant reduction in economic activity and insured exposure in some classes. Our booked reserves include consideration of these factors, but the duration and degree to which these issues persist, along with potential legislative, regulatory or judicial actions, could result in loss reserve deficiencies and reduce earnings in future periods.
We continue to evaluate opportunities for expense savings and efficiencies and took targeted actions to reduce or defer expenses in 2020, including certain hiring freezes, position consolidations, travel limitations and executive merit increase suspensions. Bonus and profit-sharing expense, which is correlated with company performance, also declined.
The equity portfolio has more than recovered from the sharp market sell off in the first quarter, with $37.8 million of net after-tax realized and unrealized gains on equity securities in 2020. Additionally, lower interest rates increased the fair value of the fixed income portfolio, which resulted in $53.5 million of after-tax other comprehensive earnings. However, with the decline in yields, reinvestment rates are now lower than in previous years, which will limit the portfolio’s ability to generate higher levels of investment income, absent a larger invested asset base.
Maui Jim, Inc. (Maui Jim) and Prime Holdings Insurance Services, Inc. (Prime) contributed towards positive net earnings in 2020. While earnings for Prime were higher than in 2019, Maui Jim’s sales were negatively impacted by the shutdown much of the traditional retail sector experienced during the year. The economic downturn may continue to impact the results of these investees, particularly if there is any lasting impact on the retail sector as it relates to Maui Jim.
We produced solid operating results in 2020 and our financial position remained strong despite the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We generated $263.3 million of net operating cash inflows and believe we have adequate liquidity. Our revolving credit facility provides for a borrowing capacity of $60.0 million, which can be increased to $120.0 million under certain circumstances. Additionally, our membership in the Federal Home Loan Bank system provides a secured lending facility with an aggregate borrowing capacity of approximately $30.0 million. There were no amounts outstanding under any of these facilities as of December 31, 2020. In addition to the $155.9 million of cash and other investments maturing within one year as of December 31, 2020, we believe that cash generated from operations, the liquidity of our fixed income portfolio and our unused lines of credit provide sufficient sources of cash to meet our anticipated needs over the next 12 to 24 months.
Ultimately, the extent to which COVID-19 will impact our business will be influenced by how long it takes for the economy to recover. We continue to evaluate all aspects of our operations and are making necessary adjustments to manage our business. Our diversified portfolio of products and financial strength have allowed us to remain on solid footing. We believe we have a strong and sustainable underwriting approach that will allow us to weather the economic downturn and uncertainty we are currently experiencing.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, incorporated herein by reference.
Consolidated revenue for 2020 decreased $20.0 million from 2019. Net premiums earned for the Group increased 3 percent, driven by growth from our property and casualty segments, but performance in the equity portfolio was not able to match the return generated in 2019. Net investment income decreased by 1 percent in 2020, primarily due to lower reinvestment rates relative to the prior year. Additionally, we recorded net realized gains on our investment portfolio in 2020 and 2019, due to portfolio rebalancing.
Net earnings for 2020 totaled $157.1 million, down from $191.6 million in 2019. Improved underwriting income was offset by a decline in unrealized gains on equity securities.
UNDERWRITING RESULTS
Gross premiums written increased $71.4 million, or 7 percent, in 2020 when compared to 2019. Excluding the decline in commercial transportation, which was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, written premium increased by 12 percent. Positive rate movement across most of the casualty and property portfolio and an expansion of distribution channels provided for growth opportunities in established lines.
Underwriting results for 2020 were impacted by significant catastrophe activity, including $51.5 million of pretax losses and $1.5 million of reinstatement premium from hurricanes, as well as $6.5 million of other storm and civil unrest losses. Additionally, $18.3 million of COVID-19 related loss and defense reserves were established in 2020. Comparatively, pretax storm losses were $9.5 million in 2019. Results for each period benefited, however, from favorable development on prior years’ loss reserves, which provided additional pretax earnings of $101.1 million in 2020, compared to $75.3 million in 2019. Further discussion of reserve development can be found in note 6 to the consolidated financial statements within Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Incentive and profit-sharing amounts earned by executives, managers and associates are predominately influenced by corporate performance including operating return on equity, combined ratio and Market Value Potential (MVP). MVP is a compensation model that measures components of comprehensive earnings against a minimum required return on capital. MVP is the primary measure of executive bonus achievement and a significant component of manager and associate incentive targets. Incentive and profit-sharing related expenses attributable to the favorable reserve developments totaled $14.2 million and $11.1 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. These performance-related expenses impact policy acquisition, insurance operating and general corporate expenses line items in the financial statements. Partially offsetting the 2020 and 2019 increases were $11.2 million and $1.4 million, respectively, in reductions to incentive and profit-sharing amounts earned due to losses associated with catastrophe activity, as well as the reserves that were established for COVID-19 in 2020.
In total, underwriting income was $69.6 million on a 92.0 combined ratio in 2020, compared to $67.6 million on a 91.9 combined ratio in 2019. The loss ratio was 51.2 in 2020, compared to 49.3 in 2019. The expense ratio decreased to 40.8 in 2020, from 42.6 in 2019. Travel and entertainment expenses, along with other discretionary costs, decreased in 2020 as we made adjustments to reduce the impact of COVID-19 on our results. Additionally, stronger growth in book value was experienced in 2019, which led to larger levels of bonus and profit-sharing expenses.
We achieved our 25th consecutive year of underwriting profit in 2020. Our ability to continue to produce underwriting income, and to do so at margins which have consistently outperformed the broader industry, is a testament to our underwriters’ discipline throughout the insurance cycle and our continued commitment to underwriting for a profit. We believe our underwriting discipline can differentiate the Company from the broader insurance market by ensuring sound risk selection and appropriate pricing.
The following tables and narrative provide a more detailed look at individual segment performance over the last two years.
GROSS PREMIUMS WRITTEN AND NET PREMIUMS EARNED
Casualty
Gross premiums written for the casualty segment were up $45.2 million for 2020. Rate increases were achieved across the segment, particularly in our executive products group. Small commercial continued to benefit from new production sources and geographic expansion, while personal umbrella expanded its distribution base. Other casualty increased $9.7 million, as our general binding authority (GBA) business continued to grow.
Commercial transportation has been significantly affected by the stay-at-home orders associated with COVID-19, particularly public auto, which focuses on charter, school and transit buses. The reduced utilization led to a $42.2 million decline in gross premiums written in 2020. General liability premiums also declined as a result of increased competition, as well as decreases in construction related activity and use-based exposures.
Property
Gross premiums written from our property segment were up $27.3 million in 2020. Our commercial property business was up $19.0 million, as an improving market allowed our underwriters to find more opportunities with acceptable rate levels. Additionally, rates on wind-prone and earthquake exposures continued to increase. Rate increases and market disruption, which created new business opportunities, led to $6.7 million of growth for our marine product. Other property premium increased as a result of property-exposed GBA business that continued to gain scale.
Surety
Gross premiums written from our surety segment were down $1.1 million in 2020. The economic slowdown reduced demand for surety bonds. Additionally, we continually monitor our portfolio for higher risk accounts and have selectively eliminated exposures that no longer met our underwriting standards.
Casualty
Underwriting income for the casualty segment was $44.4 million on a 92.2 combined ratio in 2020, compared to $20.6 million on a 96.3 combined ratio in 2019. The improvement is the result of increased favorable development on prior accident years’ reserves and improved current accident year performance resulting from a shift in mix of business and lower levels of bonus and profit-sharing expenses.
Favorable development on prior accident years’ loss reserves contributed to underwriting earnings in each of the past two years. The total benefit from favorable development on prior years’ reserves was $75.1 million for 2020, with the largest amounts of the development coming from accident years 2016 through 2019. Products which generated the majority of the favorable development include transportation, general liability, commercial excess and professional services. No active products experienced significant adverse development. Comparatively, overall results for the casualty segment in 2019 included favorable development of $62.5 million, with the bulk of the development attributable to transportation, general liability, professional services, commercial excess, personal umbrella and small commercial across accident years 2016 through 2018. Executive products and medical professional liability developed adversely in 2019. Favorable development on executive products and medical professional liability in 2020 was responsible for a significant amount of the increase between the releases in 2020 and 2019. Hurricane losses on casualty-oriented package policies that include property coverage resulted in $4.4 million of losses in 2020 and $12.9 million of current year reserves were established for COVID-19 loss and defense costs on financial-related product lines.
The segment’s loss ratio was 56.6 in 2020, compared to 59.1 in 2019. The lower loss ratio in 2020 was due to the higher amounts of favorable development on prior years’ reserves. The expense ratio for the casualty segment decreased to 35.6 from 37.2 in 2019.
Property
Underwriting loss from the property segment was $3.2 million on a 101.7 combined ratio in 2020, compared to underwriting income of $18.1 million on an 88.9 combined ratio in 2019. Underwriting results for 2020 included $13.0 million of favorable development on prior years’ loss and catastrophe reserves, primarily from the marine business, $5.0 million of storm and civil unrest losses and $2.0 million of reserves related to COVID-19 investigative and defense costs. Hurricane activity resulted in $47.2 million of losses and $1.5 million of ceded reinstatement premium. Comparatively, results for 2019 included $4.5 million of favorable development in prior years’ reserves, largely from marine, and $8.8 million of storm losses.
The segment’s loss ratio was 60.6 in 2020, compared to 44.9 in 2019. Catastrophe losses added 30 points to the loss ratio in 2020, compared to 5 points of impact from catastrophe losses in 2019. Partially offsetting this increase was a reduction in current accident year non-catastrophe losses and larger favorable development on prior years’ reserves. The expense ratio for the property segment declined to 41.1 in 2020, from 44.0 in 2019, due in part to the larger premium base in 2020.
Surety
Underwriting income for the surety segment totaled $28.4 million on a 74.8 combined ratio in 2020, compared to $28.8 million on a 75.3 combined ratio in 2019. Underwriting performance for each year reflects a combination of positive current accident year results and favorable development in prior accident years’ loss reserves. The current accident year combined ratio for each period has been in the low 80s, with each product line contributing to underwriting profit. Results for 2020 included favorable development on prior accident years’ reserves, which decreased loss and settlement expenses for the segment by $13.0 million, and offset $3.4 million in current year reserves established for COVID-19 related losses. Comparatively, 2019 results included favorable development on prior accident years’ loss reserves, which decreased the segment’s loss and settlement expenses by $8.3 million.
The segment’s loss ratio was 8.4 in 2020, compared to 8.3 in 2019. As stated above, a larger amount of favorable development on prior years’ reserves in 2020 was offset by higher current accident year losses, primarily from reserves established for COVID-19, all of which was incurred on a lower premium base. The expense ratio for the surety segment was 66.4 in 2020, compared to 67.0 in 2019.
NET INVESTMENT INCOME AND REALIZED INVESTMENT GAINS
During 2020, net investment income decreased by 1 percent. The decrease was primarily due to lower reinvestment rates relative to the prior year. The average annual yields on our investments were as follows for 2020 and 2019:
The after-tax yield reflects the different tax rates applicable to each category of investment. Our taxable fixed income securities were subject to a corporate tax rate of 21.0 percent, our tax-exempt municipal securities were subject to a tax rate of 5.3 percent and our dividend income was generally subject to a tax rate of 13.1 percent. During 2020, the average after-tax yield on the taxable fixed income portfolio was 2.5 percent, a decrease from 2.7 percent in the prior year. The average after-tax yield on the tax-exempt portfolio remained at 2.6 percent.
The fixed income portfolio increased by $213.5 million during the year, as the majority of operating cash flows were allocated to the fixed income portfolio and a decline in interest rates was experienced during the year, increasing the fair value of fixed income securities. The tax-adjusted total return on a mark-to-market basis was 6.6 percent. Our equity portfolio increased by $63.4 million to $524.0 million in 2020 as a result of the strong equity market returns during the year. The total return for the year on the equity portfolio was 12.5 percent.
Our investment results for the last five years are shown in the following table:
(1)
Average amounts at beginning and end of year (inclusive of cash and short-term investments).
(2)
Investment income, net of investment expenses.
(3)
Before income taxes.
(4)
Relates to available-for-sale fixed income and equity securities.
In 2020, we recognized $15.8 million in net realized gains in the equity portfolio, $3.9 million in net realized gains in the fixed income portfolio and $1.8 million in other net realized losses. In 2019, we recognized $14.4 million in net realized gains in the equity portfolio, $3.2 million in net realized gains in the fixed income portfolio and $0.1 million in other net realized losses.
We regularly evaluate the quality of our investment portfolio. With the adoption of ASU 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, we started recognizing a reversible allowance for credit losses on available-for-sale fixed income securities. Prior to 2020, when we determined
that a fixed income security had suffered an other-than-temporary decline in value, the investment’s value was adjusted by reclassifying the decline from unrealized to realized losses. In 2020, we realized $0.6 million in losses on fixed income securities for which we had the intent to sell. We did not recognize any impairment losses in 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, in addition to the securities included in the allowance for credit losses, the fixed income portfolio contained 142 positions with an unrealized loss position for which an allowance for credit losses had not been recorded. Of these 142 securities, 31 have been in an unrealized loss position for 12 consecutive months or longer and represent $0.4 million in unrealized losses. All fixed income securities in the investment portfolio continue to pay the expected coupon payments under the contractual terms of the securities. Based on our analysis, our fixed income portfolio is of a high credit quality and we believe we will recover the amortized cost basis.
INVESTMENTS
We maintain a diversified investment portfolio with a prudent mix of fixed income and risk assets. We continually monitor economic conditions, our capital position and the insurance market to determine our tactical allocation. As of December 31, 2020, the portfolio had a fair value of $2.8 billion, an increase of $276.7 million from the end of 2019.
We determined the fair value of certain financial instruments based on their underlying characteristics and relevant transactions in the marketplace. We maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. For additional information, see notes 1 and 2 to the consolidated financial statements within Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
As of December 31, 2020, our investment portfolio had the following asset allocation breakdown:
*
Quality ratings provided by Moody’s, S&P and Fitch
**
Non-agency asset-backed, commercial mortgage-backed and mortgage-backed securities
Quality in the previous table and in all subsequent tables is an average of each bond’s credit rating, adjusted for its relative weighting in the portfolio.
Fixed income represented 77 percent of our total 2020 portfolio, the same as 2019. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of our fixed income portfolio consisted of 44 percent AAA-rated securities, 19 percent AA-rated securities, 21 percent A-rated securities, 10 percent BBB-rated securities and 6 percent non-investment grade or non-rated securities. This compares to 49 percent AAA-rated securities, 17 percent AA-rated securities, 19 percent A-rated securities, 9 percent BBB-rated securities and 6 percent non-investment grade or non-rated securities in 2019.
In selecting the maturity of securities in which we invest, we consider the relationship between the duration of our fixed income investments and the duration of our liabilities, including the expected ultimate payout patterns of our reserves. We believe that both liquidity and interest rate risk can be minimized by such asset/liability management. As of December 31, 2020, our fixed income portfolio’s duration was 4.7 years.
Consistent underwriting income allows a portion of our investment portfolio to be invested in equity securities and other risk asset classes. Equities comprised 19 percent of our total 2020 portfolio, a slight increase from 18 percent in 2019. Securities within the equity portfolio are well diversified and are primarily invested in large-cap issues with a preference for dividend income. Our strategy has a value tilt and security selection takes precedence over market timing. Likewise, low turnover throughout our long investment horizon minimizes transaction costs and taxes.
FIXED INCOME PORTFOLIO
As of December 31, 2020, our fixed income portfolio had the following rating distributions:
Mortgage-Backed, Commercial Mortgage-Backed and Asset-Backed Securities
The following table summarizes the distribution of our mortgage-backed securities (MBS) portfolio by investment type, as of December 31:
Agency MBS represented 18 percent of the fixed income portfolio, compared to 21 percent as of December 31, 2019. We believe agency MBS investments add diversification, liquidity, credit quality and additional yield to our portfolio. Our objective for the agency MBS portfolio is to provide reasonable cash flow stability where we are compensated for the call risk associated with residential refinancing. The agency MBS portfolio includes mortgage-backed pass-through securities and collateralized mortgage obligations (CMO), which include planned amortization classes (PACs) and sequential pay structures. As of December 31, 2020, all of the securities in our agency MBS portfolio were rated AAA and issued by Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs) such as the Governmental National Mortgage Association (GNMA), Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA) or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC).
Variability in the average life of principal repayment is an inherent risk of owning mortgage-related securities. However, we reduce our portfolio’s exposure to prepayment risk by seeking characteristics that tighten the probable scenarios for expected cash flows. As of December 31, 2020, the agency MBS portfolio contained 57 percent of pure pass-throughs, compared to 67 percent as of December 31, 2019. An additional 26 percent of the MBS portfolio was invested in sequential payer, the same as 2019.
The following table summarizes the distribution of our asset-backed and commercial mortgage-backed securities portfolio as of December 31:
An asset-backed security (ABS), commercial mortgage-backed security (CMBS) or non-agency residential mortgage-backed security (RMBS) is a securitization collateralized by the cash flows from a specific pool of underlying assets. These asset pools can include items such as credit card payments, auto loans, structured bank loans in the form of collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) and residential or commercial mortgages. As of December 31, 2020, ABS/CMBS/RMBS investments were 10 percent of the fixed income portfolio, compared to 11 percent as of December 31, 2019. Eighty-four percent of the securities in the ABS/CMBS/RMBS portfolio were rated AAA as of December 31, 2020, while 99 percent were rated A or better. We believe that ABS/CMBS investments add diversification and additional yield to the portfolio while often adding superior cash flow stability over mortgage pass-throughs or CMOs.
When making investments in MBS/ABS/CMBS, we evaluate the quality of the underlying collateral, the structure of the transaction, which dictates how any losses in the underlying collateral will be distributed, and prepayment risks. We had $1.2 million in unrealized losses in these asset classes as of December 31, 2020.
Municipal Fixed Income Securities
As of December 31, 2020, municipal bonds composed 24 percent of our fixed income portfolio, compared to 21 percent as of December 31, 2019. We believe municipal fixed income securities can provide diversification and additional tax-advantaged yield to our portfolio. Our objective for the municipal fixed income portfolio is to provide reasonable cash flow stability and increased after-tax yield.
Our municipal fixed income portfolio is comprised of general obligation (GO) and revenue securities. The revenue sources include sectors such as sewer and water, public improvement, school, transportation and colleges and universities. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 43 percent of the municipal fixed income securities in the investment portfolio were GO and the remaining 57 percent were revenue based. The municipal portfolio is diversified amongst 280 issues with the largest single issuer representing less than 1 percent of invested assets.
Eighty-six percent of our municipal fixed income securities were rated AA or better, while 99 percent were rated A or better. The municipal portfolio includes 62 percent tax-exempt and 38 percent taxable securities.
Corporate Debt Securities
As of December 31, 2020, our corporate debt portfolio comprised 37 percent of the fixed income portfolio, compared to 35 percent as of December 31, 2019. The corporate allocation includes floating rate bank loans and bonds that are below investment grade in credit quality and offer incremental yield over our core fixed income portfolio. Non-investment grade bonds totaled $134.0 million at the end of 2020. The corporate debt portfolio has an overall quality rating of BBB+ diversified among 657 issues.
The table below illustrates our corporate debt exposure as of December 31, 2020. Private placements include bank loan and Regulation D securities.
We believe corporate debt investments add diversification and additional yield to our portfolio. Because corporates make up a large portion of the fixed income opportunity set, the corporate debt investments will continue to be a significant part of our investment program.
EQUITY SECURITIES
As of December 31, 2020, our equity portfolio comprised 19 percent of the investment portfolio, an increase of 1 percent from December 31, 2019. The securities within the equity portfolio remain primarily invested in large-cap issues with a focus on dividend income. In addition, we have investments in three broadly diversified, exchange traded funds (ETFs) that represent market indexes similar to the Russell 1000 Index, S&P 500 Index and S&P 600 Index. The ETF portfolio is congruent with the actively managed equity portfolios and solves for exposures that line up with our overall benchmark index, the Russell 3000. In total, the equity portfolio is comprised of 221 securities with the largest single company exposure representing less than 1 percent of invested assets.
INTEREST AND GENERAL CORPORATE EXPENSE
We incurred $7.6 million of interest expense on outstanding debt during 2020 and 2019. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our long-term debt consisted of $150.0 million in senior notes maturing September 15, 2023, and paying interest semi-annually at the rate of 4.875 percent.
As discussed previously, general corporate expenses tend to fluctuate relative to our incentive compensation plans. Our compensation model measures components of comprehensive earnings against a minimum required return on our capital. Bonuses are earned as we generate earnings in excess of this required return. In 2020 and 2019, we exceeded the required return, resulting in the accrual of executive bonuses. Decreased levels of comprehensive earnings in 2020 resulted in lower variable compensation earned than in 2019.
INVESTEE EARNINGS
We maintain a 40 percent equity interest in Maui Jim, a manufacturer of high-quality sunglasses. As a private company, the market for Maui Jim’s stock is limited. Our investment in Maui Jim is carried at the RLI Corp. holding company level, as it is not core to our insurance operations. While we have certain rights under our shareholder agreement with Maui Jim as a minority shareholder, we are subject to the decisions of the controlling shareholder, which may impact the value of our investment. In 2020, we recorded $10.4 million in earnings from this investment, compared to $13.6 million in 2019. Sales were negatively impacted by the shutdown the traditional retail sector experienced during 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we had a 23 percent interest in the equity and earnings of Prime. Prime writes business through two Illinois domiciled insurance carriers, Prime Insurance Company, an excess and surplus lines company, and Prime Property and Casualty Insurance Inc., an admitted insurance company. As a private company, the market for Prime’s stock is limited. While we have certain rights under our shareholder agreement, we are subject to the decisions of the controlling shareholder, which may impact the value of our investment. In 2020, we recorded $10.8 million in investee earnings for Prime, compared to $7.4 million in 2019,
reflective of their growth in revenue. Additionally, we maintain a quota share reinsurance treaty with Prime, which contributed $15.7 million of gross premiums written and $14.3 million of net premiums earned during 2020, compared to $13.1 million of gross premiums written and $28.7 million of net premiums earned during 2019. The decrease in net premiums earned is reflective of our decreased quota share participation with Prime.
We received a dividend from Prime in 2020 and Maui Jim in 2019. Dividends from Maui Jim and Prime have been irregular in nature and while they provide added liquidity when received, we do not rely on those dividends to meet our liquidity needs. While these dividends do not flow through the investee earnings line, they do result in the recognition of a tax benefit, which is discussed in the income tax section that follows.
INCOME TAXES
Our effective tax rates were 17.3 percent and 17.7 percent for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Effective rates are dependent upon components of pretax earnings, which is impacted by the volatility of unrealized gains and losses, and the related tax effects. The effective rate was lower in 2020 due to investment tax credits and lower levels of pretax earnings, which caused tax-favored adjustments to be larger on a percentage basis.
Our net earnings include equity in earnings of unconsolidated investees, Maui Jim and Prime. The investees do not have a policy or pattern of paying dividends. As a result, we record a deferred tax liability on the earnings at the corporate capital gains rate of 21 percent in anticipation of recovering our investments through means other than through the receipt of dividends, such as a sale. We received a $4.7 million dividend from Prime in 2020 and recognized a $0.5 million tax benefit from applying the lower tax rate applicable to affiliated dividends paid to an insurance company (10.8 percent in 2020), as compared to the corporate capital gains rate on which the deferred tax liabilities were based. We received a $13.2 million dividend from Maui Jim in 2019 and recognized a $1.8 million tax benefit from applying the lower tax rate applicable to affiliated dividends paid to a non-insurance company (7.4 percent in 2019), as compared to the corporate capital gains rate on which the deferred tax liabilities were based. Standing alone, the dividends resulted in a 0.2 percent and 0.8 percent reduction to the 2020 and 2019 effective tax rates, respectively.
Dividends paid to our Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) also result in a tax deduction. Dividends paid to the ESOP in 2020 and 2019 resulted in tax benefits of $1.1 million in each year. These tax benefits reduced the effective tax rate for 2020 and 2019 by 0.6 percent and 0.5 percent, respectively.
NET UNPAID LOSSES AND SETTLEMENT EXPENSES
The primary liability on our balance sheet relates to unpaid losses and settlement expenses, which represents our estimated liability for losses and related settlement expenses before considering offsetting reinsurance balances recoverable. The largest asset on our balance sheet, outside of investments, is the reinsurance balances recoverable on unpaid losses and settlement expenses, which serves to offset this liability. The liability can be split into two parts: (1) case reserves representing estimates of losses and settlement expenses on known claims and (2) IBNR reserves representing estimates of losses and settlement expenses on claims that have occurred but have not yet been reported to the Company. Our gross liability for both case and IBNR reserves is reduced by reinsurance balances recoverable on unpaid losses and settlement expenses to calculate our net reserve balance. This net reserve balance increased to $1.3 billion at December 31, 2020, from $1.2 billion as of December 31, 2019. This reflects incurred losses of $442.9 million in 2020 offset by paid losses of $325.1 million, compared to incurred losses of $413.4 million offset by $319.9 million paid in 2019. For more information on the changes in loss and LAE reserves by segment, see note 6 to the consolidated financial statements within Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Gross reserves (liability) and the reinsurance balances recoverable (asset) are generally subject to the same influences that affect net reserves, though changes to our reinsurance agreements can cause reinsurance balances recoverable to behave differently. Total gross loss and LAE reserves increased to $1.8 billion at December 31, 2020, from $1.6 billion at December 31, 2019, while ceded loss and LAE reserves increased to $443.7 million from $384.5 million over the same period.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
OVERVIEW
We have three primary types of cash flows: (1) operating cash flows, which consist mainly of cash generated by our underwriting operations and income earned on our investment portfolio, (2) investing cash flows related to the purchase, sale and
maturity of investments and (3) financing cash flows that impact our capital structure, such as changes in debt, issuance of common stock and dividend payments. The following table summarizes these three cash flows over the last two years:
We have posted positive operating cash flow in the last two years. Variations in operating cash flow between periods are largely driven by the volume and timing of premium receipt, claim payments, reinsurance and taxes. In addition, fluctuations in insurance operating expenses impact operating cash flow. During 2020, the majority of cash flow uses were related to financing and investing activities and associated with the payments of dividends and net purchases of investments, respectively.
We have entered into certain contractual obligations that require the Company to make recurring payments. The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Loss and settlement expense reserves represent our best estimate of the ultimate cost of settling reported and unreported claims and related expenses. As discussed previously, the estimation of loss and loss expense reserves is based on various complex and subjective judgments. Actual losses and settlement expenses paid may deviate, perhaps substantially, from the reserve estimates reflected in our financial statements. Similarly, the timing for payment of our estimated losses is not fixed and is not determinable on an individual or aggregate basis. The assumptions used in estimating the payments due by periods are based on our historical claims payment experience. Due to the uncertainty inherent in the process of estimating the timing of such payments, there is a risk that the amounts paid in any period can be significantly different than the amounts disclosed above. Amounts disclosed above are gross of anticipated amounts recoverable from reinsurers. Reinsurance balances recoverable on unpaid loss and settlement reserves are reported separately as assets, instead of being netted with the related liabilities, since reinsurance does not discharge the Company of our liability to policyholders. Reinsurance balances recoverable on unpaid loss and settlement reserves totaled $443.7 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $384.5 million in 2019.
The next largest contractual obligation relates to long-term debt outstanding. On October 2, 2013, we completed a public debt offering of $150.0 million in senior notes maturing September 15, 2023, (a 10-year maturity) and paying interest semi-annually at the rate of 4.875 percent. The notes were issued at a discount resulting in proceeds, net of discount and commission, of $148.6 million. We are not party to any off-balance sheet arrangements. See note 4 to the consolidated financial statements within Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for more information on our long-term debt. Additionally, see note 2 to the consolidated financial statements within Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for information on our obligations for other invested assets.
Our primary objective in managing our capital is to preserve and grow shareholders’ equity and statutory surplus to improve our competitive position and allow for expansion of our insurance operations. Our insurance subsidiaries must maintain certain minimum capital levels in order to meet the requirements of the states in which we are regulated. Our insurance companies are also evaluated by rating agencies that assign financial strength ratings that measure our ability to meet our obligations to policyholders over an extended period of time.
We have historically grown our total capital as a result of three sources of funds: (1) earnings on underwriting and investing activities, (2) appreciation in the value of our investments and (3) the issuance of common stock and debt.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash, short-term investments and other investments maturing within one year of approximately $155.9 million and an additional $519.9 million of investments maturing between 1 to 5 years. We maintain a revolving line of credit with Bank of Montreal, Chicago Branch, which permits us to borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $60.0 million. Under certain conditions, the line may be increased up to an aggregate principal amount of $120.0 million. The facility has a three-year term that expires on March 27, 2023. This facility replaced the previous $50.0 million facility with JP Morgan Chase Bank N.A., which was set to expire on May 24, 2020. As of and during the year ended December 31, 2020, no amounts were outstanding on these facilities.
Additionally, two of our insurance companies, RLI Ins. and Mt. Hawley, are members of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago (FHLBC). Membership in the Federal Home Loan Bank system provides both companies with access to an additional source of liquidity via a secured lending facility. Based on qualifying assets at year-end, aggregate borrowing capacity is approximately $30.0 million. However, under certain circumstances, that capacity may be increased based on additional FHLBC stock purchased and available collateral. Our membership allows each insurance subsidiary to determine tenor and structure at the time of borrowing. As of and during the year ended December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding borrowings with the FHLBC.
We believe that cash generated by operations, cash generated by investments and cash available from financing activities will provide sufficient sources of liquidity to meet our anticipated needs over the next 12 to 24 months. We have consistently generated positive operating cash flow. The primary factor in our ability to generate positive operating cash flow is underwriting profitability, which we have achieved for 25 consecutive years.
OPERATING ACTIVITIES
The following list highlights some of the major sources and uses of cash flow from operating activities:
Sources
Uses
Premiums received
Claims
Loss payments from reinsurers
Ceded premium to reinsurers
Investment income (interest and dividends)
Commissions paid
Unconsolidated investee dividends from affiliates
Operating expenses
Funds held
Interest expense
Income taxes
Funds held
Our largest source of cash is from premiums received from our customers, which we receive at the beginning of the coverage period for most policies. Our largest cash outflow is for claims that arise when a policyholder incurs an insured loss. Because the payment of claims occurs after the receipt of the premium, often years later, we invest the cash in various investment securities that earn interest and dividends. We use cash to pay commissions to brokers and agents, as well as to pay for ongoing operating expenses such as salaries, rent, taxes and interest expense. We also utilize reinsurance to manage the risk that we take on our policies. We cede, or pay out, part of the premiums we receive to our reinsurers and collect cash back when losses subject to our reinsurance coverage are paid.
The timing of our cash flows from operating activities can vary among periods due to the timing by which payments are made or received. Some of our payments and receipts, including loss settlements and subsequent reinsurance receipts, can be significant, so their timing can influence cash flows from operating activities in any given period. We are subject to the risk of incurring significant losses on catastrophes, both natural (such as earthquakes and hurricanes) and man-made (such as terrorism). If we were to incur such losses, we would have to make significant claims payments in a relatively concentrated period of time.
INVESTING ACTIVITIES
The following list highlights some of the major sources and uses of cash flow from investing activities:
Sources
Uses
Proceeds from sale, call or maturity of bonds
Purchase of bonds
Proceeds from sale of stocks
Purchase of stocks
Proceeds from sale of other invested assets
Purchase of other invested assets
Acquisitions
Purchase of property and equipment
We maintain a diversified investment portfolio representing policyholder funds that have not yet been paid out as claims, as well as the capital we hold for our shareholders. As of December 31, 2020, our portfolio had a carrying value of $2.8 billion. Portfolio assets at December 31, 2020, increased by $276.7 million, or 11 percent, from December 31, 2019.
Our overall investment philosophy is designed to first protect policyholders by maintaining sufficient funds to meet corporate and policyholder obligations and then generate long-term growth in shareholders’ equity. Because our existing and projected liabilities are sufficiently funded by the fixed income portfolio, we can improve returns by investing a portion of the surplus (within limits) in a risk assets portfolio largely made up of equities. As of December 31, 2020, 46 percent of our shareholders’ equity was invested in equities, unchanged from December 31, 2019.
The fixed income portfolio is structured to meet policyholder obligations and optimize the generation of after-tax investment income and total return.
FINANCING ACTIVITIES
In addition to the previously discussed operating and investing activities, we also engage in financing activities to manage our capital structure. The following list highlights some of the major sources and uses of cash flow from financing activities:
Sources
Uses
Proceeds from stock offerings
Shareholder dividends
Proceeds from debt offerings
Debt repayment
Short-term borrowing
Share buy-backs
Shares issued under stock option plans
Our capital structure is comprised of equity and debt obligations. As of December 31, 2020, our capital structure consisted of $149.5 million in 10-year maturity senior notes (long-term debt) and $1.1 billion of shareholders’ equity. Debt outstanding comprised 12 percent of total capital as of December 31, 2020.
At the holding company (RLI Corp.) level, we rely largely on dividends from our insurance company subsidiaries to meet our obligations for paying principal and interest on outstanding debt, corporate expenses and dividends to RLI Corp. shareholders. As discussed further below, dividend payments to RLI Corp. from our principal insurance subsidiary are restricted by state insurance laws as to the amount that may be paid without prior approval of the insurance regulatory authorities of Illinois. As a result, we may not be able to receive dividends from such subsidiary at times and in amounts necessary to pay desired dividends to RLI Corp. shareholders. On a GAAP basis, as of December 31, 2020, our holding company had $1.1 billion in equity. This includes amounts related to the equity of our insurance subsidiaries, which is subject to regulatory restrictions under state insurance laws. The unrestricted portion of holding company net assets is comprised primarily of investments and cash, including $64.6 million in liquid investment assets, which exceeds our normal annual holding company expenditures. Unrestricted funds at the holding company level are available to fund debt interest, general corporate obligations and regular dividend payments to our shareholders. If necessary, the holding company also has other potential sources of liquidity that could provide for additional funding to meet corporate obligations or pay shareholder dividends, which include a revolving line of credit, as well as access to the capital markets.
Ordinary dividends, which may be paid by our principal insurance subsidiary without prior regulatory approval, are subject to certain limitations based upon statutory income, surplus and earned surplus. The maximum ordinary dividend distribution from our principal insurance subsidiary in a rolling 12-month period is limited by Illinois law to the greater of 10 percent of RLI Ins. policyholder surplus, as of December 31 of the preceding year, or the net income of RLI Ins. for the 12-month period ending December 31 of the preceding year. Ordinary dividends are further restricted by the requirement that they be paid from earned surplus. In 2020 and 2019, our principal insurance subsidiary paid ordinary dividends totaling $110.0 million and $59.0 million, respectively, to RLI Corp. Any dividend distribution in excess of the ordinary dividend limits is deemed extraordinary and requires prior approval from the IDOI. No extraordinary dividends were paid in 2020 or 2019. As of December 31, 2020, $25.3 million of the net assets of our principal insurance subsidiary are not restricted and could be distributed to RLI Corp. as ordinary dividends. Because the limitations are based upon a rolling 12-month period, the amount and impact of these restrictions vary over time. In addition to restrictions from our principal subsidiary’s insurance regulator, we also consider internal models and how capital adequacy is defined by our rating agencies in determining amounts available for distribution.
Our 179th consecutive dividend payment was declared in February 2021 and will be paid on March 19, 2021, in the amount of $0.24 per share. Since the inception of cash dividends in 1976, we have increased our annual dividend every year.
OUTLOOK FOR 2021
We achieved our 25th consecutive year of underwriting profit in 2020, a notable milestone in the midst of challenging conditions. Despite the economic slowdown, we were able to grow premium 7 percent for the year and believe there is momentum for growth to continue in 2021. The support for broad-based rate increases in the industry go well beyond the influences of the pandemic and continue to be driven by loss cost inflation, elevated catastrophe activity, reinsurance pricing and prolonged low interest rates. We will benefit when rates exceed the trajectory of projected loss costs and should continue to see business opportunities that meet our risk appetite.
Terms and conditions are an important part of tailoring coverage for the specific needs of an insured. The evolution of policy language offers the potential for more business to align with our criteria, and we are better equipped to provide bespoke solutions to our distribution partners.
Brokers and agents that drive new business to RLI are demanding ease of use. As consolidation of these producers is likely to persist, the ability to maintain relationships through transitions is critical. Continued investment in people and technology is designed to address these trends and sustain our business. Our diversified portfolio of products allows us to respond to market opportunity and shift away from commoditized business with heavy competition.
Government policy was swift and far reaching in response to the COVID-induced recession of mid-2020. Consumers, employers, the mortgage market and credit availability were all supported by large amounts of federal stimulus. Measures of employment have rebounded faster than expected, but the path toward full employment will take time, with affected industries (e.g. entertainment, travel, hospitality) requiring a prolonged recovery, well into 2022.
The Federal Reserve’s support of the capital markets last year seems to have forestalled a second financial crisis. However, this accommodation will extend the low interest rate environment for the foreseeable future. While this liquidity will support asset prices in much of our investment portfolio, longer term performance will require increasing earnings and sound fundamentals. Investment income will face some headwinds over the next several quarters, but a growing invested asset base may provide an important offset. Equity prices and credit markets have rebounded significantly from the lows in March 2020, and while there may be some volatility in 2021, we believe markets will continue to respond positively to the ongoing recovery.
The economy was on better footing in the last six months of 2020. However, there are segments of our business that remain highly sensitive to slowdowns in gross domestic product. A number of products in our casualty and surety segments touch the construction industry and any slide back into recession may shelve projects more permanently. Our expectation is that most planned commercial construction activity will continue as intended, although post pandemic preferences for real estate may change the landscape over time.
CASUALTY
The casualty segment has experienced a number of cross currents on loss trends over the last several years, with volatile damage awards and changes to frequency adding to uncertainty of outcomes, especially for lines with longer duration. Pricing has responded with consecutive years of improvement in many lines, especially for products where the most challenging loss outcomes have impacted participants, and capacity is being removed from the market.
We will remain disciplined and aim to grow premium and underwriting profit, primarily from rate and by providing outstanding service to our producer partners and insureds.
PROPERTY
Market disruption for property has been ongoing for several years, driven by increased frequency of storm activity. Last year set a number of records for weather events and business interruption (BI) was a constant headline for the segment. The industry will be working through BI coverage issues beyond 2021, as cases make their way through the court system.
Capital constraints for other carriers, a reactive reinsurance market and higher loss activity should support continued positive rate change. Reduced capacity has increased new business opportunities in our excess and surplus commercial coverages. Over time and through major catastrophe events, we have demonstrated our commitment to serving our insureds through responsive claim handling, which has strengthened our relationships with producers as well as insureds. We believe growth is achievable in all of our property businesses in 2021, and underwriting profit will be dependent on the level of catastrophe activity.
SURETY
The surety market appears to be changing as macroeconomic factors and years of competitiveness have increased losses relative to premium. Capacity is available and relatively stable, but losses are beginning to influence terms, conditions and rate. Bankruptcy activity may be elevated over the next year, along with general deterioration in financial security, particularly in the energy sector.
Surety premiums have been capped the last few years as we maintained disciplined underwriting, surrounded by higher levels of competition. Our actions are reflected in the stable underwriting profit the segment has produced. Looking ahead, we are ready to take advantage of improving market conditions and are cautiously optimistic that measured growth is possible for 2021. We will continue to take underwriting action where required and are monitoring how our accounts are faring in light of the current economy.
* * *
In all, we see some momentum continuing into the new year, with a cautious eye on trends affecting our industry. We will maintain our disciplined approach and the cultural hallmarks that have enabled RLI to achieve an enviable track record over the past 25 years.
PROSPECTIVE ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
Prospective accounting standards are those which we have not implemented because the implementation date has not yet occurred. For a discussion of relevant prospective accounting standards, see note 1.D. to the consolidated financial statements within Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.