ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements (“financial statements”) and accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements. See “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Item 1A.-Risk Factors” for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
The historical results of operations discussed in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations are those of RE/MAX Holdings, Inc. (“Holdings”) and its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company,” “we,” “our” or “us”).
Overview
Industry Conditions and the Impact of COVID-19 on our Company and Results of Operations
The COVID-19 pandemic began impacting the global economy in early 2020, adversely affecting consumer demand, financial markets and employment levels. The residential real estate industry was not immune to the impacts of the pandemic as the amount of homebuying, selling and borrowing activity significantly slowed in the second quarter. After year-over-year transaction declines in April and May that averaged nearly 30% in U.S. Company-Owned Regions, we began to experience a resurgence in demand during the second half of the year, with an average year-over-year transaction growth of approximately 19%. We believe that the residential real estate industry is positioned for future growth and will benefit from an increase in demand from rising household formations, an increase in demand from lifestyle and generational shifts, and pent-up demand from supply shortages accompanied by record-low interest rates.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, during the second quarter we offered our RE/MAX franchisees in Company-Owned Regions in the U.S. and Canada and our Motto Mortgage franchisees temporary financial relief options to support their businesses, which resulted in reductions of Continuing franchise fees and Marketing Funds fees of $7.0 million and $4.9 million in the second quarter, respectively. Many of our Independent Region owners in the U.S. and Canada and globally also extended financial relief programs to their franchisees. All North American relief programs ended in the second quarter, although small amounts continued into the third quarter for our global regions. At this time, we do not plan to offer further financial relief programs.
Also during the second quarter, we implemented a cost mitigation plan that included the elimination of the 2020 corporate bonus plan, the temporary suspension of the 401(k) match, travel and events, and the implementation of a hiring freeze. Given the Company’s strong performance in the second half of the year, the Board of Directors approved a discretionary bonus in the fourth quarter, albeit at a lower level than our initially established bonus targets prior to the pandemic and the actual 2019 attainment level. Cost savings measures enacted in 2020 largely ended as of December 31, 2020 with the notable exception of travel and events related expenses which are expected to be muted, at least initially, in 2021.
We continue to monitor the impact of the pandemic on all aspects of our business. Our priority with regard to COVID-19 has been, and continues to be, the safety, health and well-being of our employees, networks, consumers and others with whom we partner in our business activities to continue our operations in this unprecedented environment.
Financial and Operational Highlights - Year Ended December 31, 2020
(Compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 unless otherwise noted)
● Acquired The Gadberry Group, LLC (“Gadberry”), a location intelligence data company and Wemlo, Inc. (“wemlo”), an innovative fintech company that provides third-party mortgage loan processing services through its “Service Cloud” for mortgage brokers, combining third-party loan processing with an all-in-one digital platform.
● Total agent count increased by 5.3% to 137,792 agents.
● U.S. and Canada combined agent count decreased 0.5% to 84,250 agents.
● Total open Motto Mortgage offices increased 27.0% to 141 offices.
● Total Revenue of $266.0 million, a decrease of 5.8% from the prior year.
● Net income attributable to RE/MAX Holdings, Inc. of $11.0 million.
● Adjusted EBITDA of $92.6 million and Adjusted EBITDA margin of 34.8% compared to Adjusted EBITDA of $103.5 million and Adjusted EBITDA margin of 36.7% from the prior period. This decrease driven primarily by temporary COVID-19 related financial support initiatives.
Execution of our strategy, and continued investment in our business alongside rebounding U.S. housing and mortgage markets helped our business recover quickly from coronavirus-related declines experienced in the second quarter of 2020. Despite the pandemic, we generated healthy organic growth in the latter part of the year and continued our trend of robust free cash flow generation resulting in a year-end cash balance of $101.4 million. Overall, RE/MAX agent count and Motto franchise sales continued to grow. Agent count outside the U.S. and Canada accelerated in the second half of 2020 and grew 16% year-over-year. Motto franchise sales of 71 set an annual record and increased more than 35% from 2019. We also continued to invest for long-term growth and completed the acquisitions of wemlo and Gadberry during the third quarter of 2020. These strategic acquisitions tie directly into our strategy of adding value for the RE/MAX and Motto Mortgage networks while broadening and diversifying our revenue and growth opportunities. These acquisitions benefit our networks, strengthen our technology and data core, and create additional commercial possibilities. We are already investing in wemlo and Gadberry and currently expect these two acquisitions, alongside incremental investments from our 2019 acquisition of First, to adversely impact Adjusted EBITDA in a range of $2.5 million to $3.5 million during 2021 compared to 2020, and become accretive in 2022.
The Financial and Operational Highlights, Results of Operations and Sources and Uses of Cash, for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 and as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively, has been previously disclosed in Item 7 of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K and is incorporated herein by reference.
Selected Operating and Financial Highlights
The following tables summarize several key performance indicators and our results of operations for the last three years.
(1) Includes franchise sales in the U.S., Canada and global regions.
(2) Excludes virtual offices and Branchises.
(1) See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for further discussion of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin and a reconciliation of the differences between Adjusted EBITDA and net income, which is the most comparable U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”) measure for operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA margin represents Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of total revenue.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 vs. Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
A summary of the components of our revenue is as follows (in thousands except percentages):
Consolidated revenue decreased primarily due to temporary COVID-19 related financial support initiatives the Company provided in the second quarter and, to a lesser extent, agent recruiting initiatives that reduced both Continuing franchise fees and Marketing Funds fees.
Continuing Franchise Fees
Revenue from Continuing franchise fees decreased primarily due to temporary COVID-19 related financial support initiatives and previously announced agent recruiting initiatives which waive Continuing franchise, partially offset by Motto expansion.
Broker Fees
Revenue from Broker fees increased primarily due to rising home prices and higher total transactions per agent.
Marketing Funds fees
Revenue from the Marketing Funds fees decreased primarily due to temporary COVID-19 related financial support initiatives and previously announced agent recruiting initiatives which waive Marketing Funds fees.
Franchise Sales and Other Revenue
Franchise sales and other revenue decreased primarily due to continued attrition of booj’s legacy customer base, lower approved supplier revenue and lower event-based revenue, partially offset by incremental revenue from acquisitions. For the full year 2021, we expect the attrition of the booj legacy customer base to negatively impact revenue and profit by approximately $2.0 million as compared to 2020. In addition, in 2021 our first quarter annual agent conference will have limited in-person attendance and the majority of agents will participate virtually. As a result, we expect our revenue to be approximately $1.5 million lower in the first quarter of 2021 as compared to the same prior year period; however, associated cost savings are expected to largely offset the decreased revenue.
Operating Expenses
A summary of the components of our operating expenses is as follows (in thousands, except percentages):
n/m - not meaningful
Selling, Operating and Administrative Expenses
Selling, operating and administrative expenses consists of personnel costs, professional fee expenses, lease costs and other expenses. Other expenses within selling, operating and administrative expenses include certain marketing and production costs that are not paid by the Marketing Funds, including travel and entertainment costs, and costs associated with our annual conventions in the U.S. and other events and technology services.
A summary of the components of our selling, operating and administrative expenses is as follows (in thousands, except percentages):
n/m - not meaningful
Total selling, operating and administrative expenses increased as follows:
● Personnel costs increased due to an increase in equity-based compensation expense of $5.3 million (See Note 13, Equity-Based Compensation), increased headcount largely from acquisitions and compensation increases for existing employees, partially offset by the suspension of the 401(k) match. As a result of equity issued in conjunction with acquisitions and increased headcount, we expect equity-based compensation expense will increase approximately $11 million in 2021 as compared to 2020.
● Professional fees increased primarily due to an increase in legal fees related to the Moehrl-related suits (See Note 14, Commitments and Contingencies). Due to ongoing industry litigation, we expect legal fees will increase approximately $1.0 million in 2021 as compared to 2020.
● Other selling, operating and administrative expenses decreased primarily due to lower travel and events expenses as part of our cost mitigation plan and lower bad debt expense driven by improved collections of past-due receivables partially offset by new costs associated with our acquisitions.
Marketing Funds Expenses
We recognize an equal and offsetting amount of expenses to revenue such that there is no impact to our overall profitability.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased primarily due to placing the booj Platform in service and new amortization related to our acquisitions.
Impairment charge - leased assets
During the third quarter of 2020, we began executing on a plan to both refresh our corporate headquarters and sublease space made available through the refresh. As a result, we performed an impairment test on the portion of our headquarters we intend to sublease and recognized an impairment charge of $7.9 million. See Note 3, Leases, for additional information about our leases.
Other Expenses, Net
A summary of the components of our operating expenses is as follows (in thousands, except percentages):
Other expenses, net decreased primarily due to a decrease in interest expense as a result of decreasing interest rates on our Senior Secured Credit Facility partially offset by lower interest earnings on our cash balances from lower interest rates.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective income tax rate increased to 31.3% from 18.9% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, primarily due to (a) nonrecurring taxes arising from the conversion of wemlo and First from C Corporations to flow-through entities (which is expected to provide long-term tax amortization benefits), and (b) the impact of lower pre-tax income compared to certain non-creditable foreign taxes which have not decreased.
Our effective income tax rate depends on many factors, including a rate benefit attributable to the fact that the portion of RMCO’s earnings attributable to the non-controlling interests are not subject to corporate-level taxes because RMCO is classified as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes and therefore is treated as a “flow-through entity,” as well as annual changes in state and foreign income tax rates. See Note 4, Non-controlling Interest, further details on the
allocation of income taxes between Holdings and the non-controlling interest and see Note 12, Income Taxes for additional information.
Adjusted EBITDA
See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for our definition of Adjusted EBITDA and for further discussion of our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA as well as a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, which is the most comparable GAAP measure for operating performance.
Adjusted EBITDA was $92.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $10.9 million from the comparable prior year period. Adjusted EBITDA decreased primarily due to revenue decreases from the temporary COVID-19 related financial support initiatives in the second quarter, increased personnel costs largely from acquisitions, higher legal fees and other new costs from acquisitions partially offset by lower travel and events expenses, lower 401(k) expenses from cost mitigation steps in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and lower bad debt expense from improved collections.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) has adopted rules to regulate the use in filings with the SEC and in public disclosures of financial measures that are not in accordance with U.S. GAAP, such as Adjusted EBITDA and the ratios related thereto. These measures are derived on the basis of methodologies other than in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA (consolidated net income before depreciation and amortization, interest expense, interest income and the provision for income taxes, each of which is presented in our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K), adjusted for the impact of the following items that are either non-cash or that we do not consider representative of our ongoing operating performance: gain or loss on sale or disposition of assets and sublease, non-cash impairment charges, equity-based compensation expense, acquisition-related expense, gain on reduction in tax receivable agreement liability, Special Committee investigation and remediation expense, expense or income related to changes in the estimated fair value measurement of contingent consideration and other non-recurring items.
As Adjusted EBITDA omits certain non-cash items and other non-recurring cash charges or other items, we believe that it is less susceptible to variances that affect our operating performance resulting from depreciation, amortization and other non-cash and non-recurring cash charges or other items. We present Adjusted EBITDA, and the related Adjusted EBITDA margin, because we believe they are useful as supplemental measures in evaluating the performance of our operating businesses and provides greater transparency into our results of operations. Our management uses Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin as factors in evaluating the performance of our business.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider these measures either in isolation or as a substitute for analyzing our results as reported under U.S. GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
● these measures do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
● these measures do not reflect our interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
● these measures do not reflect our income tax expense or the cash requirements to pay our taxes;
● these measures do not reflect the cash requirements to pay dividends to stockholders of our Class A common stock and tax and other cash distributions to our non-controlling unitholders;
● these measures do not reflect the cash requirements pursuant to the Tax Receivable Agreements (“TRAs”);
● although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often require replacement in the future, and these measures do not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
● although equity-based compensation is a non-cash charge, the issuance of equity-based awards may have a dilutive impact on earnings per share; and
● other companies may calculate these measures differently, so similarly named measures may not be comparable.
The adjustments to EBITDA in future periods are generally expected to be similar to the kinds of charges and costs excluded from Adjusted EBITDA in prior periods. The exclusion of these charges and costs in future periods will have a significant impact on our Adjusted EBITDA. We are not able to provide a reconciliation of anticipated non-GAAP financial information for future periods to the corresponding U.S. GAAP measures without unreasonable effort because of the uncertainty and variability of the nature and amount of these future charges and costs.
A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income is set forth in the following table (in thousands):
(1) Represents the impairment recognized on a portion of our corporate headquarters office building. See Note 3, Leases to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information. Lease costs are lower by $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the impairment.
(2) Acquisition-related expense includes personnel, legal, accounting, advisory and consulting fees incurred in connection with the acquisition and integration of acquired companies.
(3) Gain on reduction in tax receivable agreement liability is a result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act enacted in December 2017 and further clarified in 2018. See Note 12, Income Taxes for additional information.
(4) Special Committee investigation and remediation expense relates to costs incurred in relation to the previously disclosed investigation by the special committee of independent directors of actions of certain members of our senior management and the implementation of the remediation plan.
(5) Fair value adjustments to contingent consideration include amounts recognized for changes in the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration liabilities. See Note 11, Fair Value Measurements, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview of Factors Affecting Our Liquidity
Our liquidity position is affected by the growth of our agent and franchise base and conditions in the real estate market. In this regard, our short-term liquidity position from time to time has been, and will continue to be, affected by a number of factors including agents in the RE/MAX network, particularly in Company-Owned Regions. Our cash flows are primarily related to the timing of:
(i) cash receipt of revenues, including any declines in Continuing franchise fees driven by the temporary COVID-19-related financial support initiatives the Company offered during the second quarter of 2020, and any similar programs offered by the Independent regions in the U.S. and Canada, as well as significant variability in Broker fees revenue due to home sale volatility during COVID-19;
(ii) payment of selling, operating and administrative expenses;
(iii) investments in technology and Motto;
(iv) cash consideration for acquisitions and acquisition-related expenses;
(v) principal payments and related interest payments on our Senior Secured Credit Facility;
(vi) dividend payments to stockholders of our Class A common stock;
(vii) distributions and other payments to non-controlling unitholders pursuant to the terms of RMCO’s limited liability company operating agreement (“the RMCO, LLC Agreement”);
(viii) corporate tax payments paid by the Company; and
(ix) payments to the TRA parties pursuant to the TRAs.
We have satisfied these needs primarily through our existing cash balances, cash generated by our operations and funds available under our Senior Secured Credit Facility.
Our liquidity has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our liquidity and financial condition is unknown, and its impact may be variable over time as government regulations, market conditions and consumer behavior changes positively or negatively in response to developments with respect to the pandemic. We may utilize our Senior Secured Credit Facility, and we may pursue other sources of capital that may include other forms of external financing, in order to increase our cash position and preserve financial flexibility in response to the uncertainty in the United States and global markets resulting from COVID-19.
Financing Resources
RMCO and RE/MAX, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of RMCO, have a credit agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, and various lenders party thereto (the “Senior Secured Credit Facility”). The Senior Secured Credit Facility provided to RE/MAX, LLC $235.0 million in term loans and a $10.0 million revolving facility. Borrowings under the term loans and revolving loans accrue interest, at London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”), provided LIBOR shall be no less than 0.75% plus an applicable margin of 2.75%. LIBOR was originally set to cease being provided as a reference rate at the end of 2021, with alternate rates in the U.S. being developed such as the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”). Such cessation would likely require amendments to our Senior Secured Credit Facility. However, in late 2020, the timeline for the cessation of term-based LIBOR (upon which our outstanding borrowings are based) was extended until June 2023. The Company continues to evaluate when it might modify its Senior Secured Credit Facility to allow for a new reference rate.
The Senior Secured Credit Facility restricts the aggregate acquisition consideration for permitted acquisitions, in a situation in which RE/MAX, LLC would not be in pro forma compliance with a 3.5:1.0 total leverage ratio (based on how such term is defined therein), to $100.0 million in any fiscal year. The Senior Secured Credit Facility also provides for incremental facilities, subject to lender participation, as long as the total leverage ratio (calculated as net debt to EBITDA as defined therein) remains below 4.00:1.00.
The Senior Secured Credit Facility requires RE/MAX, LLC to repay term loans at $0.6 million per quarter. We are also required to repay the term loans and reduce revolving commitments with (i) 100.0% of proceeds of any incurrence of additional debt not permitted by the Senior Secured Credit Facility, (ii) 100.0% of proceeds of asset sales and 100.0% of amounts recovered under insurance policies, subject to certain exceptions and a reinvestment right and (iii) 50% of excess cash flow (as defined in the Senior Secured Credit Facility) at the end of the applicable fiscal year if RE/MAX, LLC’s total leverage ratio as defined in the Senior Secured Credit Facility is in excess of 3.25:1. If the total leverage ratio as of the last day of such fiscal year is less than 3.25:1 but above 2.75:1, the repayment percentage is 25% of excess cash flow and if the total leverage ratio as of the last day of such fiscal year is less than 2.75:1, no repayment from excess cash flow is required. Any such repayment would be due no later than April 10 of the following year. As of December 31, 2020, the aforementioned leverage ratio for RE/MAX LLC is less than 2.0:1, and therefore no such repayment is due on April 10, 2021.
The Senior Secured Credit Facility is guaranteed by RMCO and is secured by a lien on substantially all of the assets of RE/MAX, LLC.
The Senior Secured Credit Facility provides for customary restrictions on, among other things, additional indebtedness, liens, dispositions of property, dividends, transactions with affiliates and fundamental changes such as mergers, consolidations and liquidations. With certain exceptions, any default under any of our other agreements evidencing
indebtedness in the amount of $15.0 million or more constitutes an event of default under the Senior Secured Credit Facility.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $223.5 million of term loans outstanding, net of an unamortized discount and issuance costs, and no revolving loans outstanding under our Senior Secured Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate on the term loan facility was 3.5%. If any loan or other amounts are outstanding under the revolving line of credit, the Senior Secured Credit Facility requires compliance with a leverage ratio and an interest coverage ratio. A commitment fee of 0.5% per annum accrues on the amount of unutilized revolving line of credit.
As needs arise, we may seek additional financing in the public capital markets.
Sources and Uses of Cash
As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we had $101.4 million and $83.0 million, respectively, in cash and cash equivalents, of which approximately $4.2 million and $1.1 million were denominated in foreign currencies, respectively.
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities decreased primarily as a result of:
● a decrease in Adjusted EBITDA of $10.9 million;
● larger payments of certain employee related accruals;
● partially offset by lower tax payments due to lower taxable income; and
● lower net interest payments due to lower interest rates.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was primarily the result of restricted cash acquired in connection with the acquisition of the Marketing Funds during 2019 versus the cash used in the acquisitions of wemlo and Gadberry, as well as lower capitalizable investments in technology as compared to the prior year.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in financing activities increased primarily due increased primarily due to an increase in payments related to tax withholding for share-based compensation, primarily due to half of the corporate bonus plan being settled in stock, and an increase in dividends per Class A share and non-controlling unit to $0.22 per share/unit during each quarter of 2020 as compared to $0.21 per share/unit during each quarter in 2019, partially offset by decreases in tax distributions paid to non-controlling unitholders.
Capital Allocation Priorities
Liquidity
Our objective is to maintain a strong liquidity position. We have existing cash balances, cash flows from operating activities, access to our revolving facility and incremental facilities under our Senior Secured Credit Facility available to
support the needs of our business. Should additional liquidity needs arise, we may choose to access public capital markets if such financing would be available.
Acquisitions
As part of our growth strategy we may pursue reacquisitions of Independent Regions as well as additional acquisitions or investments in complementary businesses, services and technologies that would provide access to new markets, revenue streams, or otherwise complement our existing operations. We would fund any such growth with various sources of capital including existing cash balances and cash flow from operations, as well as proceeds from debt financings including under existing credit facilities or new arrangements raised in the public capital markets.
Capital Expenditures
The total aggregate amount for purchases of property and equipment and capitalization of developed software was $6.9 million, $13.2 million and $7.8 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, with a portion of this funded from the Marketing Funds. These amounts primarily related to investments in technology and training materials. In order to expand our technology, we plan to continue to re-invest in our business in order to improve operational efficiencies and enhance the tools and services provided to affiliates in our networks. Total capital expenditures for 2021 are expected to be between $12.0 million and $15.0 million as a result of continued investments in technology and inclusive of between $5.0 million and $6.0 million related to the refresh and efficiency enhancements of our corporate headquarters. See Financial and Operational Highlights above for additional information.
Dividends
Our Board of Directors declared quarterly cash dividends of $0.22 and $0.21 per share on all outstanding shares of Class A common stock every quarter in 2020 and 2019, respectively, as disclosed in Note 5, Earnings Per Share and Dividends. On February 17, 2021, our Board of Directors announced a quarterly dividend of $0.23 per share on all outstanding shares of Class A common stock, which is payable on March 17, 2021 to stockholders of record at the close of business on March 3, 2021. The declaration of additional future dividends, and, if declared, the amount of any such future dividend, will be subject to our actual future earnings and capital requirements and will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors.
Distributions and Other Payments to Non-controlling Unitholders by RMCO
Distributions to Non-Controlling Unitholders Pursuant to the RMCO, LLC Agreement
As authorized by the RMCO, LLC Agreement, RMCO makes cash distributions to its members, Holdings and RIHI. Distributions are required to be made by RMCO to its members on a pro-rata basis in accordance with each members’ ownership percentage in RMCO. These distributions have historically been either in the form of payments to cover its members’ estimated tax liabilities, dividend payments, or payments to ensure pro-rata distributions have occurred.
As a limited liability company (treated as a partnership for income tax purposes), RMCO does not incur significant domestic federal, state or local income taxes, as these taxes are primarily the obligations of its members. RMCO is generally required to distribute cash to its members to cover each member’s estimated tax liabilities, if any, with respect to their allocable share of RMCO earnings. Such distributions are required if any other distributions from RMCO (i.e., in the form of dividend payments) for the relevant period are otherwise insufficient to enable each member to cover its estimated tax liabilities.
Holdings’ only source of cash flow from operations is in the form of distributions from RMCO. Holdings receives distributions from RMCO on a quarterly basis that are equal to the dividend payments Holdings makes to the stockholders of its Class A common stock. As a result, absent any additional distributions, Holdings may have insufficient funds to cover its estimated tax and TRA liabilities. Therefore, as necessary, RMCO makes a separate distribution to Holdings,
and because all distributions must be made on a pro-rata basis, RIHI receives a separate payment to ensure such pro-rata distributions have occurred.
Payments Pursuant to the Tax Receivable Agreements
As of December 31, 2020, the Company reflected a total liability of $33.6 million under the terms of its TRAs. The liability pursuant to the TRAs will increase upon future exchanges by RIHI of RMCO common units, with the increase representing 85% of the estimated future tax benefits, if any, resulting from such exchanges. Payments are made on this liability as tax benefits are realized by Holdings.
Distributions and other payments pursuant to the RMCO, LLC Agreement and TRAs were comprised of the following (in thousands):
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods (in thousands):
(1) We have reflected full payment of our Senior Secured Credit Facility in December 2023 at maturity.
(2) The Senior Secured Credit Facility may require additional prepayments throughout the term of the loan based on the total leverage ratio as discussed above.
(3) The variable interest rate on the Senior Secured Credit Facility is assumed at the interest rate in effect as of December 31, 2020 of 3.5%.
(4) We are obligated under non-cancelable leases for offices and equipment. Future payments under these leases and commitments, net of payments to be received under sublease agreements of $5.4 million in the aggregate, are included in the table above.
(5) As described elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we entered into TRAs, that will provide for the payment by us of 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that we realize as a result of tax deductions arising from the increase in tax basis in RMCO’s assets.
(6) Represents outstanding purchase orders with vendors initiated in the ordinary course of business for operating and capital expenditures, including payments from the Marketing Fund.
(7) Represents estimated payments to the former owner of Motto and former owners of Gadberry as required per the purchase agreements. See Note 11, Fair Value Measurements, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information.
Commitments and Contingencies
Our management does not believe there are any matters involving us that could result, individually or in the aggregate, in a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no material off balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Judgments and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Several of the estimates and assumptions we are required to make relate to matters that are inherently uncertain as they pertain to future events. We base estimates on historical experience and other assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances and evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies. We believe that the accounting policies and estimates discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Motto and First Goodwill
We assess goodwill for impairment at least annually or whenever an event occurs, or circumstances change that would indicate impairment may have occurred at the reporting unit level. Reporting units are driven by the level at which segment management reviews operating results. We perform our required impairment testing annually on October 1.
For most of our reporting units, the fair value of the reporting unit significantly exceeded its carrying value at the latest assessment date and only a qualitative impairment test was performed. However, for First and Motto Franchising, we performed a quantitative impairment test.
The Motto Franchising reporting unit in the Mortgage segment, which has a carrying value of goodwill as of December 31, 2020 of $11.8 million, is an early-stage business and its fair value is tied primarily to franchise sales over the next several years and the discount rate used in our discounted cash flow analysis. Failure to achieve targeted franchise sales (which are currently estimated at between 60 and 80 per year over the next 10 years) would likely result in an impairment of this goodwill balance.
The First reporting unit in the Real Estate segment, which has a carrying value of goodwill as of December 31, 2020 of $11.1 million, is an even earlier stage business and its fair value is tied primarily to agent adoption rates for the technology and the discount rate used in our discounted cash flow analysis. A significant revision of the long-term targeted adoption rate of approximately 20% of U.S. agents would result in lower expected usage, a need to reduce the monthly price, or both and would likely result in an impairment of this goodwill balance. COVID-19 slowed the rollout of this technology in 2020. However, the Company has increased the marketing efforts for 2021 and created a group dedicated to technology enablement, including First.
We have not recorded any goodwill impairments during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Purchase Accounting for Acquisitions
We allocate the purchase price of an acquired business to its identifiable assets and liabilities based on estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over the amount allocated to the identifiable assets less liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Purchase price allocations require management to make assumptions and apply judgment to estimate the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities. Management estimates the fair value of assets and liabilities primarily using discounted cash flow analysis.
We typically engage outside appraisal firms to assist in the fair value determination of identifiable intangible assets, primarily franchise rights. The timing and amount of expected future cash flows used in the valuation requires estimates,
among other items, of revenue and agent growth rates, operating expenses and expected operating cash flow margins. The development of these cash flows, and the discount rate applied to the cash flows, is subject to inherent uncertainties. We adjust the preliminary purchase price allocation, as necessary, after the acquisition closing date through the end of the measurement period of one year or less as we finalize valuations for the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. If estimates or assumptions used to complete the initial purchase price allocation and estimate the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities significantly differed from assumptions made in the final valuation, the allocation of purchase price between goodwill and intangibles could significantly differ. Such a difference would impact future earnings through amortization expense of these intangibles. In addition, if forecasts supporting the valuation of the intangible assets or goodwill are not achieved, impairments could arise, as discussed further above.
Deferred Tax Assets and TRA Liability
As discussed in Item 1. Business, Holdings has twice acquired significant portions of the ownership in RMCO. When Holdings acquired this ownership in the form of common units, it received a significant step-up in tax basis on the underlying assets held by RMCO. The step-up is principally equivalent to the difference between (1) the fair value of the underlying assets on the date of acquisition of the common units and (2) their tax basis in RMCO, multiplied by the percentage of units acquired. The majority of the step-up in basis relates to intangibles assets, primarily franchise agreements and goodwill, and is included within deferred tax assets on our consolidated balance sheets. The computation of the step-up requires valuations of the intangible assets of RMCO and has the same complexities and estimates as discussed in Purchase Accounting for Acquisitions above. In addition, the step-up is governed by complex IRS rules that limit which intangibles are subject to step-up, and also imposes further limits on the amount of step-up. Given the magnitude of the deferred tax assets and complexity of the calculations, small adjustments to our model used to calculate these deferred tax assets can result in material changes to the amounts recognized. There were no redemptions of common units in RMCO in the periods presented. However, if more common units of RMCO are redeemed by RIHI, the percentage of RE/MAX Holdings’ ownership of RMCO will increase, and additional deferred tax assets will be created as additional tax basis step-ups occur and such amounts are likely to be material.
Pursuant to the TRA agreements, Holdings makes annual payments to RIHI and Parallaxes Rain Co-Investment, LLC (“Parallaxes”) (a successor to the TRAs prior owners) equivalent to 85% of any tax benefits realized on each year’s tax return from the additional tax deductions arising from the step-up in tax basis. A TRA liability of $33.6 million exists as of December 31, 2020 for the future cash obligations expected to be paid under the TRAs and is not discounted. The calculation of this liability is a function of the step-up described above and therefore has the same complexities and estimates. Similar to the deferred tax assets, these liabilities would likely increase materially if RIHI redeems additional common units of RMCO.
General Litigation Matters
We are subject to litigation claims arising in the ordinary course of business. We accrue for contingencies related to litigation matters if it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Because these matters are inherently unpredictable and unfavorable developments or resolutions can occur, assessing litigation matters is highly subjective and requires judgments about future events. We regularly review litigation matters to determine whether our accruals and related disclosures are adequate. The amount of ultimate loss may differ from these estimates. See Note 14, Commitments and Contingencies, for more information related to litigation matters.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, for recently issued accounting pronouncements applicable to us and the effect of those standards on our financial statements and related disclosures.