ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in Item 1A. “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory, Inc., a Delaware corporation, and its subsidiaries (including its operating subsidiary with the same name, Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory, Inc., a Colorado corporation (“RMCF”) (collectively, the “Company,” “we,” “us,” or “our”) is an international franchisor, confectionery manufacturer and retail operator. Founded in 1981, we are headquartered in Durango, Colorado and manufacture an extensive line of premium chocolate candies and other confectionery products. Our wholly-owned subsidiary, U-Swirl International, Inc. (“U-Swirl”), franchises and operates self-serve frozen yogurt stores. Our revenues and profitability are derived principally from our franchised/license system of retail stores that feature chocolate, frozen yogurt and other confectionary products. We also sell our candy in select locations outside of our system of retail stores and license the use of our brand with certain consumer products. We are also party to strategic alliance and ecommerce agreements with Edible Arrangements®, LLC and its affiliates (“Edible”), whereby we sell our candy in their store locations and through their ecommerce platform. As of March 31, 2021, there were two Company-owned, 95 licensee-owned and 211 franchised Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory stores operating in 37 states, Canada, South Korea, Panama, and the Philippines. As of March 31, 2021, U-Swirl operated three Company-owned stores and 72 franchised and licensed stores located in 23 states and Qatar. U-Swirl operates self-serve frozen yogurt cafes under the names “U-Swirl,” “Yogurtini,” “CherryBerry,” “Yogli Mogli Frozen Yogurt,” “Fuzzy Peach Frozen Yogurt,” “Let’s Yo!” and “Aspen Leaf Yogurt”.
In FY 2020 and early FY 2021, we entered into a long-term strategic alliance and ecommerce agreements, respectively, with Edible, whereby it is intended that we would become the exclusive provider of certain branded chocolate products to Edible, its affiliates and its franchisees. Under the strategic alliance, Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory branded products are intended to be available for purchase both on Edible’s website as well as through over 1,000 franchised Edible locations nationwide. In addition, due to Edible’s significant e-commerce expertise and scale, we have also executed an ecommerce licensing agreement with Edible, whereby Edible is expected to sell a wide variety of chocolates, candies and other confectionery products produced by the Company or its franchisees through Edible’s websites. There is no assurance that the strategic alliance and ecommerce agreements will be deployed into our operations and to our satisfaction, or that we will achieve the expected full benefits from these agreements.
Current Trends and Outlook
As discussed in more detail throughout this Annual Report, we have experienced significant business disruptions resulting from efforts to contain the rapid spread of the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”), including the vast mandated self-quarantines of customers and closures of non-essential business throughout the United States and internationally. Nearly all of the Company-owned and franchise stores were directly and negatively impacted in FY 2021 by public health measures taken in response to COVID-19, with nearly all locations experiencing reduced operations as a result of, among other things, modified business hours and store and mall closures. As a result, franchisees did not order products for their stores during FY 2021 in line with historical amounts. This trend has negatively impacted, and is expected to continue to negatively impact, among other things, factory sales, retail sales and royalty and marketing fees. Beginning in May 2020 and continuing through February 2021, most stores previously closed for much of March 2020 and April 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, began to re-open. As of February 28, 2021, approximately 54 stores have not re-opened and the future of these locations is uncertain. This is a closure rate significantly higher than historical levels. By February 28, 2021, certain stores have met or exceeded pre-COVID-19 levels, however, many retail environments have continued to be adversely impacted by changes to consumer behavior because of COVID-19. Most stores re-opened subject to various local health restrictions and with reduced operations. It is unclear when or if store operations will return to pre-COVID-19 levels. As a result of the negative impacts of COVID-19 the Company incurred bad debt expense of approximately $1.3 million, incurred expense associated with the impairment of goodwill and intangible assets of approximately $476,000 and incurred expense associated with fixed asset impairments of approximately $57,000.
In addition, as previously announced in May 2020, the Board of Directors suspended the Company’s first quarter cash dividend payment to preserve cash and provide additional flexibility in the current environment impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore, the Board of Directors has suspended future quarterly dividends until the significant uncertainty of the current public health crisis and economic climate has passed, and the Board of Directors determines that resumption of dividend payments is in the best interest of the Company and its stockholders.
During this challenging time, the Company’s foremost priority is the safety and well-being of its employees, customers, franchisees and communities. In addition to the already stringent practices for the quality and safety of the Company’s confections, the Company is diligently following health and safety guidance issued by the World Health Organization, the Centers for Disease Control and state and local governmental agencies. The COVID-19 pandemic has had an unprecedented impact on the retail industry as containment measures continue to impact the Company’s operations and the retail industry. Numerous countries, states and local governments have effected ordinances to protect the public through social distancing, which has caused, and we expect will continue to cause, a significant decrease in, among other things, retail traffic and as a result, factory sales, retail sales and royalty and marketing fees. With that said, Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory products have remained available for sale online. The Company’s current focus is on supporting its franchisees and licensees during this challenging time and driving growth in online sales, especially in light of the ecommerce licensing agreement with Edible, as discussed herein, while also sensibly managing costs. The number of Company-owned and franchise stores remaining open may change frequently and significantly due to the ever-changing nature of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In these challenging and unprecedented times, management is taking all necessary and appropriate action to maximize liquidity as the Company navigates the current landscape. These actions include significantly reducing operating expenses and production volume to reflect reduced sales volumes as well as the elimination of all non-essential spending and capital expenditures. Further, in an abundance of caution and to maintain ample financial flexibility, the Company drew down the full amount under its line of credit in March 2020 and the Company received loans under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) in April 2020. These borrowings allowed the Company to temporarily avoid workforce reduction measures amidst a steep decline in revenue and production volume. The Company subsequently repaid its line of credit in full and the loans received under the PPP were fully forgiven. While the Company believes it has sufficient liquidity with its current cash position, the Company will continue to monitor and evaluate all financing alternatives as necessary as these unprecedented events evolve. For more information, please see Item 1A “Risk Factors-Risks Related to the Economy-The Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic Has, and May Continue to, Materially and Adversely Affect our Sales, Earnings, Financial Condition and Liquidity.”
It is not possible to predict the consequences of current events on the outcome of results in the future. In addition to the steps described above, the Company, Management and the Board of Directors may take additional actions as a result of current events related to COVID-19. Continued or prolonged disruption to the economy may result in, among other things: an increase in expense associated with obsolete inventory, an increase in bad debt expense, expense associated with the impairment of long-lived assets and intangible assets, an increase in store closures, and a decrease in new store openings.
The Company has been focused on employee safety and implementing steps to improve safety. The Company has been monitoring the frequently changing guidance on best safety practices and is rapidly integrating safety measures into the working environment. Most of our office and administrative staff are working remotely. The nature of our production environment necessitates that most production employees must be on site to perform their job duties. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic we have implemented COVID-19 testing procedures, contact tracing, quarantine procedures and employee vaccinations. The current trends have made it and may continue to make it difficult for us to hire and retain production employees.
Limited financing alternatives for domestic franchise growth has led us to pursue a strategy of expansion through co-branding with complimentary concepts such as ice cream and frozen yogurt, international development, sale of our products to specialty markets, licensing the Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory brand for use with other appropriate consumer products, and selected entry of Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory branded products into other wholesale channels, along with business acquisitions as primary drivers of growth. This is a trend that continued in FY 2021 and we expect to continue into the foreseeable future.
Going forward in FY 2022, we are taking a conservative view of market conditions in the United States. We intend to continue to focus on our long-term objectives while seeking to maintain flexibility to respond to market conditions, including our strategic alliance with Edible to reduce our dependence on domestic brick-and-mortar retail.
We are subject to seasonal fluctuations in sales because of key holidays and the location of our franchisees, which have traditionally been located in resort or tourist locations, and the nature of the products we sell, which are highly seasonal. As we expanded our geographical diversity to include regional centers and our franchise offerings to include frozen desserts, we have seen some moderation to our seasonal sales mix. Seasonal fluctuation in sales causes fluctuations in quarterly results of operations. Historically, the strongest sales of our products have occurred during key holidays and summer vacation seasons. Additionally, quarterly results have been, and in the future are likely to be, affected by the timing of new store openings and sales of franchises. Because of the seasonality of our business and the impact of new store openings and sales of franchises, results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of results that may be achieved in other quarters or for a full fiscal year.
The most important factors in continued growth in our earnings are macroeconomic and retail sector post-COVID 19 recovery, ongoing online revenue growth, a shift in consumer behavior as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, unit growth, increased same store sales and increased same store pounds purchased from the factory.
Our ability to successfully achieve growth as a result of our strategic alliance with Edible depends on many factors not within our control, including customer receptiveness to our products, Edible franchisee’s receptiveness to our products, logistical considerations and technological integration. Our ability to successfully achieve expansion of our franchise systems depends on many factors not within our control including the availability of suitable sites for new store establishment and the availability of qualified franchisees to support such expansion.
Efforts to reverse the decline in same store pounds purchased from the factory by franchised stores and to increase total factory sales depend on many factors, including new store openings, competition, the receptivity of our franchise system to our product introductions and promotional programs. In FY 2021, same store pounds purchased from the factory by franchised and co-branded licensed stores was significantly impacted by COVID-19 and the impact it had on store operations. During FY 2021, same store pounds purchased from the factory by franchised and co-branded licensed stores decreased approximately 74.3% in the first quarter, decreased approximately 27.7% in the second quarter, decreased approximately 16.9% in the third quarter, decreased approximately 7.5% in the fourth quarter, and decreased 30.0% overall in FY 2021 as compared to the same periods in FY 2020.
We have expanded co-branding as a way to offset low franchise growth through a relationship with Cold Stone Creamery. We have additionally developed co-branded locations through U-Swirl brands. We believe that if this co-branding strategy continues to prove financially viable it could represent a significant future growth opportunity. As of February 28, 2021, Cold Stone licensees operated 96 co-branded locations, our U-Swirl franchisees operated 6 co-branded locations and we have co-branded 3 of our Company-owned cafés.
Results of Operations
Fiscal 2021 Compared To Fiscal 2020
Results Summary
Basic earnings per share decreased from $0.17 per share in FY 2020 to a net loss of $(0.15) per share in FY 2021. Revenues decreased 26.3% from $31.8 million for FY 2020 to $23.5 million for FY 2021. Operating income decreased from $1.4 million in FY 2020 to an operating loss of $(3.5) million in FY 2021. Net income decreased from $1.0 million in FY 2020 to a net loss of $(900,000) in FY 2021. The decreases in operating income and net income were due primarily to a decline in revenue associated with the continued impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, including its impact on our operations and the operations of our franchised, licensed and Company-owned locations.
REVENUES
Factory Sales
The decrease in factory sales for FY 2021 versus FY 2020 was primarily due to a 37.3% decrease in sales of product to our network of franchised and licensed retail stores, partially offset by a $2.3 million increase in shipments of product to customers outside our network of franchised retail stores. The decrease in sales of product to our network of franchised and licensed retail stores was primarily the result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated public health measures in place during FY 2021, which significantly reduced traffic in our stores and caused most stores to close for a portion of FY 2021. The increase in shipments of product to customers outside our network of franchise and licensed retail stores was primarily the result of sales associated with our strategic alliance with Edible. Subsequent to February 28, 2021, certain disagreements arose between RMCF and Edible related to the strategic alliance and ecommerce agreements resulting in continuing discussions, the result of which are not currently determinable. There can be no assurance historical revenue levels will be indicative of future revenues.
Same store pounds purchased by domestic Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory franchise and license locations decreased 30.0% in FY 2021, compared to FY 2020 as result of store closures, reduced operations and reduced demand in stores as a result of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Retail Sales
The decrease in retail sales was primarily due to store closures, reduced operations and reduced demand in stores as a result of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. As of February 28, 2021, all Company-owned stores had resumed limited operations following COVID-19 related closures. Same store sales at all Company-owned stores and cafés decreased 36.5% during FY 2021 compared with FY 2020.
Royalties, Marketing Fees and Franchise Fees
The decrease in royalties and marketing fees for FY 2021 compared to FY 2020 was primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated public health measures in place during FY 2021. Nearly all of our franchised locations experienced reduced operations and periods of full closure during FY 2021. The average number of total domestic franchise stores in operation decreased 9.7% from 269 during FY 2020 to 243 during FY 2021. This decrease is the result of domestic store closures exceeding domestic store openings, a trend which has accelerated as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Franchise fee revenues decreased in FY 2021 compared to FY 2020 primarily as a result of a decrease in revenue resulting from fewer franchise stores in operation and the associated recognition of revenue over the term of the franchise agreement.
COSTS AND EXPENSES
Cost of Sales
Adjusted gross margin and factory adjusted gross margin are non-GAAP measures. Adjusted gross margin is equal to the sum of our factory adjusted gross margin plus our retail gross margin calculated in accordance with GAAP. Factory adjusted gross margin is equal to factory gross margin plus depreciation and amortization expense. We believe adjusted gross margin and factory adjusted gross margin are helpful in understanding our past performance as a supplement to gross margin, factory gross margin and other performance measures calculated in conformity with GAAP. We believe that adjusted gross margin and factory adjusted gross margin are useful to investors because they provide a measure of operating performance and our ability to generate cash that is unaffected by non-cash accounting measures. Additionally, we use adjusted gross margin and factory adjusted gross margin rather than gross margin and factory gross margin to make incremental pricing decisions. Adjusted gross margin and factory adjusted gross margin have limitations as analytical tools because they exclude the impact of depreciation and amortization expense and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for any measure reported under GAAP. Our use of capital assets makes depreciation and amortization expense a necessary element of our costs and our ability to generate income. Due to these limitations, we use adjusted gross margin and factory adjusted gross margin as measures of performance only in conjunction with GAAP measures of performance such as gross margin and factory gross margin.
Cost of Sales and Gross Margin
Factory gross margin decreased 9.0% during FY 2021 compared to FY 2020 due primarily to lower production volume. During FY 2021, production volume decreased 23.8% in response to a 19.5% decrease in factory sales, primarily due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. During FY 2021, the Company also incurred approximately $280,000 of production labor costs associated with paying employees who abided by local stay at home orders related to COVID-19 public health measures. This excess capacity cost, in the form of idle labor, was included in cost of sales.
Franchise Costs
The decrease in franchise costs for FY 2021 compared to FY 2020 was due primarily to lower travel costs, the result of COVID-19 related travel restrictions. As a percentage of total royalty and marketing fees and franchise fee revenue, franchise costs increased to 39.9% during FY 2021 from 26.4% during FY 2020. This increase as a percentage of royalty, marketing and franchise fees is primarily a result of the decrease in franchise revenue.
Sales and Marketing
The decrease in sales and marketing costs during FY 2021 compared to FY 2020 was primarily due to lower advertising and promotion costs, partially offset by an increase in online advertising cost.
General and Administrative
The decrease in general and administrative costs during FY 2021 compared to FY 2020 was due to lower professional fees associated with the Company’s process to explore and review strategic alternatives and costs associated with a stockholder’s contested solicitation of proxies during FY 2020, with no comparable costs incurred during FY 2021. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in bad debt expense and the impairment of certain intangible assets during FY 2021. During FY 2020, the Company incurred approximately $2,271,000 of one-time costs associated with the review of strategic alternatives and the contested solicitation of proxies, compared with no comparable costs incurred during FY 2021. Bad debt expense during FY 2021 was primarily the result of management’s assessment of the likelihood of collecting accounts and notes receivable. As a result of this assessment total allowances for potentially uncollectable accounts and notes receivable increased to $1,454,140 at February 28, 2021, compared to $638,907 at February 29, 2020. This cost was a direct result of public health measures in place due to responses to COVID-19 and the financial burden experienced by the majority of our network of franchised and licensed locations. As a percentage of total revenues, general and administrative expenses increased to 22.4% in FY 2021 compared to 18.0% in FY 2020.
Retail Operating Expenses
Retail operating expenses decreased during FY 2021 compared to FY 2020, as a result of the temporary closure of all of our Company-owned stores for much of the three months ended May 31, 2020. The closure of our Company-owned stores was the result of COVID-19 and the associated public health measures in place. Retail operating expenses, as a percentage of retail sales, increased to 74.4% during FY 2021 from 55.9% during FY 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization, exclusive of depreciation and amortization included in cost of sales, was $711,000 during FY 2021, a decrease of 20.6% from $895,000 incurred during FY 2020. This decrease was the result of a decrease in frozen yogurt cafés in operation and lower amortization of the associated franchise rights. See Note 7 to the financial statements for a summary of annual amortization of intangible assets based upon existing intangible assets and current useful lives. Depreciation and amortization included in cost of sales increased 4.7% from $597,000 during FY 2020 to $626,000 during FY 2021. This increase was the result of an increase in production assets in service primarily resulting from the replacement of obsolete equipment or equipment at the end of its operating life.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income was $1.7 million during FY 2021 compared to other income of $10,700 during FY 2020. This change was primarily the result of a gain on insurance recovery and the forgiveness of debt partially offset by higher interest expense resulting from the Company’s increased debt as a result of measures taken during FY 2021 to ensure adequate liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic. In early FY 2021 the Company borrowed $3.4 million from its line of credit (subsequently the line of credit was repaid in February 2021) and borrowed $1.5 million of loans under the Paycheck Protection Program which have been forgiven along with associated interest.
The Company recognized a gain on insurance recovery of $210,500 and recognized forgiveness of debt in the amount of $1.5 million during FY 2021, compared with no similar amounts recognized during FY 2020. The debt forgiveness was the result of the Company’s PPP loans being forgiven.
Income Tax Expense
Our effective income tax rate for FY 2021 was 49.8%, compared to 26.3% FY 2020. This change was primarily the result of debt forgiveness income being realized with no associated income tax expense and the revaluation of a portion of deferred tax assets as a result of the Company realizing a taxable loss during FY 2021 that can be carried back to prior periods with a higher effective income tax rate.
Fiscal 2020 Compared To Fiscal 2019
A discussion of our results of operations for FY 2020 in comparison to FY 2019 has been omitted from this Annual Report, but can be found in Item 7. "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020, filed with the SEC on May 29, 2020, as amended by our Annual Report on Form 10-K/A for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020, filed with the SEC on June 29, 2020, which are available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our corporate website (www.rmcf.com).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As discussed below, we have taken several defensive measures to maximize liquidity in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the suspension of our cash dividend, reducing expenses, extending payment terms with vendors, reducing production volume and deferring discretionary capital expenditures. Based on these actions, we believe that cash flows from operations and our cash and cash equivalents on hand, will be sufficient to meet our ongoing liquidity needs and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months. Additional future financing may be necessary to fund our operations, and there can be no assurance that, if needed, we will be able to secure additional debt or equity financing on terms acceptable to us or at all, especially in light of the market volatility and uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Although we believe we have adequate sources of liquidity over the long term, the success of our operations, the global economic outlook, and the pace of sustainable growth in our markets, in each case, in light of the market volatility and uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, among other factors, could impact our business and liquidity.
As of February 28, 2021, working capital was $9.0 million compared with $8.0 million as of February 29, 2020. The increase in working capital was due primarily to our efforts to preserve liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic, including the receipt of PPP funds and the suspension of our quarterly dividend. We have historically generated excess operating cash flow. We review our working capital needs and projections and when we believe that we have greater working capital than necessary we have historically utilized that excess working capital to repurchase common stock and pay dividends to our stockholders.
Cash and cash equivalent balances increased from $4.8 million as of February 29, 2020 to $5.6 million as of February 28, 2021 as a result of cash flows generated by financing activities. Our current ratio was 3.4 to 1.0 at February 28, 2021 compared to 2.4 to 1.0 at February 29, 2020. We monitor current and anticipated future levels of cash and cash equivalents in relation to anticipated operating, financing and investing requirements.
During FY 2021, we had a net loss of $900,000. Operating activities provided cash of $67,000, with the principal adjustment to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities being depreciation and amortization of $1.3 million and stock compensation expense of $512,000. During FY 2020, we had net income of $1.0 million. Operating activities provided cash of $4.4 million, with the principal adjustment to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities being depreciation and amortization of $1.5 million, an increase in accounts payable of $1.2 million and stock compensation expense of $809,000.
During FY 2021, investing activities used cash of $71,000, primarily due to the purchases of property and equipment, intangible assets and deposits on future asset purchases of $461,000, partially offset by proceeds received from an insurance recovery of $305,000. In comparison, investing activities used cash of $911,000 during FY 2020 primarily due to the purchases of property and equipment of $984,000 the result of investment in factory infrastructure improvements, partially offset by proceeds received on notes receivable of $146,000.
Financing activities provided cash of $815,000 during FY 2021 and used cash of $4.0 million during the prior year. The decrease in cash used in financing activities was primarily due to the receipt of PPP proceeds and the suspension of the Company’s quarterly cash dividend.
Revolving Credit Line
The Company has a $5.0 million credit line for general corporate and working capital purposes, of which $5.0 million was available for borrowing (subject to certain borrowing base limitations) as of February 28, 2021. On March 16, 2020, as a precautionary measure in light of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related economic impacts, the Company drew the maximum amount available on the credit line in an amount equal to $3.4 million (the full amount of $5.0 million under the credit line, subject to the borrowing base of 50% of eligible accounts receivable plus 50% of eligible inventories). In February 2021, the Company repaid the credit line in full as a result of improving economic conditions and the full forgiveness of PPP loans. The credit line is secured by substantially all of the Company’s assets, except retail store assets. Interest on borrowings is at LIBOR plus 2.25% (2.4% at February 28, 2021). Additionally, the line of credit is subject to various financial ratio and leverage covenants. At February 28, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all such covenants. The credit line is subject to renewal in September 2021 and the Company believes it is likely to be renewed on terms similar to the current terms.
PPP Loan
On April 13, 2020 and April 20, 2020, the Company entered into a Loan Agreements and Promissory Notes (collectively the “SBA Loans”) with 1st SOURCE BANK pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under the recently enacted Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. The Company received total proceeds of $1.5 million from the SBA Loans. These loans were forgiven during FY 2021 and no amount was outstanding as of February 28, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
The table below presents significant contractual obligations of the Company at February 28, 2021.
(Amounts in thousands)
The Company made an average of $584,000 per year in capital expenditures during the three fiscal years ended February 28, 2021. For FY 2022 the Company anticipates making approximately $775,000 of capital expenditures.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of February 28, 2021, we had purchase obligations of approximately $377,000. These purchase obligations primarily consist of contractual obligations for future purchases of commodities for use in our manufacturing.
Impact of Inflation
Inflationary factors such as increases in the costs of ingredients and labor directly affect the Company's operations. Most of the Company's leases provide for cost-of-living adjustments and require it to pay taxes, insurance and maintenance expenses, all of which are subject to inflation. Additionally, the Company’s future lease cost for new facilities may include potentially escalating costs of real estate and construction. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to pass on increased costs to its customers.
Depreciation expense is based on the historical cost to the Company of its fixed assets, and is therefore potentially less than it would be if it were based on current replacement cost. While property and equipment acquired in prior years will ultimately have to be replaced at higher prices, it is expected that replacement will be a gradual process over many years.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the related disclosures. Estimates and assumptions include, but are not limited to, the carrying value of accounts and notes receivable from franchisees, inventories, the useful lives of fixed assets, goodwill, and other intangible assets, income taxes, contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on analyses, of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We believe that the following represent our more critical estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, although not all inclusive.
Accounts and Notes Receivable - In the normal course of business, we extend credit to customers, primarily franchisees, that satisfy pre-defined credit criteria. We believe that we have a limited concentration of credit risk primarily because our receivables are secured by the assets of the franchisees to which we ordinarily extend credit, including, but not limited to, their franchise rights and inventories. An allowance for doubtful accounts is determined through analysis of the aging of accounts receivable, assessments of collectability based on historical trends, and an evaluation of the impact of current and projected economic conditions. The process by which we perform our analysis is conducted on a customer by customer, or franchisee by franchisee, basis and takes into account, among other relevant factors, sales history, outstanding receivables, customer financial strength, as well as customer specific and geographic market factors relevant to projected performance. The Company monitors the collectability of its accounts receivable on an ongoing basis by assessing the credit worthiness of its customers and evaluating the impact of reasonably likely changes in economic conditions that may impact credit risks. Estimates with regard to the collectability of accounts receivable are reasonably likely to change in the future. We may experience the failure of our wholesale customers, including our franchisees, to whom we extend credit to pay amounts owed to us on time, or at all, particularly if such customers are significantly impacted by COVID-19.
We recorded an average expense of approximately $533,000 per year for potential uncollectible accounts over the three fiscal years ended February 28, 2021. Write-offs of uncollectible accounts net of recoveries averaged approximately $217,000 over the same period. The provision for uncollectible accounts is recognized as general and administrative expense in the Statements of Income. Over the past three fiscal years, the allowances for doubtful notes and accounts have ranged from 10.0% to 40.1% of gross receivables. As a result of COVID-19 and the associated impact on the liquidity of our customers, we recorded higher expense for potentially uncollectable accounts and a higher allowance as a percentage of gross receivables.
Revenue Recognition - We recognize revenue on sales of products to franchisees and other customers at the time of delivery. Beginning in FY 2019, upon adoption of ASC 606, the Company began recognizing franchise fees and license fees over the term of the associated agreement, which is generally a period of 10-15 years. Prior to FY 2019, franchise fee revenue was recognized upon opening of the franchise store, or upon execution of an international license agreement. We recognize a marketing and promotion fee of one percent (1%) of the Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory and U-Swirl franchised stores’ gross retail sales and a royalty fee based on gross retail sales. The Company recognizes no royalty on franchised stores’ retail sales of products purchased from the Company and recognizes a ten percent (10%) royalty on all other sales of product sold at franchise locations. Royalty fees for U-Swirl cafés are based on the rate defined in the acquired contracts for the franchise rights and range from 2.5% to 6% of gross retail sales. Rebates received from purveyors that supply products to our franchisees are included in franchise royalties and fees. Product rebates are recognized in the period in which they are earned. Rebates related to Company-owned locations are offset against operating costs.
Inventories - Our inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value and are reduced for slow-moving, excess, discontinued and shelf-life expired inventories. Our estimate for such reduction is based on our review of inventories on hand compared to estimated future usage and demand for our products. Such review encompasses not only potentially perishable inventories but also specialty packaging, much of it specific to certain holiday seasons. If actual future usage and demand for our products are less favorable than those projected by our review, further inventory adjustments may be required. We closely monitor our inventory, both perishable and non-perishable, and related shelf and product lives. Historically we have experienced low levels of obsolete inventory or returns of products that have exceeded their shelf life. Over the three fiscal years ended February 28, 2021, the Company recorded expense averaging $324,400 per year for potential inventory losses, or approximately 1.8% of total cost of sales for that period.
Goodwill - Goodwill consists of the excess of purchase price over the fair market value of acquired assets and liabilities. Effective March 1, 2002, under ASC Topic 350, all goodwill with indefinite lives is no longer subject to amortization. ASC Topic 350 requires that an impairment test be conducted annually or in the event of an impairment indicator. We previously entered into a loan and security agreement with SWRL to cover the purchase price and other costs associated with acquisitions of SWRL (the “SWRL Loan Agreement”). Borrowings under the SWRL Loan Agreement were secured by all of the assets of SWRL, including all of the outstanding stock of its wholly-owned subsidiary, U-Swirl. As a result of certain defaults under the SWRL Loan Agreement, we issued a demand for payment of all obligations under the SWRL Loan Agreement. On February 29, 2016, RMCF repossessed all stock in U-Swirl pledged as collateral on the SWRL Loan Agreement. Our testing and impairment is described in Note 7 to the financial statements. We may be required to revise certain accounting estimates and judgments related to Goodwill as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on economic conditions.
Franchise Rights - Franchise rights consists of the purchase price paid in consideration of certain rights associated with franchise agreements. These franchise agreements provide for future payments to the franchisor of royalty and marketing fees. We consider franchise rights to have a 20 year life.
Other accounting estimates inherent in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements include estimates associated with its evaluation of the recoverability of deferred tax assets, as well as those used in the determination of liabilities related to litigation and taxation. Various assumptions and other factors underlie the determination of these significant estimates. The process of determining significant estimates is fact specific and takes into account factors such as historical experience, current and expected economic conditions, and product mix. The Company constantly re-evaluates these significant factors and makes adjustments where facts and circumstances dictate. Historically, actual results have not significantly deviated from those determined using the estimates described above.