ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Investing in our common stock involves a high degree of risk. You should carefully consider the risks and uncertainties described below, together with all of the other information in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, before making an investment decision. The risks and uncertainties described below may not be the only ones we face. If any of the risks actually occur, our business, financial condition, operating results, cash flows and prospects could be materially and adversely affected. In that event, the market price of our common stock could decline, and you could lose part or all of your investment.
Overview
Ra Medical Systems, Inc. is a commercial-stage medical device company leveraging our advanced excimer laser-based platform for use in the treatment of vascular and dermatological immune-mediated inflammatory diseases. We believe our products enhance patients’ quality of life by restoring blood-flow in arteries and clearing chronic skin conditions.
The DABRA laser and single-use catheter, together referred to as DABRA, is used as a tool in the treatment of peripheral artery disease, or PAD, which commonly occurs in the legs. DABRA is cleared by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, as a device for crossing chronic total occlusions, or CTOs, in patients with symptomatic infrainguinal lower extremity vascular disease and with an intended use for ablating a channel in occlusive peripheral vascular disease. DABRA was also granted CE mark approval in Europe in September 2016 for the endovascular treatment of infrainguinal arteries via atherectomy and for crossing total occlusions.
Our vascular business strategy is focused on multiple engineering efforts to improve our catheter offering as well as conducting a clinical study to obtain an atherectomy “indication for use” in the United States. Key catheter engineering efforts currently underway include projects to:
•
Extend our catheter’s shelf life. During 2020, we identified the factors limiting our shelf life, including the introduction of unwanted elements in the catheter’s fluid core and the degradation of the coating on the inner diameter, and are currently implementing multiple remediations to address these issues. Our initial internal accelerated aging test data supports shelf life for our catheter of at least six months;
•
Increase the robustness of our catheter via a braided overjacket, or a similar design, to make the catheter more kink-resistant when navigating tortuous anatomy. We expect to complete the engineering work for this catheter in the second half of 2021 and subsequently submit to the FDA for clearance; and
•
Develop a version of the DABRA catheter that is compatible with a standard guidewire. We completed several guidewire-compatible catheter prototypes in the fourth quarter of 2020 and then conducted in vitro evaluations with several physicians. We expect to finalize the design for this catheter at the end of 2021 and subsequently submit to the FDA for clearance.
As stated, we are currently pursuing an atherectomy indication for use, which the FDA defines to include a prespecified improvement in luminal patency. To satisfy the FDA’s data requirements to support an atherectomy indication, we are performing a pivotal study designed to allow the FDA to evaluate the use of DABRA in atherectomy procedures. We received an Investigational Device Exemption, or IDE, approval in January 2020 and the study is approved for up to 10 clinical sites and 100 subjects.
We enrolled the first subject in February 2020. Throughout much of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic substantially impacted our ability to activate new sites and enroll additional subjects. Many sites or potential sites have been or are currently operating at a reduced capacity, and some have been closed from time to time. In addition, potential study subjects may voluntarily opt to postpone their procedures due to COVID-19 concerns. As of December 31, 2020, we have enrolled 20 subjects and five sites have been cleared to enroll subjects. Due to the unpredictable impact the COVID-19 pandemic has had and will continue to have on enrollment in this study, we currently cannot estimate when enrollment will be completed.
We are continuing to supply catheters to those sites involved in our atherectomy clinical study. We have paused shipments of catheters to commercial sites while we conduct further studies on the stability of our shelf life.
We submitted additional test data in March 2021, which will need to be cleared by the FDA prior to resuming commercial shipments of catheters. We do not anticipate rebuilding our vascular sales team until most of our engineering projects are complete and we have a more definitive timeline for obtaining an atherectomy indication.
Our Pharos laser is a medical device that we have marketed since October 2004 as a tool for the treatment of proliferative skin conditions including psoriasis, vitiligo, atopic dermatitis, and leukoderma. The COVID-19 pandemic is negatively impacting the dermatology business as many customers delay the acquisition or purchase of capital equipment such as our PHAROS laser. Because this business does not have a disposables component and we augment our capital equipment sales with recurring revenue derived from service and/or rental or lease agreements, we are experiencing less of an impact than business models that rely solely on capital equipment and/or disposables sales. We continue to evaluate our overall strategy for the dermatology business and believe there could be an opportunity to grow revenues and increase its cash contribution in the future. Changes to our dermatology business strategy, as well as the timing of those potential changes, will be influenced by the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Recent Developments
COVID-19
The global spread of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has created significant volatility, uncertainty and economic disruption. The ultimate effects of the COVID-19 on our business, operations and financial condition are unknown at this time. In the near term, we expect that our revenue will continue to be adversely impacted and enrollment in our atherectomy clinical trial will continue to be delayed or slowed, as patients elect to postpone voluntary treatments and physicians’ offices are either closed or operating at a reduced capacity. In addition, some customers are requesting more flexible payment terms on a temporary basis. We also may not be able to secure additional financing in a timely manner or on favorable terms, if at all. Our manufacturing facility located in Carlsbad, California is currently operational. Employee travel is limited to essential travel only and many employees are working from home when feasible. We have experienced minor delays in receiving shipments of parts, which has affected the timing of our key engineering efforts. To date, the shipment delays have not had a material impact on our ability to support our atherectomy indication trial. However, the extent to which COVID-19 impacts our business will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and the actions to contain it or treat its impact, among others.
Reverse Stock Split
On November 16, 2020, we filed a certificate of amendment to the Certificate of Incorporation with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware to effect a reverse stock split of our Common Stock at a ratio of one-for-twenty-five, or the Reverse Stock Split. The Reverse Stock Split became effective as of 4:01 p.m. Eastern time on November 16, 2020, and our Common Stock began trading on the New York Stock Exchange on a post-split basis on November 17, 2020. Unless otherwise noted, all share and per share numbers contained in this annual report are reflected on a post-split basis for all periods presented.
NYSE American
On December 17, 2020, we received approval to list our Common Stock on the NYSE American and provided written notice to the New York Stock Exchange, or the NYSE, of our intention to list our Common Stock on NYSE American and to simultaneously delist such securities from the NYSE. Our final day trading on the NYSE was on December 21, 2020 and we commenced trading on NYSE American on December 22, 2020 under our current stock symbol “RMED.”
Components of our Results of Operations
Net revenue
Product sales consist of the sale of DABRA and Pharos lasers, the sale of catheters for use with the DABRA laser and the sale of consumables and replacement parts.
Service and other revenue consists primarily of sales of extended warranties, which we recognize over the contract period and billable services, including repair activity, which is recognized when the service is provided. It also includes income from the rental of our lasers.
We currently use our commercial team to service the U.S. market, and we utilize distributors outside the U.S. in markets where we have received regulatory approval. We expect to continue to seek regulatory approvals for our products in additional strategic markets.
Cost of revenue and gross profit (loss)
Cost of revenue for product sales consists primarily of costs of components for use in our products, the labor that are used to produce our products, and the manufacturing overhead that support production.
Cost of revenue for service and other includes the cost of maintaining and servicing the warranties on our products, including the depreciation on lasers we own.
We expect cost of revenue to increase to the extent our total revenue grows.
We calculate gross profit (loss) as revenue less cost of revenue. Our gross profit (loss) has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, primarily production volumes, the cost of direct materials, discounting practices, manufacturing costs, product yields, headcount and cost-reduction strategies. We expect our gross loss to reduce and become gross profit over the long term as our production volume increases and certain costs remain fixed or increase at a slower rate. We intend to use our design, engineering and manufacturing capabilities to further advance and improve the efficiency of our manufacturing processes, which we believe will reduce costs. While we expect gross profit (loss) to improve over the long term as our production volume increases, it will likely fluctuate from quarter to quarter as we introduce new products and adopt new manufacturing processes and technologies.
Research and development expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses consist of applicable personnel, clinical trial expenses, materials and consulting. R&D expenses include:
•
certain employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel expense and stock-based compensation expense;
•
cost of clinical studies to support new products and product enhancements, including expanded indications;
•
supplies used for internal research and development and clinical activities; and
•
cost of outside consultants who assist with technology development and clinical affairs.
We expense R&D costs as incurred. In the future, we expect R&D expenses to increase as we continue to develop new products, enhance existing products and technologies and perform activities related to obtaining additional regulatory approval. However, we expect R&D expenses as a percentage of total revenue to vary over time depending on the level and timing of our new product development efforts, as well as our clinical development, clinical trials and studies and other related activities.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses consist of employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel expense, sales commissions and stock-based compensation expense. Other SG&A expenses include promotional activities, marketing, conferences and trade shows, professional services fees, including legal, audit and tax fees, insurance costs, general corporate expenses, facilities-related expenses and shipping and handling costs. We expect continued increased costs due to the additional legal, accounting, insurance and other expenses associated with being a public company compared to when we were privately held. We also expect continued legal costs associated with ongoing litigation and government investigations.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table shows our results of operations (in thousands):
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019-By reportable segments
We organize our business into two operating segments based on the product specialties: the vascular segment and the dermatology segment. In deciding how to allocate resources and assess performance, we regularly evaluate the net revenue and gross profit (loss) of these segments. Amounts included within selling, general and administrative expense and research and development expense are general to us and not specific to a particular segment; therefore, these amounts are not evaluated by us on a segmented basis. Additional information on our reportable segments is contained in Note 16 to the financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Net revenue
The following table shows our net revenue from our two segments (in thousands):
Vascular
Net revenue was $0.3 million and $1.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease of approximately $1.0 million was due to decreased catheter unit sales.
We do not expect our net revenue to increase in the near term as we sell catheters only to support our atherectomy clinical study while we focus on remedying the inconsistencies in our DABRA catheter performance and obtaining an atherectomy indication. In addition, we expect net revenue to continue to be negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, as patients elect to postpone voluntary treatments and physicians’ offices are either closed or operating at a reduced capacity. Over the longer term, if we are able to extend the shelf life, introduce design changes to the catheter and obtain an atherectomy indication, we believe we will be able to increase our vascular revenue.
Dermatology
Net revenue was $4.1 million and $5.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease of approximately $1.8 million was due primarily to a decrease of $1.5 million in direct unit product sales and $0.3 million in service revenue due to less activity as a result of COVID-19.
Cost of revenue
The following table shows our cost of revenue from our two segments (in thousands):
Vascular
Cost of revenue was $2.0 million and $4.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The $2.0 million decrease was due to (i) decreased unit sales, (ii) decrease in warranty costs of replacement units, (iii) decrease in stock-based compensation expense, partially offset by increased expenses related to quality enhancement initiatives.
Dermatology
Cost of revenue was $3.5 million and $4.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease of $1.3 million was due to a decrease in direct unit product sales and decreased service costs due to less activity from COVID-19, decreased stock-based compensation expense, partially offset by increased expenses related to quality enhancement initiatives.
Gross (loss) profit
The following table shows our gross (loss) profit from our two segments (in thousands):
Vascular
Gross loss was $1.7 million and $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The $1.1 million decrease in gross loss was primarily due to a decrease in warranty costs of replacement units and decreased stock-based compensation expense, partially offset by increased labor costs due to quality enhancement initiatives and increased overhead due to operating under capacity.
We expect our gross loss to be negatively impacted in the short term as we sell catheters only to support our atherectomy clinical study while we continue efforts to remedy the inconsistencies in our DABRA catheter performance and obtain an atherectomy indication. In addition, we expect the gross loss to continue to be negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, as patients elect to postpone voluntary treatments and physicians’ offices are either closed or operating at a reduced capacity.
Dermatology
Gross profit was $0.6 million and $1.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease of $0.5 million was primarily due to increased labor costs due to quality enhancement initiatives and increased overhead due to operating under capacity.
We expect the gross profit to continue to be negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, as patients elect to postpone voluntary treatments and physicians’ offices are either closed or operating at a reduced capacity.
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019-General
Selling, general and administrative expenses. SG&A expenses were $26.0 million and $51.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $25.5 million decrease was to primarily related to decreases of (i) $17.1 million in stock-based compensation expense, (ii) $4.9 million in salary, benefits, recruiting expenses and other personnel-related costs primarily due to reductions in our sales force, (iii) $3.9 million in travel and trade shows, sales related costs, and marketing, (iv) $0.4 million in legal expense, which represents accruals for loss contingencies, primarily due a $2.7 million settlement for the DOJ False Claims Act investigation, and other litigation matters, offset by decreases in legal services and (v) $0.2 million in other expenses, partially offset by increased insurance expense of $1.0 million.
Research and development expenses. R&D expenses were $9.0 million and $4.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $4.5 million increase was primarily due to increases of $3.1 million in personnel and consulting expenses, $2.1 million in supplies and $0.4 million in other costs, including clinical study expenses, partially offset by decreases of $1.1 million primarily related to stock-based compensation expense. These increases are due to engineering efforts on our next-generation catheters, including increased shelf life and improved deliverability, and also progress on the atherectomy clinical study.
Other income (expense), net. Other income (expense), net was net other income of $21,000 and $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease of $0.8 million is primarily due to a decrease of interest income due to a decrease in cash and cash equivalents during the comparable periods and a decrease in interest expense primarily related to the significant financing component for multi-year warranty service contracts.
Non-GAAP Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are performance measures that provide supplemental information we believe is useful to analysts and investors to evaluate our ongoing results of operations, when considered alongside other GAAP measures. These Non-GAAP Measures exclude the financial impact of items management does not consider in assessing our ongoing operating performance, and thereby facilitate review of our operating performance on a period-to-period basis.
We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance. However, non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Some of these limitations are that:
•
EBITDA excludes certain recurring, non-cash charges such as depreciation and amortization of long-lived assets, although these are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future; and
•
Adjusted EBITDA further excludes stock-based compensation expense, which has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense in our business and an important part of our compensation strategy.
In addition, other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate similarly-titled non-GAAP measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of our non-GAAP financial measures as tools for comparison.
A reconciliation for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with U.S. GAAP is included below. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures, and not to rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business. We define Adjusted EBITDA as our GAAP net loss as adjusted to exclude depreciation and amortization, interest income, interest expense, income tax expense and stock-based compensation.
The following is a reconciliation of Net loss to Adjusted EBITDA:
Adjusted EBITDA was negative $29.6 million compared to negative $32.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change in Adjusted EBITDA reflects decreased selling, general and administrative expenses, including salary, benefits and travel, due to reduced personnel, offset by increased research and development expenses and increased costs and loss estimates related to the ongoing litigation.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $23.9 million and an accumulated deficit of $153.2 million. Our primary sources of capital have been from the sale of our products and services, the net proceeds of $67.3 million from our initial public offering, the net proceeds of $19.1 million from our 2020 public offerings and, to a lesser extent, private placements of common stock and equipment financing arrangements.
In May 2020, we entered into a $2.0 million Paycheck Protection Program Promissory Note and Agreement (“PPP Promissory Note”) with a commercial bank under the Coronavirus Aid Relief, and Economic Security Act. The PPP Promissory Note bears interest at 1.0% per annum. Under the terms of the PPP Promissory Note, payments would be due monthly beginning November 1, 2020 and the principal amount of the PPP Promissory Note along with any unpaid interest would be due on May 3, 2022. On June 5, 2020, the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020 (the “PPPFA”) extended the deferral period for all loans to 10 months after the last day of the covered period. Under the revised terms, payments are due beginning August 2021 and the principal amount along with unpaid interest is due in July 2023. We have requested from our lender an extension of the loan maturity from two years to five years as permitted under the PPPFA. The principal and interest may be forgiven if the proceeds are used for forgivable purposes as defined by the terms in the PPP Promissory Note, and we believe we have used the proceeds from the PPP Promissory Note for forgivable purposes as defined by the terms of the PPP Promissory Note. It is our intent to apply for forgiveness under the provisions of the CARES Act. Forgiveness is subject to the sole approval of the Small Business Administration.
Management expects operating losses and negative cash flows to continue for the foreseeable future with our reduced commercial footprint, and as we continue to incur costs related to our atherectomy clinical trial, engineering efforts to improve the shelf-life of our catheters, and develop next generation products and legal costs associated with ongoing litigation. We also expect the COVID-19 pandemic to have a continued negative impact on its revenue and the timing of enrollment in its atherectomy clinical trial as well as the Company’s ability to secure additional financing in a timely manner or on favorable terms, if at all. In the third quarter of 2019, we began implementing certain operational efficiency and cost savings initiatives intended to align our resources with our product strategy, reduce our operating expenses, and manage our cash flows. These cost efficiency initiatives included targeted workforce reductions of our sales and marketing teams. We reduced the size of our DABRA sales force from 34 employees as of June 30, 2019 to five clinical specialists as of December 31, 2020. In addition, we may need to decrease or defer capital expenditures and development activities to further optimize our operations. Such measures may impair our ability to invest in developing, marketing and selling new and existing products.
We are incurring additional costs as a result of operating as a public company, including increases in legal, accounting, insurance and other expenses. Additionally, we expect legal and related expenses to remain high in the near term in connection with the legal proceedings discussed in Note 15, "Commitments and Contingencies," in the notes to the financial statements.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
our ability to complete our atherectomy trial in a timely manner or at all, which may be affected by reductions in voluntary medical procedures during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic as well as by limitations in our DABRA catheter performance, as described above;
•
the revenue generated by sales of our DABRA and Pharos products, related consumables, and other products that get approved in the U.S. and select non-U.S. markets, as well as the amount of sales personnel required to generate the revenue;
•
our ability to remedy the inconsistencies in our DABRA catheter performance; including extended shelf life and reduce non-calibrations, reduced kinking, and identify future issues;
•
our ability to further enhance our DABRA catheter performance with an improved design to make the catheter more kink-resistant when navigating tortuous anatomy;
•
our ability to develop a guidewire-compatible version of our DABRA catheter designed to allow physicians to navigate the vasculature more easily;
•
our ability to develop a larger diameter catheter to facilitate treatment of larger vessels more commonly seen in above-the-knee procedures;
•
following our voluntary product recall, our ability to achieve market acceptance of DABRA;
•
matters arising out of our completed Audit Committee investigation;
•
the cost, timing and outcomes of any litigation involving our company, products, and business activities, including securities class actions and derivative lawsuits, and government investigations in which we are involved;
•
the extent to which our products are adopted by the physician community;
•
the ability of our customers to obtain adequate reimbursement from third-party payors for procedures performed using DABRA;
•
the degree of success we experience in commercializing our excimer lasers and related consumables;
•
the costs, timing and outcomes of any future clinical studies and regulatory reviews, including to seek and obtain approvals for new indications for our products;
•
the costs and timing of developing variations of our excimer lasers, and, if necessary, obtaining FDA clearance to market such variations;
•
the emergence of competing or complementary technologies;
•
the number and types of future products we develop and commercialize;
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications and maintaining, enforcing and defending intellectual property-related claims; and
•
the level of our selling, general and administrative expenses.
Although we bolstered our liquidity resources in 2020, have an effective shelf registration statement and an “at the market” offering to allow us to raise additional capital when the opportunities permit, and may receive additional funds from the exercise of its warrants depending on market conditions, management concluded that the aforementioned conditions, including the ongoing uncertainty related to the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, continue to raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within 12 months from the date of issuance of the financial statements. Our plans to address this uncertainty include raising additional funding, if necessary, through public or private equity or debt financings. However, we may not be able to secure such financing in a timely manner or on favorable terms, if at all. Furthermore, if we issue equity securities to raise additional funds, our existing stockholders may experience dilution, and the new equity securities may have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of our existing stockholders.
Our financial statements include explanatory disclosures regarding substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Future reports on our financial statements may also include explanatory disclosures with respect to our ability to continue as a going concern. Our financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or amounts of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue our operations.
Cash Flows
Net cash used in operating activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $28.3 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $36.0 million and a decrease in net operating assets of $1.0 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $6.7 million consisting of primarily stock-based compensation expense and depreciation and amortization.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was $33.2 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $57.0 million and an increase in net operating assets of $1.9 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $25.7 million consisting of primarily stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization and allowance for doubtful accounts.
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by investing activities was $15.9 million, consisting of $16.0 million from proceeds of maturities of investments offset by $0.1 million in purchases of equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $16.0 million, consisting of $36.5 million to purchase short-term investments and $0.3 million to purchase manufacturing equipment and vehicles for our sales force to transport our laser equipment, partially offset by $21.0 million from proceeds of sales of investments.
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $21.7 million due to consisting of $19.9 million proceeds, net of placement agent fees, received from our 2020 public offerings, $2.0
million proceeds under the PPP Promissory Note, and $0.8 million proceeds from the exercise of warrants, proceeds from issuance of common stock related to the employee stock purchase plan of $42,000, offset by payments of offering costs of $0.8 million and $0.3 million of payments on our financed equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in financing activities was $0.5 million due to payments on our financed equipment of $0.3 million and payments for taxes on the settlement of restricted stock units of $0.2 million, partially offset by proceeds from issuance of common stock related to the employee stock purchase plan of $37,000.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not engage in transactions that generate relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, as a part of our ongoing business. Accordingly, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements during any of the periods presented.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal obligations consist of the operating leases for our facilities. The following table sets out, as of December 31, 2020, our contractual obligations due by period (in thousands):
(1)
Consists of obligations under multi-year, non-cancelable building leases for our facilities in Carlsbad, California.
(2)
Consists of the Paycheck Protection Program Promissory Note, which we intend to apply for forgiveness under the provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act.
(3)
Consists primarily of obligations under the equipment financing for automobiles.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue recognition
We adopted ASC Topic 606 (Topic 606), Revenue from Contracts with Customers, on January 1, 2019 using the modified retrospective method to all contract agreements not completed as of January 1, 2019. Results for reporting periods beginning after January 1, 2019 are presented under Topic 606 while, as permitted by Topic 606, prior period amounts are not adjusted and continue to be reported under the accounting standards in effect for the prior period. We recorded a cumulative catch up adjustment to beginning accumulated deficit to reflect the impact of adopting Topic 606. The adoption of Topic 606 did not have a material effect on our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We generate revenue from the sale of products and services. Product sales consist of the sale of DABRA and Pharos laser systems, the sale of catheters for use with the DABRA laser, and the sale of consumables and replacement parts. Our sales agreements generally do not include right-of-return provisions for any form of consideration including partial refund or credit against amounts owed to us. Services and other revenue primarily consist of sales of extended warranty and billable services, including repair activity and income from rental of lasers.
We determine revenue recognition incorporating the following steps:
•
Identification of each contract with a customer;
•
Identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•
Determination of the transaction price;
•
Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•
Recognition of revenue when, or as, performance obligations are satisfied.
We account for a contract with a customer when we have a legally enforceable contract with the customer, the arrangement identifies the rights of the parties, the contract has commercial substance, and we determine it is probable that it will collect the contract consideration. We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services transfers to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Taxes collected from customers relating to goods or services and remitted to governmental authorities are excluded from revenue.
Catheter Revenue
We enter into a DABRA laser commercial usage agreement or DABRA laser placement acknowledgement with each customer that is supplied a DABRA laser, collectively the “usage agreement”. The usage agreement provides for specific terms of continued use of DABRA laser, including a nominal periodic fee. The terms of a usage agreement typically allow us to place a DABRA laser at a customer’s specified location without a specified contract term. Under the usage agreement terms, we retain all ownership rights to the DABRA laser and are permitted to request the return of the equipment within 10 business days of notification. While the laser periodic fees are nominal, the laser usage agreements provide us the exclusive rights to supply related single-use catheters to the customer which aggregate the majority of the vascular segment revenue. There are no specified minimum purchase commitments for the catheters.
We recognize revenue associated with the usage agreement and catheter supply arrangements in accordance with Topic 606 as the contract primarily includes variable payments, the catheters are priced at their standalone selling price and the laser equipment is insignificant in the context of the contract. Revenue is recognized when the performance obligation is satisfied, which is generally upon shipment of the catheter.
Laser Sales
Sales of laser systems and are included in product sales in the statements of operations. We recognize revenue on laser sales at the point in time that control transfers to the customer. Control of the product typically transfers upon shipment.
Warranty Service Revenue
We typically provide a 12-month warranty with the purchase of our laser systems. Customers can extend the warranty period through the purchase of extended warranty service contracts. Extended warranty service contracts are sold with contract terms ranging from 12 to 60 months and cover periods after the end of the initial 12-month warranty period. The warranty provides the customer with maintenance services in addition to the assurance that the laser product complies with agreed-upon specifications. Therefore, the warranty service is treated as a separate performance obligation from the laser system. Warranty services are a stand-ready obligation, and we recognize revenue on a straight-line basis over the service contract term. Warranty service revenue is included in service and other revenue in the statements of operations.
Distributor Transactions
In certain markets outside the U.S., we sell products and provide services to customers through distributors that specialize in medical device products. The terms of sales transactions through distributors are generally consistent with the terms of direct sales to customers. We account for these transactions in accordance with our revenue recognition policy described herein.
Contracts with multiple performance obligations
Certain of our contracts with customers contain multiple performance obligations. For these contracts, we account for individual products and services as separate performance obligations if they are distinct, which is if (i) a product or service is separately identifiable from other items in the arrangement and (ii) the customer can benefit from the product or service on its own or with other readily available resources. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. We determine standalone selling prices based on observable prices of products or services sold separately in comparable circumstances to similar customers.
Significant Financing Component
For multi-year warranty service contracts in which there is a difference between the cash selling price and the consideration in the contract and a significant amount of time between the payment, which is due up-front, and delivery of the services (greater than one year), we record an adjustment for significant financing to reflect the time value of money. We recognize revenue associated with the cash selling price and interest expense using the effective interest method as we satisfy our performance obligation(s). The amount of interest expense we recognize over the contract term is based on the contract liability balance, which increases for the accrual of interest and decreases as services are provided.
For services contracts that have an original duration of one year or less, we use the practical expedient applicable to such contracts and does not adjust the transaction price for the time value of money.
Practical expedients elected
As part of our adoption of Topic 606, we elected to use the following practical expedients:
•
not to adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component when we expect, at contract inception, that the period between our transfer of a promised product or service to a customer and when the customer pays for that product or service will be one year or less;
•
to expense costs as incurred for costs to obtain a contract when the amortization period would have been one year or less;
•
to exclude government assessed taxes from the transaction price; and
•
not to recast revenue for contracts that begin and end in the same fiscal year.
Contract Costs
We capitalize costs to obtain contracts that are considered incremental and recoverable, such as sales commissions. The capitalized costs are amortized to selling, general and administrative expense over the estimated period of benefit of the asset, which is the contract term. We elected to use the practical expedient to expense the costs to obtain a contract when the amortization period is less than one year.
Rental Income
We also adopted ASC Topic 842, Leases, on January 1, 2019 using the optional transitional method. There was no adjustment to accumulated deficit at January 1, 2019.
We derive income pursuant to product lease agreements for our Pharos laser systems, as operating leases. Consequently, we retain title to the equipment and the equipment remains on our balance sheet within property and equipment. Depreciation expense on these leased lasers is recorded to cost of revenues on a straight-line basis. The costs to maintain these leased lasers are charged to cost of revenues as incurred.
These lease arrangements contain one lease component (the laser) and one nonlease component (warranty service) for which we elected the practical expedient to not separate the nonlease component from the lease component. We account for the combined lease component as an operating lease and recognizes lease income on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Stock-based compensation
We evaluate whether an award should be classified and accounted for as a liability award or equity award for all stock-based compensation awards granted. There were no liability awards outstanding at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Stock-based compensation expense for equity instruments issued to employees and directors is measured based on estimating the fair value of each stock option on the date of grant using the Black Scholes option pricing model. The fair value of each share of underlying common stock is based on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the date of grant. Expected volatility is based on the historical volatilities of certain “guideline” companies.
Equity instruments issued to nonemployee consultants and service providers are valued using the Black Scholes option pricing model and are subject to revaluation as the underlying equity instruments vest.
We recognize stock-based compensation expense as follows:
Employees
Nonemployees
Service condition only
Straight-line
In the same period and in the same manner as if we paid cash for services.
Performance criterion is probable of being met:
Service criterion is complete
Recognize the grant date fair value of the award once the performance criterion is considered probable of occurrence
Recognize the grant date fair value of the award once the performance criterion is considered probable of occurrence
Service criterion is not complete
Straight-line
Straight-line unless a performance condition is not probable
Performance criterion is not probable of being met
No expense is recognized until the performance criterion is considered probable, at which point expense is recognized per above
No expense is recognized until the performance criterion is considered probable, at which point expense is recognized per above
If factors change and we employ different assumptions, stock-based compensation expense may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the past. If there are any modifications or cancellations of the underlying unvested securities, we may be required to accelerate, increase or cancel any remaining unearned stock-based compensation expense. To the extent that our assumptions are incorrect, the amount of stock-based compensation recorded will change.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities and are measured using enacted tax rates and laws that are expected to be in effect when the differences reverse. Any resulting net deferred tax assets are evaluated for recoverability and, accordingly, a valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes using a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining whether it is more likely
than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. An uncertain tax position is considered effectively settled on completion of an examination by a taxing authority if certain other conditions are satisfied. Should we incur interest and penalties relating to tax uncertainties, such amounts would be classified as a component of interest expense and other expense, respectively.
Jobs Act Accounting Election
An emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this exemption and, therefore, we are not subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies.
New Accounting Pronouncements
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, or other standard setting bodies that are adopted by us as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed, we believe that the impact of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations upon adoption. See Note 2 to the financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of relevant new accounting pronouncements.