Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Rimini Street, Inc. (referred to as the “Company”, “we” and “us”) was incorporated in Delaware on October 10, 2017. As discussed below, the Company’s predecessor was also named Rimini Street, Inc., a company incorporated in the state of Nevada in September 2005 and referred to herein as RSI. References to “management” or “management team” refer to the officers and directors of the Company and/or RSI as its predecessor.
Rimini Street, Inc. (“RSI”) was incorporated in the state of Nevada in September 2005. RSI provides enterprise software support services. In May 2017, RSI entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) with GP Investments Acquisition Corp. (“GPIA”), a publicly-held special purpose acquisition company (“SPAC”) incorporated in the Cayman Islands and formed for the purpose of effecting a business combination with one or more businesses. The Merger Agreement was approved by the respective shareholders of RSI and GPIA in October 2017, and closing occurred on October 10, 2017, resulting in (i) the merger of a wholly-owned subsidiary of GPIA with and into RSI, with RSI as the surviving corporation, after which (ii) RSI merged with and into GPIA, with GPIA as the surviving corporation and renamed “Rimini Street, Inc.” (referred to herein as “RMNI”, as distinguished from RSI, which is defined as the predecessor entity with the same legal name) immediately after consummation of the second merger. As such, the consolidated financial results of the Company for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 presented in the consolidated financial statements reflect the operating results of RSI and its consolidated subsidiaries.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included in Item 8 of this Report. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Risk Factors” in Item 1A and elsewhere in this Report.
Certain figures, such as interest rates and other percentages included in this section have been rounded for ease of presentation. Percentage figures included in this section have not in all cases been calculated on the basis of such rounded figures but on the basis of such amounts prior to rounding. For this reason, percentage amounts in this section may vary slightly from those obtained by performing the same calculations using the figures in our consolidated financial statements or in the associated text. Certain other amounts that appear in this section may similarly not sum due to rounding.
Overview
Rimini Street, Inc. is a global provider of enterprise software support products and services, and the leading independent software support provider for Oracle and SAP products, based on both the number of active clients supported and recognition by industry analyst firms. We founded our company to disrupt and redefine the enterprise software support market by developing and delivering innovative new products and services that fill a then unmet need in the market. We believe we have achieved our leadership position in independent enterprise software support by recruiting and hiring experienced, skilled and proven staff; delivering outcomes-based, value-driven and award-winning enterprise software support products and services; seeking to provide an exceptional client-service, satisfaction and success experience; and continuously innovating our unique products and services by leveraging our proprietary knowledge, tools, technology and processes.
Enterprise software support products and services is one of the largest categories of overall global information technology (“IT”) spending. We believe core enterprise resource planning (“ERP”), customer relationship management (“CRM”), product lifecycle management (“PLM”) and technology software platforms have become increasingly important in the operation of mission-critical business processes over the last 30 years, and also that the costs associated with failure, downtime, security exposure and maintaining the tax, legal and regulatory compliance of these core software systems have also increased. As a result, we believe that licensees often view software support as a mandatory cost of doing business, resulting in recurring and highly profitable revenue streams for enterprise software vendors. For example, for fiscal year 2020, SAP reported that support revenue represented approximately 42% of its total revenue and, for fiscal 2020, Oracle reported a margin of 85% for cloud services and license support.
We believe that software vendor support is an increasingly costly model that has not evolved to offer licensees the responsiveness, quality, breadth of capabilities or value needed to meet the needs of licensees. Organizations are under increasing pressure to reduce their IT costs while also delivering improved business performance through the adoption and integration of emerging technologies, such as mobile, virtualization, internet of things (“IoT”) and cloud computing. Today, however, the majority of IT budget is spent operating and maintaining existing infrastructure and systems. As a result, we believe organizations are increasingly seeking ways to redirect budgets from maintenance to new technology investments that provide greater strategic value, and our software products and services help clients achieve these objectives by reducing the total cost of support.
As of December 31, 2020, we employed approximately 1,420 professionals and supported over 2,480 active clients globally, including 75 Fortune 500 companies and 17 Fortune Global 100 companies across a broad range of industries. We define an active client as a distinct entity, such as a company, an educational or government institution, or a business unit of a company that purchases our services to support a specific product. For example, we count as two separate active client instances in circumstances where we provide support for two different products to the same entity. We market and sell our services globally, primarily through our direct sales force, and have wholly-owned subsidiaries in Australia, Brazil, Canada, UAE (Dubai), France, Germany, Hong Kong, India, Israel, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Singapore, Sweden, Taiwan, the United Kingdom and the United States. We believe our primary competitors are the enterprise software vendors whose products we service and support, including IBM, Microsoft, Oracle and SAP.
Our subscription-based revenue provides a strong foundation for, and visibility into, future period results. We generated revenue of $326.8 million, $281.1 million and $253.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020. 2019, and 2018, respectively, representing a year-over-year increase of 16% and 11% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. We have a history of losses, and as of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $301.7 million. We earned net income of $13.0 million and $17.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and had a net loss of $64.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. We generated approximately 59% of our revenue in the United States and approximately 41% of our revenue from our international business for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Since our inception, we have financed our operations through cash collected from clients and net proceeds from equity financings and borrowings. As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding financial obligations under any note payables.
We intend to continue investing for long-term growth. We have invested and expect to continue investing in expanding our ability to market, sell and provide our current and future products and services to clients globally. We also expect to continue investing in the development and improvement of new and existing products and services to address client needs. We currently do not expect to be profitable in the near future.
Impact of COVID-19
During fiscal year 2020, we continued investing for long-term growth. However, as we neared the end of the first quarter of 2020, the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic took hold and is having widespread, rapidly evolving and unpredictable impacts on global society, economies, financial markets and business practices. Federal and state governments have implemented multiple measures aiming to contain the spread of the virus, including social distancing, travel restrictions, border closures, quarantine guidance following travel to certain jurisdictions, limitations on public gatherings and continued closures of certain non-essential businesses. As a result, to protect the health and well-being of our employees, clients and the communities in which we operate, we transitioned as many of our employees as possible to a work-at-home model, temporarily closed our offices worldwide, placed restrictions on non-essential business travel, transitioned to a no in-person event marketing strategy and implemented a fully remote sales model. We believe these measures have been successful and have not significantly affected our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020. We have implemented business continuity measures and will continue to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic as circumstances dictate.
As a result of the measures that we have taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic described above, we have realized reduced costs of travel, reductions in costs resulting from cancelling certain in-person marketing events, reductions in office operating costs and potential rent abatement related to office closures around the world (that began mid-March 2020 and are expected to continue through at least June 2021). While some of our offices have partially re-opened with limited staffing, our offices will not fully re-open until local authorities permit us to, and our own criteria and conditions to ensure employee health and safety are satisfied. We continue to expect to offset some of these reduced costs with accelerated investments including implementing virtual sales and other marketing programs, special compensation bonuses for lower-paid employees and special compensation bonuses for employees who have tested positive for COVID-19. For example, during fiscal year 2020, we paid COVID-19 special bonuses to certain of our employees to help with pandemic-related special costs and for the few of our employees who have tested positive for COVID-19. We have authorized COVID-19 special bonuses during pandemic that have been paid throughout 2020. The cost of these special bonuses were more than offset by the cost reductions relating to travel and in-person marketing event fees and expenses described above.
The COVID-19 pandemic had no significant net impact on our revenue or results of operations during the year ended December 31, 2020, and we continued to deliver uninterrupted and critical support services to our clients during this period. Our ability to utilize our secure remote-connectivity global infrastructure promotes the safety of our employees while abiding by the restrictions currently in place where they are located throughout the world. While we did implement discounted or extended payment terms for certain of our clients in 2020, in most cases it was in exchange for contractual concessions
favorable to us, for example, extended contract terms or marketing support for references, and the collective impact of such changes was not material to our results. However, the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted business markets worldwide, primarily due to the uncertainty relating to the continued effects of the pandemic. As a result, we have experienced some clients not renewing our services as their businesses have been adversely impacted during the pandemic. Despite this, we expect to continue to be able to market, sell and provide our current and future products and services to clients globally. We also expect to continue investing in the development and improvement of new and existing products and services to address client needs.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business going forward will depend on numerous evolving factors we cannot reliably predict, including the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental and business actions in response to the pandemic; and the impact on economic activity, including the possibility of recession or financial market instability. These factors may adversely impact consumer, business, and government spending on technology as well as our clients’ ability to pay for our services on an ongoing basis. This uncertainty also affects management’s accounting estimates and assumptions, which could result in greater variability in a variety of areas that depend on these estimates and assumptions, including receivables and forward-looking guidance. As such, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our financial results until future periods. Refer to "Risk Factors" (Part I, Item 1A of this Report) for a discussion of these factors and other risks.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act was signed into law in the United States to address the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We have elected to defer payroll tax payments which totaled $3.3 million as of December 31, 2020 as permitted by the CARES Act (such deferred payroll taxes are due in two installments: 50% by December 31, 2021 and 50% by December 31, 2022). We continue to monitor any effects that may result from the CARES Act and other similar legislation or actions in geographies in which our business operates.
Recent Developments
Reference is made to Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Report for a discussion of recent developments related to the securities purchase agreements entered into on October 30, 2020 and January 5, 2021, and the related private placements of Series A Preferred Stock, Common Stock and Convertible Notes.
On August 18, 2020, we completed a firm commitment underwritten public offering (the "August 2020 Offering") of 6.1 million shares of our Common Stock at a price of $4.50 per share for total gross proceeds of $27.5 million. Net proceeds from the August 2020 Offering were approximately $25.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses. We intend to use the net proceeds from the August 2020 Offering for working capital and other general corporate purposes. Reference is made to Note 7 to our unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Report for information about the August 2020 Offering.
Additionally, reference is made to Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Report for a discussion of developments in our litigation with Oracle.
Our Business Model
We believe most enterprise software vendors license the rights for customers to use their software. In a traditional licensing model, the customer typically procures a perpetual software license and pays for the license in a single upfront fee (“Perpetual License”), and base software support services can be optionally procured from the software vendor for an annual fee that averages approximately 22% of the total cost of the software license. In a subscription-based licensing model, such as software as a service, or SaaS, the customer generally pays as it goes for usage of the software on a monthly or annual basis (“Subscription License”). Under a Subscription License, the product license and a base level of software support are generally bundled together as a single purchase, and the base level of software support is not procured separately nor is it an optional purchase.
When we provide base software support for a Perpetual License, we generally offer our clients service for a fee that is equal to approximately 50% of the annual fees charged by the software vendor for their base support. When providing supplemental software support for a Perpetual License, where the client procures our support service in addition to retaining the software vendor’s base support, we generally offer our clients service for a fee that is equal to 25% of the annual fees charged by the software vendor for their base support. For supplemental software support on a Subscription License, we generally offer our clients services for a fee that is equal to 50% of the annual fees charged by the software vendor for their supplemental or premium support. We also offer a special support service, Rimini Street Extra Secure Support, for clients that require a higher level of security clearance for our engineers accessing their system. Rimini Street Extra Secure Support is an additional fee
added to our base or supplemental support fee and is priced at approximately 1% of the software vendor’s annual fees for base maintenance for Perpetual Licenses and at approximately 2% of the subscription fees for Subscription Licenses. Subscriptions for additional software products and services are available, designed to meet specific client needs and we believe provide exceptional value for the fees charged.
Our subscription-based software support products and services offer enterprise software licensees a choice of solutions that replace or supplement the support products and services offered by enterprise software vendors for their products. Features, service levels, service breadth, technology and pricing differentiate our software products and services. We believe clients utilize our software products and services to achieve substantial cost savings; receive more responsive and comprehensive support; obtain support for their customized software that is not generally covered under the enterprise software vendor’s service offerings; enhance their software functionality, capabilities, and data usage; and protect their systems and extend the life of their existing software releases and products. Our products and services enable our clients to keep their mission-critical systems operating smoothly and to remain in tax, legal and regulatory compliance; improve productivity; and better allocate limited budgets, labor and other resources to investments that provide competitive advantage and support growth.
We currently offer most of our support products and services on a subscription basis for a term that is generally 15 years in length with generally an initial, non-cancelable period of two to three years. The negotiated fees extend for the full term of the contract and usually include modest increases (averaging approximately three percent) after the initial non-cancelable period of each contract. For both of the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, approximately 75% of our invoicing was generated inside a non-cancelable period, and approximately 25% of our invoicing was generated outside of a non-cancelable period.
After a non-cancelable period, our clients generally have the ability to terminate their support contracts on an annual basis upon a notice period generally ranging from 60 to 90 days prior to the end of the support period or renegotiate a mutually-agreeable, additional support period - including potentially an additional multi-year, non-cancelable support period. We generally invoice our clients annually in advance of the support period. We record amounts invoiced for support periods that have not yet occurred as deferred revenue on our balance sheet. We net any unpaid accounts receivable amounts relating to cancellable support periods against deferred revenue on our balance sheet.
In November 2019, we announced the global availability of our Application Management Systems ("AMS") for Oracle, which includes coverage for Oracle Database, Middleware and a wide range of Oracle applications including E-Business Suite, JD Edwards, PeopleSoft and Siebel. In addition to leveraging our support services for Oracle that replaces expensive and less robust software vendor annual support with a more responsive and comprehensive support offering, our clients can now have us manage their Oracle systems day-to-day with an integrated application management and support service provided by a single trusted vendor. As an integrated service, we believe we can provide clients a better model, better people, and better outcomes with higher satisfaction and significant savings of time, labor and money. The AMS for Oracle includes system administration, operational support, health monitoring and enhancement support.
In August 2019, we announced plans to globally offer AMS for SAP enterprise software, expanding the scope of support services we will offer clients globally. This AMS service is in addition to our traditional enterprise Support Services. We are already providing this new SAP AMS service to clients in North and South America. The service includes system administration and SAP Basis support, system health monitoring with proactive analysis, preventative system recommendations and event detection; and enhancement support for complex SAP software landscapes.
Our pricing model is a key component of our marketing and sales strategy and we believe delivers significant savings and value to our clients.
Key Business Metrics
Number of clients
Since we founded our company, we have made the expansion of our client base a priority. We believe that our ability to expand our client base is an indicator of the growth of our business, the success of our sales and marketing activities, and the value that our services bring to our clients. We define an active client as a distinct entity, such as a company, an educational or government institution, or a business unit of a company that purchases our services to support a specific product. For example, we count as two separate active clients when support for two different products is being provided to the same entity. As of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we had over 2,480, 2,060 and 1,800 active clients, respectively.
We define a unique client as a distinct entity, such as a company, an educational or government institution or a subsidiary, division or business unit of a company that purchases one or more of our products or services. We count as two separate unique clients when two separate subsidiaries, divisions or business units of an entity purchase our products or services. As of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we had over 1,310, 1,160 and 1,050 unique clients, respectively.
The increase in both our active and unique client counts have been almost exclusively from new unique clients and not from sales of new products and services to existing unique clients. However, as noted previously, we intend to focus future growth on both new and existing clients. We believe that the growth in our number of clients is an indication of the increased adoption of our enterprise software products and services.
Annualized subscription revenue
We recognize subscription revenue on a daily basis. We define annualized subscription revenue as the amount of subscription revenue recognized during a quarter and multiplied by four. This gives us an indication of the revenue that can be earned in the following 12-month period from our existing client base assuming no cancellations or price changes occur during that period. Subscription revenue excludes any non-recurring revenue, which has been insignificant to date. Our annualized subscription revenue was approximately $349 million, $302 million and $271 million as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Revenue retention rate
A key part of our business model is the recurring nature of our revenue. As a result, it is important that we retain clients after the completion of the non-cancelable portion of the support period. We believe that our revenue retention rate provides insight into the quality of our products and services and the value that our products and services provide our clients.
We define revenue retention rate as the actual subscription revenue (dollar-based) recognized in a 12-month period from clients that existed on the day prior to the start of the 12-month period divided by our annualized subscription revenue as of the day prior to the start of the 12-month period. Our revenue retention rate was 92%, 92% and 91% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Gross margin
We derive revenue through the provision of our enterprise software products and services. All the costs incurred in providing these products and services are recognized as part of the cost of revenue. The cost of revenue includes all direct product line expenses, as well as the expenses incurred by our shared services organization which supports all product lines.
We define gross profit as the difference between revenue and the costs incurred in providing the software products and services. Gross margin is the ratio of gross profit divided by revenue. Our gross margin was approximately 61.4%, 62.6% and 62.1% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We believe the gross margin provides an indication of how efficiently and effectively we are operating our business and serving our clients.
Factors Affecting Our Operating Performance
Litigation
The information from Item 3, Legal Proceedings and Item 1A, “Risk Factors--Risks Related to Litigation-“We and our Chief Executive Officer are involved in litigation with Oracle. An adverse outcome in the ongoing litigation could result in the payment of substantial damages and/or an injunction against certain of our business practices, either of which could have a material adverse effect on our business and financial results,” is incorporated by reference herein. For claims on which Oracle has prevailed or may prevail, we have been and could be required to pay substantial damages for our current or past business activities, be enjoined from certain business practices, and/or be in breach of covenants and restrictions related to our Series A Preferred Stock, which could result in the ability of the holders to immediately accelerate the mandatory redemption date with the Redemption Amounts automatically becoming payment obligations pursuant to the Convertible Notes with a concurrent cancellation of the shares of the Series A Preferred Stock. Any of these outcomes could result in a material adverse effect on our business.
Adoption of enterprise software products and services
We believe the existing market for independent enterprise software support services is underserved. We currently provide support services for IBM, Microsoft, SAP, Oracle and other enterprise software vendors’ products. We also believe the existing market for our other enterprise software products and services is underserved, and that we have unique products and services that can meet client needs in the marketplace. For example, we provide the Rimini Street Advanced Database Security product in partnership with McAfee, a global leader in cybersecurity.
We also believe that our total addressable market for our enterprise software products and services is substantially larger than our current client base and the products and services we currently offer. As a result, we believe we have the opportunity to expand our global client base and to further increase adoption of our software products and services within and across existing clients. However, as the market for independent enterprise software support services as well as our other software products and services is still emerging, it is difficult for us to predict the timing of when and if widespread acceptance will occur.
Sales cycle
We sell our services to our clients primarily through our direct sales organization. Our sales cycle, depending on the product or service, typically ranges from six months to a year from when a prospective client is engaged. While we believe that there is a significant market opportunity for our enterprise software products and services, we often must educate prospective clients about the value of our products and services, which can result in lengthy and multiple sales cycles, particularly for larger prospective clients, as well as the incurrence of significant marketing expenses. Our typical sales cycle with a prospective client begins with the generation of a sales lead through trade shows, industry events, online marketing, media interviews and articles, inbound calls, outbound calls or client, analyst or other referral. The sales lead is followed by an assessment of the prospect’s current software license contract terms, systems environment, products and releases being used, needs and objectives.
The variability in our sales cycle for replacement or supplemental software support services is impacted by whether software vendors are able to convince potential clients that they should renew their software maintenance with the existing vendor or procure or renew supplemental support services from the existing vendor, respectively. Another driver of our sales cycle variability is any announcement by a software vendor of their discontinuation, reduction or limitation of support services for a particular software product or release for which we continue to offer a competing support service. In addition, our sales cycle variability is impacted by vendor discounts provided by software companies to retain existing clients or attract potential clients. Finally, our litigation with Oracle can also drive sales cycle variability as clients oftentimes perform their own legal due diligence, which can lengthen the sales cycle.
Key Components of Consolidated Statements of Operations
Revenue. We currently derive nearly all of our revenue from subscription-based contracts for software services. Revenue from these contracts is recognized ratably on a straight-line basis over the applicable service period.
Cost of revenue. Cost of revenue includes salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expenses associated with our technical support and services organization, as well as allocated overhead and non-personnel expenses such as outside services, professional fees and travel-related expenses. Allocated overhead includes overhead costs for depreciation of equipment, facilities (consisting of leasehold improvements and rent) and technical operations (including costs for compensation of our personnel and costs associated with our infrastructure). We recognize expenses related to our technical support and services organization as they are incurred.
Sales and marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for our sales, marketing and business development employees and executives, amortization expense associated with capitalized sales commissions, sales commissions that do not qualify for capitalization, travel related expenses, outside services and allocated overhead. Sales commissions are costs of obtaining customer contracts and are capitalized and then amortized over a period of benefit that we have determined to be 4 years.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for our administrative, legal, human resources, finance and accounting employees and executives. These expenses also include non-employee expenses, such as travel-related expenses, outside services, legal, auditing and other professional fees, and general corporate expenses, along with an allocation of our general overhead expenses.
Litigation costs and related recoveries, net. Litigation costs consist of legal settlements, pre-judgment interest, and third-party professional fees to defend against litigation claims. In the past, we have had liability insurance policies where a portion of our defense costs and litigation judgments or settlements have been reimbursed under the terms of the policies. Such
insurance recoveries were reflected as a reduction of litigation costs upon notification of approval for reimbursement by the insurance company. For legal expenses related to Rimini II litigation, the deferred settlement liability was reduced with a corresponding reduction of legal expenses when the costs were incurred.
Interest expense. Interest expense is incurred under our credit facilities and other debt obligations. The components of interest expense include the amount of interest payable in cash at the stated interest rate, interest that is payable in kind through additional borrowings, make-whole applicable premium, and accretion of debt discounts and issuance costs (“DDIC”) using the effective interest method.
Other debt financing expenses. Other debt financing expenses are incurred pursuant to our former Credit Facility. The components of other debt financing expenses include collateral monitoring fees, unused line fees required to ensure our availability to funding, amortization of DDIC related to the unfunded portion of the Credit Facility, write-off of DDIC related to the funded portion of the Credit Facility in connection with principal prepayments, penalties incurred for not achieving target dates for completing the mergers with GPIA, and fees charged for administrative agent and loan servicing fees.
Gain from change in fair value of embedded derivatives. Our former Credit Facility contained features referred to as embedded derivatives that were required to be bifurcated and recorded at fair value. Embedded derivatives included requirements to pay default interest upon the existence of an event of default, requirements to pay certain target date fees, and to pay “make-whole” interest for certain mandatory and voluntary prepayments of the outstanding principal balance under the Credit Facility. We engaged an independent valuation specialist to perform valuations of the embedded derivatives on a quarterly basis. Changes in the fair value of embedded derivatives were reflected as a non-operating gain or loss in our consolidated statements of operations until July 19, 2018 when the Credit Facility was terminated.
Other expenses, net. Other expenses, net consists primarily of gains or losses on foreign currency transactions, write-off of deferred debt financing costs related to unsuccessful financings, and interest income.
Income tax expense. The provision for income taxes is based on the amount of our taxable income and enacted federal, state and foreign tax rates, as adjusted for allowable credits and deductions. Our provision for income taxes consists primarily of foreign taxes for the periods presented, our taxable income for U.S. federal and state purposes is offset by net operating losses. In addition, because of our lack of domestic earnings history, the domestic net deferred tax assets have been fully offset by a valuation allowance and no tax benefit has been recognized.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Our consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are presented below (in thousands):
_____________________
(1)Includes the portion of costs for information technology, security services and facilities costs that are allocated to cost of revenue. In our consolidated financial statements, such costs are allocated between cost of revenue, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses based primarily on relative headcount, except for facilities which is based on occupancy.
Revenue. Revenue increased from $281.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $326.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $45.7 million or 16%. The vast majority of this increase was driven by a 10% increase in the average number of unique clients, as opposed to existing unique clients subscribing to additional services. On a regional basis, United States revenue grew from $179.7 million for fiscal 2019 to $191.4 million for fiscal 2020, an increase of $11.8 million or 7%, while international revenue grew from $101.4 million for fiscal 2019 to $135.3 million for fiscal 2020, an increase of $34.0 million or 33%. Accelerated growth in our international business was driven by an increase in sales headcount primarily in Asia and Europe and an increase in marketing and advertising spend targeted for prospective clients outside the United States. Our fiscal 2020 versus fiscal 2019 growth in revenue increased from approximately 11% for 2019 to 16% for 2020.
Cost of revenue. Total cost of revenue increased from $105.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $126.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $21.1 million or 20%. This increase was primarily due to additional support for the increasing number of clients that resulted in an increase in employee compensation and benefits of $13.3 million, an increase of engineering consulting costs of $4.7 million, an increase in allocation cost of $2.2 million and an increase in all other costs of $0.9 million.
The $13.3 million increase in cost of revenue attributable to employee compensation and benefits for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to (a) an increase in salaries, wages and benefit costs of $12.9 million due to a 20% increase in the average number of employees devoted to cost of revenue functions, annual pay increases, and increased bonus payouts. In addition, stock based compensation increased $0.2 million and sabbatical expense increased by $0.2 million from the prior year. Our sabbatical benefit plan began in May 2018, and provides full time employees that achieve 10 years of
service with a one-month paid sabbatical leave, and the grant of restricted stock units (“RSU’s”) with a fair value on the date of grant of $10,000 that vest over the subsequent 12-month period.
As discussed in Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report, in August 2018 Oracle obtained a permanent injunction from the District Court that prohibits us from using certain processes that could require us to incur additional labor costs to provide support for our clients as contracted. In September 2018, the Company filed a motion with the Court of Appeals, seeking a stay of the permanent injunction pending appeal and requesting a decision before the expiration of the temporary stay entered by the District Court. In November 2018, the Court of Appeals denied the Company’s motion for a stay pending appeal of the injunction issued by the District Court without addressing the merits of the Company’s appeal, and it confirmed the briefing schedule for the appeal. The briefing on our appeal to the Court of Appeals was completed in March 2019, and a hearing on our appeal occurred in July 2019. In August 2019, the Court of Appeals entered an order affirming the permanent injunction and the award of attorneys’ fees that were previously paid to Oracle. However, the Court of Appeals agreed that the injunction was overbroad in two respects and instructed the District Court to remove the restriction on “local hosting” of J.D. Edwards and Siebel software and the prohibition against “accessing” J.D. Edwards and Siebel software source code. Since the date the temporary stay was lifted on the permanent injunction, we have incurred and will continue to incur additional expenses in the range of 1% to 2% of revenue for additional labor costs because, as drafted, the injunction contains language that could be read to cover some current support practices that are being litigated in the “Rimini II” lawsuit and that have not been found to be infringing.
Gross Profit. Gross profit increased from $175.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $200.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $24.6 million or 14%. Gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2019 was 62.6% compared to 61.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $45.7 million or 16% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Total cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $21.1 million, or 20%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2010. Given that the increase in the cost of revenue was 20% compared to the increase in revenue of 16%, it resulted in a slight decline in gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The lower gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the increase in employee compensation and employee benefits as well as engineering consulting costs.
Sales and marketing expenses. As a percentage of our revenue, sales and marketing expenses have decreased from 38% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 35% for the year ended December 31, 2020. In dollar terms, sales and marketing expenses increased from $107.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $114.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $7.5 million or 7%. This increase was primarily due to (i) a $4.1 million increase in employee compensation and benefits as a result of a 4% increase in average headcount, (ii) an increase in marketing and promotional costs as well as advertising costs of $6.0 million, (iii) an increase of all other costs of $1.2 million, (iv) an increase in contract labor of $0.9 million and (v) an increase in recruiting costs of $0.5 million. These increases were offset by a decline in trade show expenses of $2.8 million and a reduction of travel expenses of $2.8 million.
The $4.1 million increase in sales and marketing expense attributable to employee compensation and benefits for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to an increase in (i) salaries, wages and benefit costs of $3.2 million due to a 4% increase in the average number of employees devoted to sales and marketing functions, annual pay increases, and higher bonus payouts and (ii) commissions of $0.9 million due to new customer wins in excess of the prior year. Our overall spending increased as we attempt to accelerate our future revenue growth by investing in more resources.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses increased from $47.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $52.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $4.9 million or 10%. This increase was primarily due to (i) increases in compensation and benefit costs of $7.9 million, (ii) an increase in computer software and license costs of $1.7 million, (iii) an increase of outside services of $1.6 million, (iv) an increase in rent of $1.0 million and (v) and increase in other costs of $0.9 million. These unfavorable variances were offset, in part, by (i) a favorable increase in administrative allocations of $2.3 million, (ii) a reduction in travel costs of $2.0 million, (iii) a decline in recruitment costs of $0.9 million and (iv) a decrease of sales and other related taxes of $0.8 million.
The $7.9 million increase in general and administrative expenses attributable to employee compensation and benefits for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to an increase in salaries, wages and benefit costs of $6.8 million due to a 15% increase in the average number of employees devoted to general and administrative functions, annual pay increases, and increased bonus payouts, and an increase of $1.1 million in stock-based compensation expense.
Looking forward, we expect to continue to incur higher expenses associated with supporting the growth of our business, both in terms of size and geographical diversity, and to meet the increased compliance requirements associated with
being a public company. Public company costs that are expected to increase in the future include additional information systems costs, costs for additional personnel in our accounting, human resources, IT and legal functions, SEC and Nasdaq fees, and incremental professional, legal, audit and insurance costs. As a result, we currently expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in dollar terms in future periods.
Impairment charges related to operating lease right-of-use assets. We recognized an impairment charge of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, related to one of our office leases as we ceased use of a portion of the office space due to increased use of remote work which has occurred during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Litigation costs and related recoveries, net. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, litigation costs and related recoveries, net consist of the following (in thousands):
Professional fees and other defense costs associated with litigation increased from $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $5.5 million. This increase was primarily due to increased costs associated with discovery work on the Rimini II litigation and the Rimini I appeal during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Litigation appeal refunds decreased from $12.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to none for the year ended December 31, 2020. In May 2018, we appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court for approximately $12.8 million of the District Court's award of non-taxable expenses related to the judgment. On March 4, 2019, the U.S. Supreme Court issued a unanimous decision reversing earlier decisions by the lower courts and ruling that Oracle must return approximately $12.8 million in non-taxable expenses that we had previously paid to Oracle (plus interest). As described in Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Report, as mandated by the U.S. Supreme Court, on April 5, 2019, Oracle paid us approximately $13.0 million (the principal amount plus post-judgment interest). As a result, we recognized a recovery of non-taxable expenses for $12.8 million and recorded interest income of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The award received is required to be shared on a pro rata basis with an insurance company, which had previously paid for part of the judgment and reimbursed a portion of defense costs, after deducting the costs of all of our past and pending appeal and remand proceedings in Rimini I.
Insurance costs and related recoveries, net decreased from a net cost of $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to net cost of $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We recognized costs of $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting the estimate of the amounts owed to the insurance company at that time. The liability, noted above, was subject to change as additional costs related to any future Rimini I appeal and remand proceedings were incurred. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized costs of $1.1 million to revise the amount due to the insurance company (for portions of the Court of Appeals and U.S. Supreme Court awards), which was paid in September 2020. We are self-insured for any costs related to any current or future intellectual property litigation. We currently believe our cash on hand, accounts receivable and contractually committed backlog provides us with sufficient liquidity to cover costs related to our litigation with Oracle.
Interest expense. Interest expense decreased from $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.3 million. Interest expense decreased due to a reduction in accretion expense of $0.2 million related to the GP Sponsor note payable. The GP Sponsor note was paid off on June 28, 2019. Interest expense related to capital leases also decreased by approximately $0.1 million.
Other expenses, net. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had other expenses, net of $1.5 million as compared to other expenses net of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1.2 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, other expense, net was primarily comprised of foreign exchange losses of $77 thousand and other non-operating expenses of $0.2 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, other expense, net of $1.5 million was primarily comprised of foreign exchange losses of $1.6 million and other non-operating expenses of $0.2 million. The amounts were partially offset by interest income of $0.2 million related to the U.S. Supreme Court decision.
Income tax expense. Income tax expense increased from $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.9 million or 68%. Our foreign earnings before income taxes increased from $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.3 million. The provision for income taxes is based on the amount of our taxable income and enacted federal, state and foreign tax rates, as adjusted for allowable credits and deductions. Our provision for income taxes consists primarily of foreign taxes for the periods presented, as our taxable income for U.S. federal and state purposes is offset by net operating losses. In addition, because of our lack of domestic earnings history, the domestic net deferred tax assets have been fully offset by a valuation allowance and no tax benefit has been recognized.
Comparison of Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Our consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 are presented below (in thousands):
_____________________
(1)Includes the portion of costs for information technology, security services and facilities costs that are allocated to cost of revenue. In our consolidated financial statements, such costs are allocated between cost of revenue, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses based primarily on relative headcount, except for facilities which is based on occupancy.
Revenue. Revenue increased from $253.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $281.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $27.6 million or 11%. The vast majority of this increase was driven by a 13% increase in the average number of unique clients, as opposed to existing unique clients subscribing to additional services. On a regional basis, United States revenue grew from $163.7 million for fiscal 2018 to $179.7 million for fiscal 2019, an increase of $15.9 million or 10%, while international revenue grew from $89.8 million for fiscal 2018 to $101.4 million for fiscal 2019, an increase of $11.6 million or 13%. Accelerated growth in our international business was driven by an increase in sales headcount primarily in Asia and Europe and an increase in marketing and advertising spend targeted for prospective clients outside the United States.
Our former Credit Facility included covenants that restricted our spending on sales and marketing activity that resulted in sequential quarterly reductions in new business activity during fiscal 2018. These covenants became less restrictive beginning on October 10, 2017 when the Credit Facility was amended, and all covenants were eliminated on July 19, 2018 as a result of the termination of the Credit Facility. The October 2017 amendment allowed us to increase our sales and marketing spending beginning in the fourth quarter of 2017. However, even though we are currently increasing our sales and marketing spending, it can take several quarters before these efforts are expected to translate into revenue, if at all. In addition, beginning in the second quarter of 2017, some potential sales transactions were adversely affected by certain competitive actions, and we are encountering increased competitive discounting by enterprise software vendors. As a result, our fiscal 2019 versus fiscal 2018 growth in revenue decreased from approximately 18% for 2018 to 11% for 2019.
Cost of revenue. Total cost of revenue increased from $96.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $105.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $9.1 million or 10%. This increase was primarily due to additional support for the increasing number of clients that resulted in an increase in employee compensation and benefits of $6.4 million and an increase in contract labor costs of $2.7 million.
The $6.4 million increase in cost of revenue attributable to employee compensation and benefits for the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to (a) an increase in salaries, wages and benefit costs of $7.1 million due to a 10% increase in the average number of employees devoted to cost of revenue functions, annual pay increases, and increased bonus payouts, offset by a decrease of $0.7 million in sabbatical expense. Our sabbatical benefit plan began in May 2018, and provides full time employees that achieve 10 years of service with a one-month paid sabbatical leave, and the grant of restricted stock units (“RSU’s”) with a fair value on the date of grant of $10,000 (the RSU’s then vest over the subsequent 12-month period).
Gross Profit. Gross profit increased from $157.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 compared to $175.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $18.5 million or 12%. Gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2018 was 62.1% compared to 62.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $27.6 million or 11% compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Total cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $9.1 million, or 10%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Given that the increase in the cost of revenue was 10% compared to the increase in revenue of 11%, it resulted in a slightly improved gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The improved gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily the result of a reduction in all other costs, largely driven by a $1.6 million decrease in travel and business meeting costs as we did not hold our Global Service Delivery conference during 2019, which our support team attends.
Sales and marketing expenses. As a percentage of our revenue, sales and marketing expenses have increased from 35% for the year ended December 31, 2018 to 38% for the year ended December 31, 2019. In dollar terms, sales and marketing expenses increased from $89.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $107.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $17.8 million or 20%. This increase was primarily due to (i) a $15.8 million increase in employee compensation and benefits as a result of a 19% increase in average headcount, (ii) an increase in shared service allocations for facilities, security and technology of $2.7 million to support more employees, (iii) a $0.9 million increase in contract labor, and (iv) an increase of $0.4 million for all other costs. These increases were offset in part by (i) a $1.5 million decrease in travel and business meeting costs as we did not hold our sales kickoff meeting during 2019, (ii) a $0.5 million decrease in marketing and advertising costs, and (iii) a decrease in employee recruitment costs of $0.2 million.
The $15.8 million increase in sales and marketing expense attributable to employee compensation and benefits for the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to an increase in (i) salaries, wages and benefit costs of $11.6 million due to a 19% increase in the average number of employees devoted to sales and marketing functions, annual pay increases, and higher bonus payouts and (ii) commissions of $4.6 million due to new customer wins in excess of the prior year and (iii) an unfavorable impact of $2.8 million as a result of adopting ASC 606 as less commissions were capitalized in 2019. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in costs of $0.3 million associated with our sabbatical benefit plan adopted in May 2018.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses increased from $37.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $47.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $10.2 million or 27%. This increase was primarily due to (i) increases in compensation and benefit costs of $5.9 million, (ii) increases in sales tax expense and other taxes of $4.5 million due to recording a larger sales tax benefit in 2018, (iii) an increase in contract labor of $1.8 million, and (iv) an increase of computer supplies and software costs for $1.3 million.
These increases which total $13.5 million were partially offset by an increase in general and administrative allocations out to other departments of $4.3 million driven primarily by increased headcount in 2019.
The $5.9 million increase in general and administrative expenses attributable to employee compensation and benefits for the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to (i) an increase in salaries, wages and benefit costs of $4.9 million due to a 11% increase in the average number of employees devoted to general and administrative functions, annual pay increases, and increased bonus payouts, and (ii) an increase of $1.1 million in stock-based compensation expense. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $0.2 million of sabbatical benefit plan costs.
Litigation costs and related recoveries, net. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, litigation costs and related recoveries, net consist of the following (in thousands):
Professional fees and other defense costs associated with litigation decreased from $30.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $22.1 million. This decrease was primarily due to lower costs associated with discovery work on the Rimini II litigation, the Rimini I appeal, and the United States Attorney's Office (the "USAO") inquiry during 2019 compared to 2018. In addition, the Company resolved a dispute with a vendor, which resulted in a non-recurring benefit of $1.8 million to professional fees and litigation costs during 2019.
Litigation appeal refunds decreased from $21.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $12.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Over a six-year period through October 2016, we were actively engaged in the Rimini I litigation, for which we paid a judgment of $124.4 million in October 2016. On March 31, 2018, Oracle paid us approximately $21.5 million including post-judgment interest of $0.2 million for the reversal of the award under state computer access statutes mandated by the Court of Appeals. Due to the collection of this award in cash, we recognized a recovery of the 2016 judgment for $21.3 million and interest income of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
In May 2018, we also appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court for approximately $12.8 million of the District Court's award of non-taxable expenses related to the judgment. On March 4, 2019, the U.S. Supreme Court issued a unanimous decision reversing earlier decisions by the lower courts and ruling that Oracle must return approximately $12.8 million in non-taxable expenses that we had previously paid to Oracle (plus interest). As further described in Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Report, as mandated by the U.S. Supreme Court, on April 5, 2019, Oracle paid us approximately $13.0 million (the principal amount plus post-judgment interest). As a result, we recognized a recovery of non-taxable expenses for $12.8 million and recorded interest income of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The award received is required to be shared on a pro rata basis with an insurance company, which had previously paid for part of the judgment and reimbursed a portion of defense costs, after deducting the costs of all of our past and pending appeal and remand proceedings in Rimini I.
Insurance costs and related recoveries, net increased from a net recovery of $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to net cost of $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the first quarter of 2018, Rimini II legal fees exceeded the $8.0 million balance of the deferred settlement liability which was eliminated through the recognition of insurance recoveries. As a result, we recognized an $8.0 million deferred gain for the year ended December 31, 2018 offset by $0.4 million owed to an insurance company. As noted above, we recognized costs of $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 reflecting our current estimate of the amounts owed to the insurance company to date from the amounts refunded by Oracle from the Rimini I litigation. The liability is subject to decrease as additional costs related to any future Rimini I appeal and remand proceedings are incurred. We expect this liability to be settled in the second quarter of 2020.
Interest expense. Interest expense decreased from $32.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $32.1 million. Reductions in interest expense were primarily due to the payoff of the former Credit Facility on July 19, 2018, including reductions in (i) interest payable at 12.0% of $7.5 million, (ii) PIK interest payable at 3.0% of $1.9 million, (iii) accretion expense of $11.7 million, and (iv) make-whole applicable premium of $3.1 million, (v) a make-whole applicable premium of $7.3 million upon payoff of the Credit Facility on July 19, 2018, and (vi) an decrease in accretion of $0.7 million related to the GP Sponsor note payable. The note was paid off on June 28, 2019.
Other debt financing expenses. Other debt financing expenses were $58.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 and were none for the year ended December 31, 2019. The debt financing expenses in fiscal year 2018 were primarily attributable to the payoff of the Credit Facility on July 19, 2018, which resulted in charges for the write-off of DDIC for the funded debt of $44.6 million and the unfunded debt of $2.8 million. In addition, there were other costs which were not incurred during 2019 due the payoff of the Credit Facility such as write-offs of DDIC due to mandatory prepayments of $7.2 million, collateral monitoring fees of $1.6 million and amortization as well as unused line fees.
Gain from change in fair value of embedded derivatives. Upon the termination of the former Credit Facility on July 19, 2018, we no longer recognized a liability for embedded derivatives associated with this instrument and recognized a corresponding gain in the third quarter of 2018. As a result, we recognized a gain of $1.6 million due to the change in fair value of embedded derivatives for the year ended December 31, 2018. There was no corresponding activity due to the termination of the former Credit Facility in 2018, resulting in no gain or loss being recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other expenses, net. For the year ended December 31, 2018, we had other expense, net of $2.2 million as compared to other expense, net of $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $0.7 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, other expense, net was primarily comprised of foreign exchange losses of $1.6 million and other non-operating expenses of $0.2 million. The amounts were partially offset by interest income of $0.2 million related to the U.S. Supreme Court decision. For the year ended December 31, 2018, other expense, net of $2.2 million was primarily comprised of foreign exchange losses of $1.4 million, and write-off of deferred financing costs of $0.7 million related to an unsuccessful debt financing, and other non-operating expenses of $0.3 million. These amounts, which total $2.4 million, were partially offset by post-judgment interest on the litigation appeal award of $0.2 million.
Income tax expense. Income tax expense increased from $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $0.7 million or 36%. Substantially all of our income tax expense is attributable to our foreign operations. Our foreign earnings before income taxes increased from $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $0.4 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of December 31, 2020, we had a working capital deficit of $62.1 million and we had an accumulated deficit of $301.7 million. We recorded net income of $13.0 million and $17.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and a net loss of $64.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
A key component of our business model generally requires that customers prepay us annually for the services we will provide over the following year or longer. As a result, we collect cash from our customers in advance of when the related service costs are incurred, which resulted in deferred revenue of $229.0 million that is included in current liabilities as of December 31, 2020. Therefore, we believe that working capital deficit is not as meaningful in evaluating our liquidity since the costs of fulfilling our commitments to provide services to customers are currently limited to approximately 39% of the related deferred revenue based on our gross margin of 61% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
We have contractual obligations of approximately $25.6 million that are due during the 12 months ending December 31, 2020. This amount consists of (i) Series A Preferred Stock dividends payable in cash of approximately $14.8 million and (ii) operating and capital lease payments of $6.4 million.
For the next 12 months, we believe that cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash of $87.9 million as of December 31, 2020, plus future cash flow from operating activities will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs including working capital requirements, planned capital expenditures, and our contractual obligations of approximately $25.6 million that are due during the 12 months ending December 31, 2021.
As discussed below in greater detail, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated cash flows from our operating activities of $42.1 million, which were derived from cash earnings of $29.1 million and favorable changes in operating assets and liabilities of $13.0 million. We believe our operating cash flows for the year ending December 31, 2020 will be sufficient to fund the portion of our contractual obligations that is not funded with existing capital resources.
Private Placement
The holders of Series A Preferred Stock are entitled to, from the respective issuance date, a cash dividend of 10.0% per annum and a payment-in-kind dividend of 3.0% per annum for the first five years following the initial June 2018 closing and thereafter all dividends accruing on such Series A Preferred Stock will be payable in cash at a rate of 13.0% per annum. Assuming no redemptions of the Series A Preferred Stock and no conversions to Common Stock, the following cash and PIK dividends (settled through issuance of additional shares of Series A Preferred Stock), regarding the combined June 2019 Private Placement, March 2019 Private Placement and Initial Private Placement, are expected to accrue for each year from January 1, 2020 through July 19, 2023 (in thousands):
This refinancing improved our liquidity and capital resources whereby future financing cash payments are expected to be limited to annual cash dividends ranging from $14.8 million to $15.2 million through July 19, 2023.
Please refer to Notes 6 and 13 to the audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report for further details about the Series A Preferred Stock including (i) mandatory redemption rights, (ii) the security agreement and Convertible Notes that may become payable pursuant to certain redemption provisions, (iii) rights to convert to shares of Common Stock, (iv) registration rights, and (v) voting rights and preferences in liquidation.
Interest rates in the United States are subject to market changes. Therefore, any future equity or debt refinancing may be affected by the timing and overall interest rate environment in effect at such time.
Note Payable to GP Sponsor
Upon consummation of the merger with GP Investments Acquisition Corp. ("GPIA") in May 2017, an outstanding note payable to GP Sponsor with an initial face amount of approximately $3.0 million was assumed by the Company. This note was originally non-interest bearing and was not due and payable until the outstanding principal balance under the former Credit Facility was less than $95.0 million. At the inception of this note, the maturity date was expected to occur in June 2020 based on the scheduled principal payments under the Credit Facility. Interest was initially imputed under this note payable at the rate of 15.0% per annum. This note payable was amended twice in 2018, which resulted in further changes to the effective interest rate and maturity date.
The second amendment to the loan agreement was effective on December 21, 2018 and provided for an extension of the maturity date from January 4, 2019 to June 28, 2019. In addition, the parties agreed that the note payable would retroactively bear interest at 13.0% per annum from July 19, 2018 through the maturity date. Total retroactive interest amounted to $0.2 million, which is accounted for as DDIC that was being accreted through the maturity date. The Company recognized accretion expense of $0.2 million and $0.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
In addition, the second amendment provided for monthly principal payments starting in December 2018 of approximately $0.4 million plus accrued interest. In December 2018, the Company made a payment of $0.6 million, primarily consisting of payment of retroactive interest of $0.2 million and the first monthly principal payment of $0.4 million. The Company made principal and interest payments totaling $2.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The effective interest rate for accretion of DDIC was 26.4% for the period from December 21, 2018 through June 28, 2019. The note was paid off on June 28, 2019.
Former Credit Facility
In June 2016, the Company entered into a multi-draw term loan Financing Agreement (the “Credit Facility”) with a syndicate of lenders (the “Lenders”). The Credit Facility would have matured in June 2020 but was repaid and terminated in July 2018 as discussed below. The Credit Facility provided for an aggregate commitment of up to $125.0 million which consisted of an initial term loan for $30.0 million, a “delayed draw A Term Loan” for $65.0 million, and a “delayed draw B Term Loan” for $30.0 million. An origination fee equal to 5.0% of the $125.0 million commitment was paid in cash to the Lenders from the proceeds of the initial term loan. The Credit Facility provided for an Original Issue Discount (“OID”) of 2.0% of the initial face amount of borrowings. Origination fees and OID were accounted for as DDIC.
Borrowings under the Credit Facility were collateralized by substantially all assets of the Company, including certain cash depository accounts that were subject to control agreements with the Lenders.
The outstanding principal balance under the former Credit Facility provided for monthly interest payments at 15.0% per annum, consisting of 12.0% per annum that was payable in cash and 3.0% per annum that was payable through the issuance of additional borrowings beginning on the interest payment due date (referred to as paid-in-kind, or “PIK” interest). In addition, a make-whole applicable premium payment of approximately 15.0% per annum through June 2019 was required for certain principal prepayments.
The Credit Facility provided for collateral monitoring fees at the rate of 2.5% of the outstanding principal balance during 2018 until the Credit Facility was terminated. The Credit Facility also required unused line fees of 5.0% per annum on the $17.5 million undrawn portion of the Credit Facility during 2018 until the termination date. All unused line fees and collateral monitoring fees were payable monthly in arrears and were recorded as a component of other financing expenses in the period incurred.
DDIC that relates to the entire Credit Facility was allocated pro rata between the funded and unfunded portions of the Credit Facility based on the relative amounts that were cumulatively borrowed versus the undrawn portion of the $125.0 million commitment. DDIC related to funded debt was accreted to interest expense using the effective interest method based on the aggregate principal obligations to the Lenders and consulting and Trigger Event exit fee obligations to one of the lenders that served as the origination agent (the “Origination Agent”). DDIC associated with unfunded debt was amortized using the straight-line method from the date incurred through the maturity date of the Credit Facility, which was included in other debt financing expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
In connection with the closing on July 19, 2018 of the Initial Private Placement discussed in Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report, we used substantially all of the $133.0 million of cash proceeds to repay all outstanding indebtedness and fees under the Credit Facility, and the Credit Facility was terminated. The aggregate cash payments to terminate the Credit Facility amounted to $132.8 million and consisted of the following (in thousands):
Cash Flows Summary
Presented below is a summary of our operating, investing and financing cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands):
Cash Flows Provided by Operating Activities
A key component of our business model generally requires that customers prepay us annually for the services we will provide over the following year or longer. As a result, we collect cash in advance of the date when the vast majority of the related services are provided. During 2020, we focused on our collection efforts as the COVID-19 pandemic emerged to
minimize the unfavorable impact of our accounts receivable. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, cash flows provided by operating activities amounted to $42.1 million, $20.4 million and $22.4 million, respectively. The key components in the calculation of our cash provided by operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, are as follows (in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash flows provided by operating activities amounted to $42.1 million. We recognized net income of $13.0 million, non-cash expenses of $16.2 million and favorable changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of $13.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For year ended December 31, 2020, the non-cash expenses, net amounted to $16.2 million and were comprised of stock-based compensation expense of $7.5 million, amortization and accretion related to ROU assets and liabilities of $6.2 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $1.8 million and a non-cash impairment charge related to a ROU asset of $1.2 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, changes in operating assets and liabilities were favorable by $13.0 million to the operating cash flows due to an increase of deferred revenue of $22.7 million, a decrease in prepaid expenses, deposits and other assets of $3.2 million, an increase in accrued liabilities of $1.6 million and an increase in accounts payable of $0.9 million. These favorable changes were offset by unfavorable changes in accounts receivable for $8.5 million and deferred contract costs for $6.9 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash flows provided by operating activities amounted to $20.4 million. We recognized net income of $17.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and non-cash expenses of $7.4 million, which were offset by unfavorable changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of $4.6 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, non-cash expenses, net amounted to $7.4 million and were primarily comprised of stock-based compensation expense of $5.5 million and depreciation and amortization expense of $1.9 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, changes in operating assets and liabilities were unfavorable by $4.6 million to operating cash flows primarily due to cash uses related to an increase in accounts receivable of $31.2 million, an increase in prepaid expenses, deposits and other assets of $9.2 million, an increase in deferred contract costs of $1.0 million and a decline in accounts payable for $10.5 million. These cash uses were offset by sources of cash from customer cash collections that resulted from an increase of deferred revenue for $39.1 million and an increase in accrued liabilities of $8.3 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, cash flows provided by operating activities amounted to $22.4 million. While we recognized a net loss of $64.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, non-cash expenses mitigated the cash impact of our net loss. For the year ended December 31, 2018, net non-cash expenses amounted to $74.9 million and were primarily comprised of the write-off of DDIC of $54.5 million, accretion and amortization expense of $13.3 million, and stock-based compensation expense of $4.4 million. Additionally, make-whole applicable premium of $10.4 million is an expense included in our net loss that was classified as a financing cash outflow since it related to the prepayment of principal under our Credit Facility.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, changes in operating assets and liabilities contributed $1.1 million of positive operating cash flows primarily due to customer cash collections that resulted from an increase of deferred revenue for $29.0 million, a decrease in prepaid expenses and other of $0.6 million, and an increase in accounts payable of $2.9 million, which were partially offset by a use of cash from an increase of accounts receivable for $18.0 million, a reduction in the deferred insurance settlement liability of $8.0 million, an increase in deferred contract costs of $3.7 million and a reduction in accrued liabilities of $1.5 million.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
Cash flows used in investing activities were primarily driven by capital expenditures for leasehold improvements and computer equipment as we continued to invest in our business infrastructure and advance our geographic expansion. Such capital expenditures totaled $1.5 million, $1.9 million and $1.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018,
respectively. From June 2016 when we entered into the Credit Facility until the termination of the Credit Facility in July 2018, we were subject to covenants in the Credit Facility that restricted our capital expenditures.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, capital expenditures of $1.5 million consisted of new computer equipment and leasehold improvements of $0.8 million for our U.S. facilities, and $0.7 million for computer equipment at our foreign locations, primarily in India.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, capital expenditures of $1.9 million consisted of new computer equipment of $0.9 million for our U.S. facilities, and $0.5 million for computer equipment and software for our facility in India, and $0.1 million for computer equipment and software at our facility in Brazil.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, capital expenditures of $1.1 million consisted of new computer equipment of $0.5 million for our U.S. facilities, and $0.3 million for computer equipment and software for our facility in India, and $0.1 million for computer equipment and software at our facility in Brazil.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities of $6.4 million was attributable to net proceeds of $25.7 million generated from our August 2020 Offering and proceeds of $1.8 million received from stock option exercises. These cash proceeds were offset by dividend payments of $15.8 million, payments of $4.5 million related to repurchasing 5,000 shares of the Series A Preferred Stock, payments for professional fees associated with our August 2020 Offering of $0.6 million and capital lease payments of $0.3 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in financing activities was $5.7 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash utilized in financing activities consisted of dividend payments of $14.7 million, payments of $2.6 million on our GP Sponsor loan, payments of $0.5 million related to the transaction costs for both the June 2019 SPA and March 2019 SPA and capital lease payments of $0.4 million. These costs were offset, in part, by proceeds received of $9.1 million from both the June 2019 SPA and March 2019 SPA transactions and proceeds received of $3.3 million from the stock option exercises.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, cash used in financing activities was $34.8 million. For the year ended December 31, 2018, sources of cash from financing activities were comprised of $133.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of Series A Preferred Stock and Common Stock in the Private Placement, and $2.0 million from the exercise of stock options. For the year ended December 31, 2018, our financing activities resulted in cash outflows that totaled $169.8 million. The key uses of cash from financing activities consisted of (i) payments under the Credit Facility for principal and other contractual obligations of $145.8 million, (ii) make-whole applicable premium payments of $10.4 million, (iii) payments for DDIC and other financing costs of $5.9 million and payments for deferred offering costs related to the Private Placement of $4.3 million (totaling $10.2 million), and (v) principal payments under capital lease obligations of $0.6 million. Principal payments under the Credit Facility consisted of a mandatory prepayment in April 2018 of $17.9 million from collection of the Rimini I appeal award, $2.0 million of mandatory consulting fees under the Credit Facility in June 2018, scheduled principal payments of $7.3 million, and a cash payment of $118.2 million upon payoff of the Credit Facility on July 19, 2018. Payments for DDIC and other financing costs totaled $5.9 million, which consisted of $5.0 million of Credit Facility amendment fees that were incurred in 2017, and $0.7 million related to an unsuccessful debt financing that was charged to expense for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Foreign Subsidiaries
Our foreign subsidiaries and branches are dependent on our U.S.-based parent for continued funding. We currently do not intend to repatriate any amounts that have been invested overseas back to the U.S.-based parent. The imposition of the Transition Tax set forth in the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 may reduce or eliminate U.S. federal deferred taxes on the unremitted earnings of our foreign subsidiaries. However, we may still be liable for withholding taxes, state taxes, or other income taxes that might be incurred upon the repatriation of foreign earnings. We have not made any provision for additional income taxes on undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $42.6 million in our foreign subsidiaries.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations on an undiscounted basis as of December 31, 2020, and the period in which each contractual obligation is due (in thousands):
____________________________________
(1)PIK Dividends are accrued quarterly in arrears at 3.0% per annum for the first five years following the July 19, 2018 original issuance date. The accrued PIK Dividends are settled quarterly through the issuance of additional shares of Series A Preferred Stock. Accordingly, the PIK shares of Series A Preferred Stock may be converted to Common Stock or subject to the holders' redemption rights beginning on July 19, 2023 (and earlier under certain circumstances).
(2)As discussed in Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report, the Series A Preferred Stock will become mandatorily redeemable, upon the election by the holders of a majority of the then outstanding Preferred Stock, on or after July 19, 2023. For purposes of this table, we have assumed that holders of Series A Preferred Stock do not elect to exercise their right to convert to Common Stock and we do not elect to redeem any shares prior to July 19, 2023. Rather, we have assumed that the holders elect to require us to redeem all outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock on July 19, 2023 for the entire liquidation preference of $154.9 million that is outstanding as of December 31, 2020. Under this scenario, the cumulative PIK Dividends of $11.6 million shown in the table above would also be subject to redemption on July 19, 2023.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated organizations or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities, which were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
With respect to our significant accounting policies that are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report, we believe that the following accounting policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
Series A Preferred Stock
In July 2018 we completed a private placement of Series A Preferred Stock, Common Stock, and Convertible Notes with no principal amount outstanding as of the issuance date. In addition, we entered into two securities purchase agreements on both March 7, 2019 and June 20, 2019 with accredited investors regarding two private placements. We allocated the net proceeds received based on the relative fair value of the Common Stock and the Series A Preferred Stock as determined by an
independent valuation specialist for each private placement. The net carrying value of the Series A Preferred Stock is classified as mezzanine equity in our consolidated balance sheets since the holders have redemption rights beginning in July 2023 (and earlier under certain circumstances). The aggregate discount related to the Series A Preferred Stock is being accreted using the effective interest method through the earliest date that the holders can currently demand redemption. Accordingly, the carrying value of the Series A Preferred Stock is being increased with corresponding reductions in additional paid-in capital until July 19, 2023, when the carrying value will be equal to the aggregate liquidation preference. Accrued dividends at the aggregate rate of 13.0% per annum are a component of the liquidation preference until paid in cash or settled in additional shares of Series A Preferred Stock. For the calculation of earnings per share of Common Stock, accretion and accrued dividends are treated as deductions in the calculation of earnings applicable to common stockholders.
The liquidation preference of the Series A Preferred Stock is convertible into shares of our Common Stock by the holders and, subject to certain restrictions, we have the right to require the holders to convert their shares of Series A Preferred Stock into Common Stock after July 19, 2021. Subject to provisions that require a make-whole penalty for the first three years, we also have the right to redeem the outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock. The Series A Preferred Stock will become mandatorily redeemable at any time upon the reasonable determination of the holders of a majority of the Series A Preferred Stock then outstanding of the occurrence of a Material Adverse Effect or the occurrence of a Material Litigation Effect (as such terms are defined in the Certificate of Designations ("CoD")), with the Redemption Amounts payable automatically becoming payment obligations pursuant to the Convertible Notes with a concurrent cancellation of the shares of the Series A Preferred Stock. If any conversion or redemption event occurs prior to July 19, 2023, the discount that has not been accreted with respect to such shares of Series A Preferred Stock will be deducted in the calculation of earnings applicable to common stockholders for the period in which the conversion or redemption event occurs. Additionally, at such time, if any, that the holders of Series A Preferred Stock have the right to demand a mandatory redemption, we will be required to classify the Series A Preferred Stock or the Convertible Notes as a current liability in our consolidated balance sheets.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is primarily derived from support services, and to a lesser extent, software licensing and related maintenance and professional services.
Effective in fiscal year 2019 with the adoption of Accounting Standards Codification 606 ("ASC 606"), Revenue from Contracts with Customers, revenue is recognized when performance obligations, as stipulated in the contracts, are transferred to a customer for an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those support services and service contracts. This occurs when the contracts are executed by both parties, the rights and obligations of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contracts have commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable. Our contracts generally do not contain any refund provisions other than in the event of our non-performance or breach.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•Identification of the contract with the customer.
•Identification of the performance obligations.
•Determination of the transaction price.
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations.
•Recognition of revenue when the performance obligations are satisfied.
Most of our contracts contain a single performance obligation for subscription support services. In a limited number of arrangements, we also license software and related maintenance services under term-based arrangements or provide our professional services. Our performance obligations are evaluated for whether they can be distinct or should be accounted for as one performance obligation and primarily consist of (i) subscription support services or (ii) professional services sold on a time and materials basis.
The transaction price is generally the same as the contractual price. Typically, the structure of our arrangements does not give rise to variable consideration. However, in the event where variable consideration should exist, we estimate additional revenue for variable consideration when we have an enforceable right, the amount can be estimated reliably and its realization is probable.
Our subscription support services are part of a comprehensive support program that helps clients keep their software and systems running smoothly and in full legal compliance. Subscription support services include product support (fixes and installation support), security, advanced support (performance tuning and interoperability), strategic roadmap services (upgrade
process), global tax, legal and regulatory services, global security, proactive support services, strategic roadmap services, device and user interface support and account management services. Subscription contracts are generally non-cancelable and do not contain general rights of return. Our support subscription is viewed as a stand-ready performance obligation comprised of a series of distinct services that is satisfied ratably over time as the services are provided. A time-elapsed output method is used to measure progress because our efforts are expended evenly throughout the period given the nature of the promise is a stand-ready service.
Other services include both software licensing services and our professional services. Our software licensing includes both internally developed software licenses as well as third party licenses. Our professional services consist of various consulting services which include project oversight, minor software customization or enhancement, and testing of client-developed software customization. Services may be provided solely by us, by a partner of ours, or in combination with our partners. Our professional services are generally provided under a separate statement of work from our subscription support services. Revenue is recognized as services are performed.
Deferred revenue is a contract liability that consists of billings issued that are non-cancellable but not yet paid and payments received in advance of revenue recognition. We typically invoice our customers at the beginning of the contract term, in annual and multi-year installments. Deferred revenue is recognized as we satisfy our performance obligations over the term of the contracted service period.
Loss Contingencies
We are subject to various loss contingencies arising in the ordinary course of business. An estimated loss contingency is accrued when it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. If some amount within a range of probable loss appears to be a better estimate than any other amount within the range, we accrue that amount. Alternatively, when no amount within a range of probable loss appears to be a better estimate than any other amount, we accrue the lowest amount in the range. If we determine that a loss is reasonably possible and the range of the loss is estimable, then we disclose the range of the possible loss if the upper end of the range is material. If we cannot estimate the range of loss, we will disclose the reason why it cannot estimate the range of loss, if there is a reasonable possibility that the amount of loss may be material. We regularly evaluate current information available to it to determine whether an accrual is required, an accrual should be adjusted and if a range of possible loss should be disclosed.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The following accounting standards are not yet effective and management has not completed its evaluation of the recent accounting pronouncements to determine the impact that adoption of these standards will have on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued new guidance on income taxes, ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The guidance removes certain exceptions to the general income tax accounting principles, and clarifies and amends existing guidance to facilitate consistent application of the accounting principles. The new guidance is effective for us as of January 1, 2021. We are assessing the impact of the adoption of this guidance on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
In January 2020, the FASB issued new guidance ASU 2020-1, Investments-Equity Securities (Topic 321), Investments - Equity and Joint Ventures (Topic 323), and Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815). The guidance clarifies the interactions between the existing accounting standards on equity securities, equity method and joint ventures, and derivatives and hedging. The new guidance addresses accounting for the transition into and out of the equity method and measuring certain purchased options and forward contracts to acquire investments. The new guidance is effective for us as of January 1, 2021. We are assessing the impact of the adoption of this guidance on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-6, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity's Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40). The guidance eliminates the beneficial conversion and cash conversion accounting for convertible instruments. The new guidance also modifies how particular convertible instruments and certain contracts that may be settled in cash or shares impact the diluted EPS computation. The new guidance is effective for us as of January 1, 2022. We are assessing the impact of the adoption of this guidance on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
For additional information on recently issued accounting standards and our plans for adoption of those standards, please refer to the section titled Recent Accounting Pronouncements under Note 2 and Adoption of ASC 842, Leases under Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report.