ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in the section entitled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, as well as assumptions that, if they never materialize or prove incorrect, could cause our results to differ significantly from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed below and elsewhere in this report, particularly in the section entitled “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item1A.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2019 as compared to fiscal 2018 is included in Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2020.
Overview
We are a leading provider of cloud communications, video meetings, collaboration, and contact center software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) solutions. We believe that our innovative, cloud-based communication and contact center solutions disrupt the large market for business communications and collaboration by providing flexible and cost-effective solutions that support mobile and distributed workforces. We enable convenient and effective communications for organizations across all their locations and employees, enabling them to be more productive and more responsive to their customers.
Our cloud-based business communications and collaboration solutions are designed to be easy to use, providing a single user identity across multiple locations and devices, including smartphones, tablets, PCs and desk phones. Our solutions can be deployed rapidly and configured and managed easily. Through our platform, we enable third-party developers and customers to integrate our solution with leading business applications to customize their own business workflows.
We have a portfolio of cloud-based offerings that are subscription based, made available at different rates varying by the specific functionalities, services, and number of users. We primarily generate revenues from the sale of subscriptions to our offerings. Our subscription plans have monthly, annual, or multi-year contractual terms. We believe that this flexibility in contract duration is important to meet the different needs of our customers. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, subscriptions revenues accounted for 90% or more of our total revenues. The remainder of our revenues has historically been primarily comprised of product revenues from the sale and rental of pre-configured phones and professional services. We do not develop, manufacture, or otherwise touch the delivery of physical phones and offer it as a convenience for a total solution to our customers in connection with subscriptions to our services. We rely on third-party providers to develop and manufacture these devices and fulfillment partners to successfully serve our customers.
We continue to invest in our direct inside sales force while also developing indirect sales channels to market our brand and our subscription offerings. Our indirect sales channels who sell our solutions consist of:
• a regional and global network of resellers;
•carriers including AT&T, Inc. (“AT&T”), TELUS Communications Company (“TELUS”), and BT Group plc (“BT”). Also, in November 2020 we entered into a strategic partnership with Vodafone Group Services Limited ("Vodafone") to deliver new cloud-based communications services. The parties will introduce a new co-branded cloud-based service that will be the Unified Communications as a Service ("UCaaS") solution for Vodafone and a Contact Center as a Service ("CCaaS") solution to Vodafone customers;
•strategic partners who market and sell our co-branded solutions directly and through their subsidiaries. Such partnerships include Avaya Holdings Corp. ("Avaya"), under which we introduced a new solution Avaya Cloud Office by RingCentral ("ACO") in March 2020; Atos SE ("Atos") and its subsidiary, Unify Software and Solutions GmbH & CO. KG ("Unify"), under which we introduced a new Unified Communications as a Service ("UCaaS") solution called Unify Office by RingCentral ("UO") in September 2020; and in July 2020, we entered into a strategic partnership with Alcatel-Lucent Enterprise ("ALE"), which includes the introduction of a new co-branded solution which will be marketed and sold as the UCaaS solution offering of ALE beginning in 2021.
Since its launch, our revenue growth has primarily been driven by our flagship RingCentral Office product offering, which has resulted in an increased number of customers, increased average subscription revenue per customer, and increased
retention of our existing customer and user base. We define a “customer” as any party that purchases or subscribes to our products and services directly or indirectly through our channel partners. As of December 31, 2020, we had customers from a range of industries, including financial services, education, healthcare, legal services, real estate, retail, technology, insurance, construction, hospitality, and state and local government, among others. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, the vast majority of our total revenues were generated in the U.S. and Canada, although we expect the percentage of our total revenues derived outside of the U.S. and Canada to grow as we continue to expand internationally.
The growth of our business and our future success depend on many factors, including our ability to expand our customer base to larger customers, expansion of our indirect sales channels including strategic partnerships, continue to innovate, grow revenues from our existing customer base, expand our distribution channels, and scale internationally.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) was reported and in January 2020, the World Health Organization (the "WHO") declared the outbreak a “Public Health Emergency of International Concern.” In February 2020, the WHO raised the COVID-19 threat level from high to very high at a global level and in March 2020, the WHO characterized the COVID-19 as a pandemic. The worldwide spread of COVID-19 has resulted in authorities implementing numerous measures to contain the virus, including travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and business limitations and shutdowns.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we noted contributions from new bookings as more businesses transition to RingCentral in the current work-from-anywhere environment. In the first and early part of the second quarter, we experienced higher churn rate mainly with small business customers in certain verticals. Since then we have seen stabilization in churn levels. Due to the shelter-in-place, we continue to see more customers opting for the RingCentral apps on laptops and mobile devices over traditional desktop phones which has impacted demand for physical phone devices. We also observed customer requests for extension in payment terms. To address customer hardships, we continue to engage with these customers providing them greater flexibility to manage challenges they are facing.
While our revenues and earnings are relatively predictable as a result of our subscription-based business model, the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic, may not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods. The COVID-19 pandemic has created a global slowdown of economic activity which has and will likely continue to decrease demand for a broad variety of goods and services, while also disrupting sales channels and marketing activities for an unknown period of time until the disease is contained.
We may experience curtailed customer demand due to reduced customer spend, shortened contract duration, higher churn, lengthened payment terms, credit card declines, potential delays in professional services implementations, and reduction in demand for desktop phones, which could adversely impact our business, results of operations and overall financial performance in future periods. We may in the future continue to experience elevated churn in certain customer verticals and customer requests for extension of payment terms.
The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will also depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, actions taken to contain the virus or its impact, impact on our partners, resellers, employees, vendors and customers, and employee or industry events, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. For example, to support the health and well-being of our employees, customers, partners and communities in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, a vast majority of our employees are working remotely and we have shifted some of our customer events to virtual-only experiences, and we may deem it advisable to similarly alter, postpone or cancel entirely additional customer, employee or industry events in the future. At this point, the full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our financial condition or results of operations is uncertain, but changes we have implemented have not affected and are not expected to affect our ability to maintain operations, including financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting, and disclosure controls and procedures.
Further discussion of the potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business can be found in the section titled "Risk Factors" included in Part I, Item 1A.
Key Business Metrics
In addition to United States generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”) and financial measures such as total revenues, gross margin, and cash flows from operations, we regularly review a number of key business metrics to evaluate growth trends, measure our performance, and make strategic decisions. We discuss revenues and gross margin under “Results of Operations”, and cash flow from operations and free cash flows under “Liquidity and Capital Resources.” Other key business metrics are discussed below.
Annualized Exit Monthly Recurring Subscriptions
We believe that our Annualized Exit Monthly Recurring Subscriptions (“ARR”) is a leading indicator of our anticipated subscriptions revenues. We believe that trends in revenue are important to understanding the overall health of our business, and we use these trends in order to formulate financial projections and make strategic business decisions. Our ARR equals our Monthly Recurring Subscriptions multiplied by 12. Our Monthly Recurring Subscriptions equals the monthly value of all customer recurring charges at the end of a given month. For example, our Monthly Recurring Subscriptions at December 31, 2020 was $108.3 million. As such, our ARR at December 31, 2020 was $1.3 billion compared to $960.1 million at December 31, 2019.
RingCentral Office Annualized Exit Monthly Recurring Subscriptions
We calculate our RingCentral Office Annualized Exit Monthly Recurring Subscriptions (“Office ARR”) in the same manner as we calculate our ARR, except that primarily customer subscriptions from RingCentral Office and RingCentral customer engagement solutions customers are included when determining Monthly Recurring Subscriptions for the purposes of calculating this key business metric. We believe that trends in revenue with respect to these products are important to the understanding of the overall health of our business, and we use these trends in order to formulate financial projections and make strategic business decisions. Our Office ARR at December 31, 2020 was $1.2 billion compared to $876.8 million at December 31, 2019.
Net Monthly Subscription Dollar Retention Rate
We believe that our Net Monthly Subscription Dollar Retention Rate provides insight into our ability to retain and grow subscriptions revenue, as well as our customers’ potential long-term value to us. We believe that our ability to retain our customers and expand their use of our solutions over time is a leading indicator of the stability of our revenue base and we use these trends in order to formulate financial projections and make strategic business decisions. We define our Net Monthly Subscription Dollar Retention Rate as (i) one plus (ii) the quotient of Dollar Net Change divided by Average Monthly Recurring Subscriptions.
We define Dollar Net Change as the quotient of (i) the difference of our Monthly Recurring Subscriptions at the end of a period minus our Monthly Recurring Subscriptions at the beginning of a period minus our Monthly Recurring Subscriptions at the end of the period from new customers we added during the period, all divided by (ii) the number of months in the period. We define our Average Monthly Recurring Subscriptions as the average of the Monthly Recurring Subscriptions at the beginning and end of the measurement period.
For example, if our Monthly Recurring Subscriptions were $118 at the end of a quarterly period and $100 at the beginning of the period, and $20 at the end of the period from new customers we added during the period, then the Dollar Net Change would be equal to ($0.67), or the amount equal to the difference of $118 minus $100 minus $20, all divided by three months. Our Average Monthly Recurring Subscriptions would equal $109, or the sum of $100 plus $118, divided by two. Our Net Monthly Subscription Dollar Retention Rate would then equal 99.4%, or approximately 99%, or one plus the quotient of the Dollar Net Change divided by the Average Monthly Recurring Subscriptions.
Our key business metrics for the five quarterly periods ended December 31, 2020 were as follows (dollars in millions):
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
Our revenues for the years presented consisted of subscriptions and other revenues. Our subscriptions revenue includes all fees billed in connection with subscriptions to our solution offerings. These fees include recurring fixed plan subscription fees, variable usage-based fees for usage in excess of plan limits, recurring administrative cost recovery fees, one-time fees, and other recurring fees related to our subscriptions. We provide our subscriptions to our customers pursuant to contractual arrangements that range in duration typically from one month to five years. We provide our subscriptions to our customers
pursuant to either “click through” online agreements for service terms up to one year or written agreements when the arrangement is expected to be one year or longer. We offer our subscriptions based on the functionalities and services selected by a customer, and generally our subscription arrangements automatically renew for additional periods at the end of the initial subscription term. We believe that this flexibility in contract duration is important to meet the different needs of our customers.
We generally bill our subscription fees in advance. We recognize subscription revenue over the term of the agreement. Amounts billed in excess of revenue recognized for the period are reported as deferred revenue on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
We also generate revenues through sales of our subscriptions and products by resellers, strategic partners, and carrier partners. When we control the performance of the contractual obligations, we record the revenues on a gross basis and amounts retained by our resellers are recorded as sales and marketing expense. Our assumption of such control is evidenced when, among other things, we are primarily responsible for the delivery of the service or products, have inventory risk, and have discretion in establishing pricing of the arrangement.
“Other revenues” includes product revenues from the sale of pre-configured phones, phone rentals, and professional services. Product revenue is recognized when the product has been delivered to the customer. Professional services revenue is recognized as services are delivered.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Our cost of subscriptions revenue primarily consists of fees paid to third-party telecommunications providers, network operations, costs to build out and maintain data centers, including co-location fees for the right to place our servers in data centers owned by third parties, depreciation of servers and equipment, along with related utilities and maintenance costs, personnel costs associated with customer care and support of the functionality of our platform and data center operations, including share-based compensation expenses, and allocated costs of facilities and information technology.
We define subscriptions gross margins as subscriptions revenue minus the cost of subscriptions revenue expressed as a percentage of subscriptions revenue.
Cost of other revenue is comprised primarily of the cost associated with the purchase of phones, cost of professional services, and allocated costs of facilities and information technology.
Operating Expenses
We classify our operating expenses as research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses.
Our research and development efforts are focused on developing new and expanded features for our solutions, integrations with distributors and other software platforms, and improvements to our backend architecture. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for employees and contractors, including share-based compensation expenses, and allocated costs of facilities and information technology, software tools, and product certification. We expense research and development costs as incurred, except for certain internal-use software development costs that we capitalize. We believe that continued investment in our products is important for our future growth, and we expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future, although these expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenues from period to period depending on the timing of these expenses.
Sales and marketing expenses are the largest component of our operating expenses and consist primarily of personnel costs for employees and contractors directly associated with our sales and marketing activities including share-based compensation expenses, internet advertising fees, radio and billboard advertising, public relations, commissions paid to employees, resellers and other third parties, amortization of capitalized sales commissions, trade shows, travel expenses, credit card fees, marketing and promotional activities, amortization of acquired customer relationship intangibles, and allocated costs of facilities and information technology. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we expand our sales and marketing efforts domestically and internationally and continue to build our brand, although these expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenues from period to period depending on the timing of these expenses.
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including share-based compensation expenses, for employees and contractors engaged in infrastructure and administrative activities to support the day-to-day
operations of our business. Other significant components of general and administrative expenses include professional service fees, allocated costs of facilities and information technology, cost of compliance with certain government-imposed taxes, the costs of legal matters, business acquisition costs, and loss contingencies. We expect our general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future, although these expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenues from period to period, depending on the timing of these expenses.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth selected consolidated statements of operations data and such data as a percentage of total revenues. The historical results presented below are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any future period (in thousands):
Percentage of Total Revenues*
* Percentages may not add up due to rounding.
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Revenues
Subscriptions revenue. Subscriptions revenue increased by $268.5 million, or 33%, during fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019. The increase was primarily a combination of the acquisition of new customers and upsells of seats and additional offerings to our existing customer base. This growth was primarily driven by an increase in sales to our mid-market and enterprise customers as we continue to move up market and increased sales through our direct and indirect sales channels. Although we expect to continue to add new customers and for existing customers to increase their usage of our product, we will continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic carefully and its impact on customer demand, contract duration, churn, payment terms, and credit card declines. Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and volatility in the market, including those resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, could also cause variability in our revenue.
Other revenues. Other revenues are primarily comprised of product revenue from the sale of pre-configured phones, phone rentals, and professional services.
Other revenue increased by $12.3 million, or 15%, during fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019, primarily due to the increase in product sales and professional services resulting from the overall growth in our business. Due to shelter in place restrictions adopted in many jurisdictions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we continued to see a shift towards using RingCentral apps on laptops and mobile devices over traditional desktop phones and timing of professional services projects. We may see a reduction in demand for desktop phones and slower implementation services. We will continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic carefully and its impact on phone and professional services revenue.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Subscription cost of revenues and gross margin. Cost of subscriptions revenues increased by $76.7 million, or 48%, during fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019. The primary drivers of the increase were third-party costs to support our solution offerings of $25.9 million, amortization of acquired intangible assets of $25.1 million, infrastructure support costs of $16.7 million, and personnel and contractor-related costs including share-based compensation expenses of $11.7 million. Gross margin decreased mainly due to timing of acquisition of intangible assets which resulted in higher amortization of acquired intangible assets of $25.1 million and timing of our equity grants which resulted in higher share-based compensation expense of $3.6 million.
The increase in headcount and other expense categories described herein was driven primarily by investments in our infrastructure and capacity to improve the availability of our subscription offerings, while also supporting the growth in new customers and increased usage of our subscriptions by our existing customer base. We expect subscription gross margin to be within a relatively similar range in the future. However, we continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic carefully and its impact on our customers.
Other cost of revenues and gross margin. Cost of other revenues increased by $15.9 million, or 22%, during fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019. This was primarily due to the increase in personnel costs including share-based compensation expense of $10.1 million and cost of product sales of $5.4 million. Other revenue gross margin fluctuated based on timing of completion of professional services projects and transaction price for product sales.
We continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on timing of professional services and transaction price of product sales.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $53.1 million, or 39%, during fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019, primarily due to $48.0 million increase in personnel and contractor costs and $4.9 million increase in overhead costs to support our research and development efforts. The increase in personnel and contractor costs was mainly driven by approximately $30.3 million relating to headcount growth and $16.2 million share-based compensation expense.
The increases in research and development headcount and other expense categories were driven by continued investment in current and future software development projects for our applications. Given the continued emphasis and focus on product innovation, we expect research and development expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $144.7 million, or 33%, during fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019, primarily due to increases in personnel and contractor costs of $73.3 million, third-party commissions of $35.2 million, advertising and marketing costs of $35.1 million, and amortization of deferred sales commission costs of $17.1 million, partially offset by a $9.9 million decrease in travel costs resulting from the impact of COVID-19 and a $6.6 million decrease in professional fees mainly due to costs associated with strategic partnerships and acquisitions in fiscal year 2019. Of the total increase in personnel and contractor costs, $45.5 million was primarily due to headcount growth and approximately $25.9 million was due to higher share-based compensation expense.
The increases in sales and marketing headcount and other expense categories were necessary to support our growth strategy to acquire new customers with a focus on larger customers, and to establish brand recognition to achieve greater penetration into the North America and international markets. Additionally, we expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to expand our presence in North America and international markets.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $58.0 million, or 41%, during fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019, primarily due to increases in personnel and contractor costs of $51.1 million including $40.6 million due to higher share-based compensation expense, business fees and taxes of $6.4 million, overhead costs of $3.9 million, professional fees of $3.2 million, and increased allowance for doubtful accounts of $3.0 million partly driven by customer collection related matters stemming form COVID-19, partially offset by cost savings of $10.0 million including credits and decreased travel costs.
We expect general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to make additional investments in processes, systems, and personnel to support our anticipated revenue growth.
Other Income (expense), net
nm - not meaningful
Other income (expense), net increased by $42.4 million during fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019.
Other income, net was higher by $71.2 million primarily due to $81.1 million net unrealized gain recognized on our long-term investments, which depends on market fluctuations, partially offset by $13.3 million loss on partial repurchase of our convertible senior notes during fiscal 2020 and decrease in interest income on our investments of $9.1 million mainly as a result of reduction in interest rates. Fiscal 2019 expense were also higher due to costs associated with strategic partnerships and acquisitions of $10.6 million, which did not recur in fiscal 2020.
Interest expense was higher by $28.8 million due to increase in the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs from our 2025 and 2026 convertible senior notes issued in the first and third quarters of 2020, respectively.
We expect interest income to further reduce in the future due to interest rate volatility in the current macroeconomic environment.
Net loss
Net loss increased by $29.4 million during fiscal year 2020, mainly due to non-cash items including $88.2 million higher share-based compensation expense primarily driven by equity awards granted to new employees and annual merit based equity awards to existing employees, $28.7 million increase in interest expense from the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs from our convertible senior notes, and $25.1 million increase in amortization of acquired intangibles, partially offset by $81.1 million net unrealized gain recognized from our long-term investments, and a decrease in acquisition-related costs of $24.0 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is a measure of our ability to access sufficient cash flows to meet the short-term and long-term cash requirements of our business operations.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash and cash equivalents of $639.9 million and $343.6 million, respectively. We finance our operations primarily through sales to our customers, which could be billed either on a monthly or annually one year in advance. For customers with annual or multi-year contracts and those who opt for annual invoicing, we generally invoice only one annual period in advance and revenue is deferred for such advanced billings. We also finance our operations from proceeds from issuance of convertible senior notes and proceeds from issuance of stock under our stock plans.
In March 2020, we issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal of 0% convertible senior notes due 2025 (the “2025 Notes”) in a private placement. As of December 31, 2020, the carrying value of our 2025 Notes totaled $825.0 million. In September 2020, we issued $650.0 million aggregate principal of 0% convertible senior notes due 2026 (the "2026 Notes") in a private placement. As of December 31, 2020, the carrying value of our 2026 Notes totaled $510.3 million. Our 2025 Notes and 2026 Notes contain customary financial covenants. In connection with both these offering, we used approximately $1.0 billion of the total net proceeds of $1.6 billion to repurchase a portion of the 0% convertible senior notes due 2023 (the "2023 Notes").
The 2023 Notes outstanding principal balance as of December 31, 2020 was $80.2 million, out of which $34.9 million conversion requests were outstanding as of December 31, 2020, and we received additional conversion requests of $4.1 million subsequent to December 31, 2020. We expect to pay approximately $185 million in the first quarter of 2021 to settle these outstanding conversion requests. As of the filing date, the remaining outstanding principal balance of the 2023 Notes is $45.3 million. We intend to settle this outstanding principal amount out of our cash and cash equivalents outstanding balance. For additional details, refer to Note 6 - Convertible Senior Notes of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information. We are in compliance with all covenants under the 2026, 2025 and 2023 Notes as of December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we entered into strategic partnership agreements with ALE and Vodafone under which we paid approximately $163.7 million. We also financed approximately $4.7 million of property, equipment, and software licenses through vendor financing arrangements and paid approximately $4.5 million to purchase additional intellectual property rights.
We believe that our operations, existing liquidity sources as well as capital resources and ability to raise cash through additional financing will satisfy our future cash requirements and obligations for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including revenue growth and costs incurred to support customer growth, acquisitions and expansions, sales and marketing, research and development, increased general and administrative expenses to support the anticipated growth in our operations, and capital equipment required to support our growing headcount and in support of our co-location data center facilities, as well as the extent of the COVID-19 pandemic and its effect on our business. Our capital expenditures in future periods are expected to grow in line with our business. We continually evaluate our capital needs and may decide to raise additional capital to fund the growth of our business for general corporate purposes through public or private equity offerings or through additional debt financing. We also may in the future make investments in or acquire businesses or technologies that could require us to seek additional equity or debt financing. Access to additional capital may not be available or on favorable terms. The uncertainty created by the changing markets and economic conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic may also impact our customers’ ability to pay on a timely basis, which could negatively impact our operating cash flows.
The table below provides selected cash flow information for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Net Cash (Used in) Provided by Operating Activities
Cash used in or provided by operating activities is driven by our net loss, the timing of customer collections, as well as the amount and timing of disbursements to our vendors, the amount of cash we invest in personnel, marketing, and infrastructure costs to support the anticipated growth of our business, payments under strategic arrangements, and amounts attributable to repayment of convertible notes.
Net cash used in operating activities was $35.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was driven primarily by $141.6 million paid under strategic agreements and $35.0 million attributable to debt discount on a portion of the 2023 convertible senior notes that was repaid. These were offset by $141.4 million in cash flow from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash flow from operating activities was driven by timing of cash receipts and prepayments from customers and carriers and cash payments for personnel related costs and to vendors.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased by $100.0 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This change was driven by payments under strategic arrangements and debt discount for a portion of the 2023 senior convertible notes that was repaid, offset with the additional cash generated from operating activities.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Our primary investing activities have consisted of our long-term investments, business acquisitions and purchase of intellectual properties, and capital expenditures and internal-use software. As our business grows, we expect our capital expenditures to continue to increase.
Net cash used in investing activities was $107.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to capital expenditures including personnel-related costs associated with development of internal-use software of $81.7 million and acquisition of IP of $26.0 million to complement and support our product development and enhancement initiatives.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $189.1 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to $135.6 million used in 2019 to acquire our long-term investments and lower cash used in 2020 for business combinations and asset acquisitions of $91.0 million, partially offset by higher capital expenditures and internal use software investment of $37.4 million to support the growth in our business.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Our primary financing activities have consisted of raising proceeds through the issuance of our 2025 Notes and 2026 Notes in the first and third quarters of 2020, respectively, and stock under our stock plans, offset by partial repurchase and conversion of our 2023 Notes.
Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $437.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to $1.6 billion proceeds from the issuance of our 2025 Notes and 2026 Notes, net of issuance costs, partially offset by $1.1 billion paid for the partial repurchase and conversions of our 2023 Notes and $102.7 million payments for capped calls transactions and costs. We also had proceeds from issuance of stock in connection with our stock plans of $41.2 million, which was offset with payments for taxes paid in connection with our stock plans of $36.7 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased by $428.5 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily proceeds from the 2025 Notes and the 2026 Notes issued in 2020, partially offset by the partial repurchases and conversions of the 2023 Notes. Refer to Note 6, Convertible Senior Notes, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Non-GAAP Free Cash Flow
To supplement our statements of cash flows presented on a GAAP basis, we use non-GAAP measures of cash flows to analyze cash flow generated from our operations. We define free cash flow, a non-GAAP financial measure, as GAAP net cash provided by (used in) operating activities plus cash paid for strategic partnerships and repayments of convertible senior notes attributable to debt discount, reduced by purchases of property and equipment and capitalized internal-use software. We believe information regarding free cash flow provides useful information to management and investors in understanding the strength of liquidity and available cash. A limitation of the use of free cash flow is that it does not represent the total increase or decrease in our cash balance for the period. Free cash flow should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to cash flows from operations, and should be considered alongside our other GAAP-based financial liquidity performance measures, such as net cash used in operating activities and our other GAAP financial results.
The following table presents a reconciliation of free cash flow to net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Backlog
We have generally signed new customers contracts with varying length, from month-to-month to multi-year terms for our subscription services. At any point in the contract term, there can be amounts allocated to services that we have not yet contractually performed, which constitute a backlog. Until we meet our performance obligations, we do not recognize them as revenues in our consolidated financial statements. Given the variability in our contract length, we believe that backlog is not a reliable indicator of future revenues and we do not utilize backlog as a key management metric internally.
Deferred Revenue
Deferred revenue primarily consists of the unearned portion of monthly or annual invoiced fees for our subscriptions, which we recognize as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. For customers with multi-year contracts, we generally invoice for only one monthly or annual subscription period in advance. Therefore, our deferred revenue balance does not capture the full contract value of multi-year contracts. Accordingly, we believe that deferred revenue is not a reliable indicator of future revenues and we do not utilize deferred revenue as a key management metric internally.
Contractual Obligations
The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1)Operating lease obligations includes operating leases of $1.1 million that have not yet commenced as of December 31, 2020.
Purchase obligations represent an estimate of open purchase orders and contractual obligations in the normal course of business for which we have not received the goods or services as of December 31, 2020. Although open purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, except for our purchase orders with our inventory suppliers, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust our requirements based on our business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services. Our purchase orders with our inventory suppliers are non-cancellable. In addition, we have other obligations for goods and services that we enter into in the normal course of business. These obligations, however, are either not enforceable or legally binding, or are subject to change based on our business decisions. The aggregate of these items represents our estimate of purchase obligations.
Indemnification Obligations
Certain of our agreements with sales agents, resellers and customers include provisions for indemnification against liabilities if our products infringe a third-party’s intellectual property rights. To date, we have not incurred any material costs as a result of such indemnification provisions and have not accrued any liabilities related to such obligations in the consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2020.
Contingencies
We are and may be in the future subject to certain legal proceedings and from time to time may be involved in a variety of claims, lawsuits, investigations, and proceedings relating to contractual disputes, intellectual property rights, employment matters, regulatory compliance matters, and other matters relating to various claims that arise in the normal course of business. We record a provision for a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a liability has been incurred, and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Significant judgment is required to determine both probability and the estimated amount of loss. Such legal proceedings are inherently unpredictable and subject to significant uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control. Should any of these estimates and assumptions change or prove to be incorrect, it could have a significant impact on our results of operations, financial position, and cash flows.
Refer to Note 8 - Commitment and Contingencies of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Through December 31, 2020, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated organizations or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities that would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by U.S. GAAP and does not require management’s judgment in its application. In other cases, management’s judgment is required in selecting among available alternative accounting standards
that provide for different accounting treatment for similar transactions. The preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts we report as assets, liabilities, revenues, costs, and expenses, and affect the related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. In many instances, we could reasonably use different accounting estimates, and in some instances changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Accordingly, our actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows will be affected. A summary of our significant accounting policies is included in Note 1 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenues from subscriptions, sale of products, and professional services. Subscriptions revenue is generally recognized over the period of the subscription contract. Subscription contracts generally allow the customers to terminate their services at any time during the first 30 days of the subscription period and are charged for the term of usage. Upon cancellation during the termination period, customers receive a pro-rata refund for any amounts paid. After the end of the termination period, the contract is non-cancellable and the customer is obligated to pay for the remaining term of the contract. For sale of products, revenue is recognized when control is transferred. For professional services, revenue is recognized as services are rendered.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a summary of recent accounting pronouncements and the anticipated effects on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference.