Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains certain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1996. Such statements consist of any statement other than a recitation of historical fact and can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as “may,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend” or “estimate” or the negative thereof or other variations thereof or comparable terminology. The reader is cautioned that all forward-looking statements are speculative, and there are certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual events or results to differ from those referred to in such forward-looking statements (see Item 1A, “Risk Factors”).
COMPANY OVERVIEW
Medytox Solutions, Inc. (“Medytox”) was organized on July 20, 2005 under the laws of the State of Nevada. In the first half of 2011, Medytox’s management elected to reorganize as a holding company, and Medytox established and acquired a number of companies in the medical service and software sector between 2011 and 2014.
On November 2, 2015, pursuant to the terms of the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of April 15, 2015, by and among CollabRx, Inc. (“CollabRx”), CollabRx Merger Sub, Inc. (“Merger Sub”), a direct wholly-owned subsidiary of CollabRx formed for the purpose of the merger, and Medytox, Merger Sub merged with and into Medytox, with Medytox as the surviving company and a direct, wholly-owned subsidiary of CollabRx (the “Merger”). Prior to closing, the Company amended its certificate of incorporation to change its name to Rennova Health, Inc. This transaction was accounted for as a reverse merger in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) and, as such, the historical financial statements of Medytox became the historical financial statements of the Company.
Our Services
We are a healthcare enterprise that delivers products and services to our patients. We operate in one business segment: Hospital Operations.
On January 13, 2017, we closed on an asset purchase agreement to acquire certain assets related to Scott County Community Hospital, based in Oneida, Tennessee (the “Oneida Assets”). The Oneida Assets include a 52,000-square foot hospital building and 6,300 square foot professional building on approximately 4.3 acres. Scott County Community Hospital is classified as a Critical Access Hospital (rural) with 25 beds, a 24/7 emergency department, operating rooms and a laboratory that provides a range of diagnostic services. Scott County Community Hospital closed in July 2016 in connection with the bankruptcy filing of its parent company, Pioneer Health Services, Inc. We acquired the Oneida Assets out of bankruptcy for a purchase price of $1.0 million. The hospital, which has since been renamed Big South Fork Medical Center, became operational on August 8, 2017.
On January 31, 2018, the Company entered into an asset purchase agreement to acquire from Community Health Systems, Inc. certain assets related to an acute care hospital located in Jamestown, Tennessee, referred to as Jamestown Regional Medical Center. The purchase was completed on June 1, 2018 for a purchase price of $0.7 million. The hospital was acquired by a newly formed subsidiary, Jamestown TN Medical Center, Inc., and the hospital is an 85-bed facility of approximately 90,000 square feet on over eight acres of land, which offers a 24-hour Emergency Department with two spacious trauma bays and seven private exam rooms, inpatient and outpatient medical services and a Progressive Care Unit which provides telemetry services. The acquisition also included a separate physician practice known as Mountain View Physician Practice, Inc. Jamestown is located 38 miles west of Big South Fork Medical Center. The Company suspended operations at the hospital in June 2019, as a result of the termination of its Medicare agreement. The Company plans to reopen the hospital upon securing adequate capital to do so. The reopening plans have also been disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic and the timing of the reopening has been delayed and is now intended for mid-2021.
In addition, on March 5, 2019, we closed an asset purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) whereby we acquired certain assets related to an acute care hospital located in Jellico, Tennessee known as Jellico Community Hospital and an outpatient clinic located in Williamsburg, Kentucky known as CarePlus Center. The hospital and the clinic and their associated assets were acquired from Jellico Community Hospital, Inc. and CarePlus Rural Health Clinic, LLC, respectively. On March 1, 2021, the Company closed Jellico Community Hospital, after the City of Jellico issued a 30-day termination notice for the lease of the building. The Company does not expect this closure to have an adverse effect on its business strategy and believes it will have a positive impact from a reduced cash requirement in the immediate future.
Jellico Community Hospital was a 54-bed acute care facility that offered comprehensive services, including diagnostic imaging, radiology, surgery (general, gynecological and vascular), nuclear medicine, wound care and hyperbaric medicine, intensive care, emergency care and physical therapy. Jellico was located 33 miles east of our Big South Fork Medical Center. The CarePlus Center offers sophisticated testing capabilities and compassionate care, all in a modern, patient-friendly environment. Services include diagnostic imaging services, x-ray, mammography, bone densitometry, computed tomography (CT), ultrasound, physical therapy and laboratory services on a walk-in basis. The purchase price for the hospital and outpatient clinic was approximately $0.7 million. This purchase price was made available by Mr. Diamantis.
Our Hospital Operations generated net revenues of approximately $7.2 million and $15.9 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During 2020 and 2019, based on collection history achieved, management recognized collection rates for our hospitals of approximately 14% and 14%, respectively. Going forward, we expect our Hospital Operations to provide us with a stable revenue base. In addition to the net revenues generated from our hospital operations, in 2019, we generated $75,460 of revenues related to non-hospital operations.
Discontinued Operations
Advanced Molecular Services Group and Health Technology Solutions, Inc.
On July 12, 2017, we announced plans to spin off our Advanced Molecular Services Group (“AMSG”) and in the third quarter 2017 our Board of Directors voted unanimously to spin off the Company’s wholly-owned subsidiary, Health Technology Solutions, Inc. (“HTS”), as independent publicly traded companies by way of tax-free distributions to the Company’s stockholders. On June 10, 2020, the Company signed an agreement for the separation of these entities into a public company. The agreement with TPT Global Tech, Inc. (“TPT”) (OTC: TPTW), a California-based public company, was to merge HTS and AMSG into a public company after TPT completed a merger of its wholly-owned subsidiary, InnovaQor, Inc., with this public company. Rennova terminated its agreement with TPT on March 8, 2021 after numerous attempts to close the transaction as proposed failed due to uncertainty and last minute unviable demands from TPT that would have created a high risk to the future success of the project. Rennova is currently considering the actions of TPT with the belief that TPT acted outside of agreements that were in place and may have converted Rennova owned confidential information for their own benefit and business strategy. Rennova intends to pursue any remedy available to it under the law to recover money owed from TPT and to protect its technology and assets.
The Company continues to pursue options available to it to separate these entities and believes this can be accomplished in the second quarter of 2021. The strategic goal of this transaction is to create a separate public company which can focus on its own strengths and operational plans and create value for Rennova and its shareholders. The Company has reflected the amounts relating to AMSG and HTS (referred to as the AMSG & HTS Group) as a disposal group classified as held for sale and included in discontinued operations in the Company’s accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Clinical Diagnostics
Prior to our focus on hospital operations, our principal focus had been clinical laboratory blood and urine testing services, with a particular emphasis on the provision of urine drug toxicology testing to physicians, clinics and rehabilitation facilities in the United States. This sector has been fraught with difficulties over the past number of years as payers reduced reimbursement and coverage for diagnostics in this sector. The lack of consistency between payer’s policies and their requirement for proof of medical necessity created uncertainty for ordering physicians and testing laboratories and their ability to receive payment. During 2018, we reduced the number of laboratories we operated to one facility operated by EPIC Reference Labs, Inc. in Palm Beach County, Florida.
During the third quarter of 2020, we announced that we had reached a tentative agreement to sell our last clinical laboratory outside of its hospital labs, EPIC Reference Labs, Inc., to TPT and as a result, EPIC Reference Labs, Inc.’s operations have been classified as held for sale and included in discontinued operations in the Company’s accompanying consolidated financial statements. This proposed sale was terminated by Rennova on March 10, 2021, along with a lab management agreement and other permissions that had been granted by Rennova to TPT. Rennova is owed certain payments under the agreements and intends to take the necessary actions to secure payments owed by TPT.
Outlook
We believe that the transition of our business model from diagnostics to ownership of rural hospitals is now complete and once stabilized will create more predictable and stable revenue. Rural hospitals provide a much-needed service to their local communities and reduce our reliance on commission-based sales employees to generate sales. We currently operate one hospital and a rural clinic in the same general geographic location and we own another hospital and physician’s office at which operations are currently suspended. Owning a number of facilities in the same geographic location will create numerous efficiencies in purchasing and staffing and will enable the provision of additional, specialized and more valuable services that are needed by rural communities but cannot be sustained by a standalone rural hospital. We remain confident that this is a sustainable model we can continue to grow through acquisition and development and believe that we can benefit from the compliance and IT and software capabilities we already have in place. The progress of the COVID-19 pandemic, which is more fully discussed below, has severely affected our operations and may cause such expectations not to be achieved or, even if achieved, not to be done in the expected timeframe.
Impact of the Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic was declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020. We have been closely monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our operations and we have taken steps intended to minimize the risk to our employees and patients. These steps have increased our costs and our revenues have been significantly adversely affected. Demand for hospital services has substantially decreased. As noted in Notes 1 and 8 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements, we have received Paycheck Protection Program loans (“PPP Notes”) as well as Health and Human Services (“HHS”) Provider Relief Funds from the federal government. If the COVID-19 pandemic continues for a further extended period, we expect to incur significant losses and additional financial assistance may be required. Going forward, we are unable to determine the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to affect our business. The nature and effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on our balance sheet and results of operations will depend on the severity and length of the pandemic in our service areas; government activities to mitigate the pandemic’s effect; regulatory changes in response to the pandemic, especially those affecting rural hospitals; and existing and potential government assistance that may be provided.
The COVID-19 pandemic and the steps taken by governments to seek to reduce its spread have severely impacted the economy and the health care industry in particular. Hospitals have especially been affected. Small rural hospitals, such as ours, may be overwhelmed by patients if conditions worsen in their local areas. Staffing costs, and concerns due to the potential exposure to infections, may increase, as may the costs of needed medical supplies necessary to keep the hospitals open. Doctors and patients may defer elective procedures and other health care services. Travel bans, social distancing and quarantines may limit access to our facilities. Business closings and layoffs in our local areas may result in the loss of insurance and adversely affect demand for our services, as well as the ability of patients and other payers to pay for services as rendered.
Hospitalizations in Tennessee for COVID-19 increased throughout 2020 and appear to have peaked in December 2020. From third party information there have been 822,085 cases and 12,001 deaths as of April 12, 2021. The roll out of vaccinations is expected to significantly reduce the risk of death and reduce transmission of the virus and a return to more normal expectations is expected throughout 2021. These developments have had, and may continue to have, a material adverse effect on the Company and the operations of our hospitals. Our plans to reopen our Jamestown Regional Medical Center, whose operations were suspended in June 2019, have been disrupted by the pandemic and the timing of the reopening has been delayed
On September 14, 2020, the Company announced that it had purchased and taken delivery of equipment to provide rapid testing for COVID-19 at Jellico Community Hospital, CarePlus Center and Big South Fork Medical Center in an effort to provide the Company with an additional revenue stream.
On March 1, 2021, the Company closed Jellico Community Hospital, after the City of Jellico issued a 30-day termination notice for the lease of the building. This closure is not expected to have a negative impact on the current position of the business or the longer-term business strategy.
AMSG & HTS Group
We believe that a successful separation of the AMSG & HTS Group will allow each to focus on its own strengths and operational plans. The Company believes it will be able to recognize the expenditures to date with regard to the AMSG & HTS Group, which are approximately $14.9 million, as an investment after the separation is complete.
Result of Operations
Our loss from continuing operations before other income and (expense) and income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $17.2 million compared to a loss of $15.7 million for the same period a year ago. We attribute the increase in the operating loss primarily to the reduction in revenue.
We recorded a net loss from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $17.6 million, as compared to a loss of $46.6 million for the same period of a year ago. The improvement was primarily due to other income (expense), net of approximately $5.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to other income (expense), net of ($9.3) million in 2019, a $0.7 million net gain from legal settlements and a $2.0 million gain on extinguishment of debt in the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease in interest expense of $11.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 and a $1.3 million income tax benefit in the year ended December 31, 2020. Partially offsetting the improvement was an increase in the loss from continuing operations before other income (expense) and income taxes of $1.5 million.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make a number of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. Such estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our estimates on historical experiences and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We continue to monitor significant estimates made during the preparation of our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate estimates and assumptions based upon historical experience and various other factors and circumstances
We have identified the policies and significant estimation processes discussed below as critical to our business and to the understanding of our results of operations. For a detailed application of these and other accounting policies, see Note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606),” including subsequently issued updates. This series of comprehensive guidance has replaced all existing revenue recognition guidance. There is a five-step approach outlined in the standard. In determining revenue, we first identify the contract according to the scope of ASU Topic 606 with the following criteria:
● The parties have approved the contract either in writing; orally by acknowledgement; or implicitly, based on customary business practices.
● Each party’s rights and the contract’s payment terms are identified.
● The contract has commercial substance.
● Collection is probable.
Under the accounting guidance, we no longer present the provision for doubtful accounts as a separate line item and our revenues are presented net of estimated contract and related allowances. We also do not present “allowances for doubtful accounts” on our consolidated balance sheets.
We review our calculations for the realizability of gross service revenues monthly to make certain that we are properly allowing for the uncollectable portion of our gross billings and that our estimates remain sensitive to variances and changes within our payer groups. The contractual allowance calculation is made based on historical allowance rates for the various specific payer groups monthly with a greater weight being given to the most recent trends; this process is adjusted based on recent changes in underlying contract provisions. This calculation is routinely analyzed by us based on actual allowances issued by payers and the actual payments made to determine what adjustments, if any, are needed.
Our revenues generally relate to contracts with patients in which our performance obligations are to provide health care services to the patients. Revenues are recorded during the period our obligations to provide health care services are satisfied. Our performance obligations for inpatient services are generally satisfied over periods that average approximately five days, and revenues are recognized based on charges incurred in relation to total expected charges. Our performance obligations for outpatient services are generally satisfied over a period of less than one day. The contractual relationships with patients, in most cases, also involve a third-party payer (Medicare, Medicaid, managed care health plans and commercial insurance companies, including plans offered through the health insurance exchanges) and the transaction prices for the services provided are dependent upon the terms provided by (Medicare and Medicaid) or negotiated with (managed care health plans and commercial insurance companies) the third-party payers. The payment arrangements with third-party payers for the services we provide to the related patients typically specify payments at amounts less than our standard charges. Medicare generally pays for inpatient and outpatient services at prospectively determined rates based on clinical, diagnostic and other factors. Services provided to patients having Medicaid coverage are generally paid at prospectively determined rates per discharge, per identified service or per covered member. Agreements with commercial insurance carriers, managed care and preferred provider organizations generally provide for payments based upon predetermined rates per diagnosis, per diem rates or discounted fee-for-service rates. Management continually reviews the contractual estimation process to consider and incorporate updates to laws and regulations and the frequent changes in managed care contractual terms resulting from contract renegotiations and renewals. Our revenues are based upon the estimated amounts we expect to be entitled to receive from patients and third-party payers. Estimates of contractual allowances under managed care and commercial insurance plans are based upon the payment terms specified in the related contractual agreements. Revenues related to uninsured patients and uninsured copayment and deductible amounts for patients who have health care coverage may have discounts applied (uninsured discounts and contractual discounts). We also record estimated implicit price concessions (based primarily on historical collection experience) related to uninsured accounts to record self-pay revenues at the estimated amounts we expect to collect.
Laws and regulations governing the Medicare and Medicaid programs are complex and subject to interpretation. Estimated reimbursement amounts are adjusted in subsequent periods as cost reports are prepared and filed and as final settlements are determined (in relation to certain government programs, primarily Medicare, this is generally referred to as the “cost report” filing and settlement process).
The Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (“EMTALA”) requires any hospital participating in the Medicare program to conduct an appropriate medical screening examination of every person who presents to the hospital’s emergency room for treatment and, if the individual is suffering from an emergency medical condition, to either stabilize the condition or make an appropriate transfer of the individual to a facility able to handle the condition. The obligation to screen and stabilize emergency medical conditions exists regardless of an individual’s ability to pay for treatment. Federal and state laws and regulations require, and our commitment to providing quality patient care encourages, us to provide services to patients who are financially unable to pay for the health care services they receive. Patients treated at hospitals for non-elective care, who have income at or below 200% of the federal poverty level, were eligible for charity care. The federal poverty level is established by the federal government and is based on income and family size. Because we do not pursue collection of amounts determined to qualify as charity care, they are not reported in revenues. We provide discounts to uninsured patients who do not qualify for Medicaid or charity care. In implementing the uninsured discount policy, we may first attempt to provide assistance to uninsured patients to help determine whether they may qualify for Medicaid, other federal or state assistance, or charity care. If an uninsured patient does not qualify for these programs, the uninsured discount is applied.
The collection of outstanding receivables for Medicare, Medicaid, managed care payers, other third-party payers and patients is our primary source of cash and is critical to our operating performance. The primary collection risks relate to uninsured patient accounts, including patient accounts for which the primary insurance carrier has paid the amounts covered by the applicable agreement, but patient responsibility amounts (deductibles and copayments) remain outstanding. Implicit price concessions relate primarily to amounts due directly from patients. Estimated implicit price concessions are recorded for all uninsured accounts, regardless of the aging of those accounts. Accounts are written off when all reasonable internal and external collection efforts have been performed. The estimates for implicit price concessions are based upon management’s assessment of historical writeoffs and expected net collections, business and economic conditions, trends in federal, state and private employer health care coverage and other collection indicators. Management relies on the results of detailed reviews of historical write offs and collections at facilities that represent a majority of our revenues and accounts receivable (the “hindsight analysis”) as a primary source of information in estimating the collectability of our accounts receivable. We perform the hindsight analysis quarterly, utilizing rolling twelve-months accounts receivable collection and write off data. We believe our quarterly updates to the estimated implicit price concession amounts at each of our hospital facilities provide reasonable estimates of our revenues and valuations of our accounts receivable.
Contractual Allowances and Doubtful Accounts Policy
Accounts receivable are reported at realizable value, net of allowances for credits and doubtful accounts, which are estimated and recorded in the period the related revenue is recorded. The Company has a standardized approach to estimating and reviewing the collectability of its receivables based on a number of factors, including the period they have been outstanding. Historical collection and payer reimbursement experience is an integral part of the estimation process related to allowances for contractual credits and doubtful accounts. In addition, the Company regularly assesses the state of its billing operations in order to identify issues which may impact the collectability of these receivables or reserve estimates. Receivables deemed to be uncollectible are charged against the allowance for doubtful accounts at the time such receivables are written-off. Recoveries of receivables previously written-off are recorded as credits to the allowance for doubtful accounts. Revisions to the allowances for doubtful accounts estimates are recorded as an adjustment to provision for bad debts. We continue to review the provision for bad debt and contractual allowances.
Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets
The Company accounts for the impairment or disposal of long-lived assets according to Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 360, Property, Plant and Equipment (“ASC 360”). ASC 360 clarifies the accounting for the impairment of long-lived assets and for long-lived assets to be disposed of, including the disposal of business segments and major lines of business. Long-lived assets are reviewed when facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable. When necessary, impaired assets are written down to estimated fair value based on the best information available. Estimated fair value is generally based on either appraised value or measured by discounting estimated future cash flows. Considerable management judgment is necessary to estimate discounted future cash flows. Accordingly, actual results could vary significantly from such estimates.
Derivative Financial Instruments and Fair Value
In July 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-11 “Earnings Per Share (Topic 260) Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (Topic 480) Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815).” The amendments in Part I of this Update change the classification analysis of certain equity-linked financial instruments (or embedded features) with down round features. When determining whether certain financial instruments should be classified as liabilities or equity instruments, a down round feature no longer precludes equity classification when assessing whether the instrument is indexed to an entity’s own stock. The amendments also clarify existing disclosure requirements for equity-classified instruments. As a result, a freestanding equity-linked financial instrument (or embedded conversion option) no longer would be accounted for as a derivative liability at fair value as a result of the existence of a down round feature. For freestanding equity classified financial instruments, the amendments require entities that present earnings per share (EPS) in accordance with Topic 260 to recognize the effect of the down round feature when it is triggered. That effect is treated as a dividend and as a reduction of income available to common shareholders in basic EPS. Convertible instruments with embedded conversion options that have down round features are now subject to the specialized guidance for contingent beneficial conversion features (in Subtopic 470-20, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options), including related EPS guidance (in Topic 260).
When the down round feature is included in an equity-classified freestanding financial instrument, the value of the effect of the down round feature is treated as a dividend when it is triggered and as a numerator adjustment in the basic EPS calculation. This reflects the occurrence of an economic transfer of value to the holder of the instrument, while alleviating the complexity and income statement volatility associated with fair value measurement on an ongoing basis.
In accordance with Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures,” the Company applies fair value accounting for all financial assets and liabilities and non-financial assets and liabilities that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis. Fair value is defined as the price that would be received from selling an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. When determining the fair value measurements for assets and liabilities which are required to be recorded at fair value, the Company considers the principal or most advantageous market in which it would transact and the market-based risk measurements or assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, such as risks inherent in valuation techniques, transfer restrictions and credit risk. Fair value is estimated by applying the following hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value into three levels and bases the categorization within the hierarchy upon the lowest level of input that is available and significant to the fair value measurement:
● Level 1 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that we have the ability to access at the measurement date.
● Level 2 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are inputs other than quoted prices included in Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; or quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in markets with insufficient volume or infrequent transactions (less active markets).
● Level 3 applies to assets or liabilities for which fair value is derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs are unobservable, including our own assumptions.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
The following table summarizes the results of our consolidated continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net Revenues
Consolidated net revenues were $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $8.8 million. The decrease in net revenues was due to a reduction in revenues from Jamestown Regional Medical Center of $2.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Operations at Jamestown Regional Medical Center were temporarily suspended beginning in June 2019 pending reinstatement of the hospital’s Medicare agreement. The Company plans to reopen the hospital upon securing adequate capital to do so. The reopening plans have also been disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic and the timing of the reopening has been delayed. The decrease in net revenues in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the 2019 was also, in large part, a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which we attribute to the decrease in net revenues from Jellico Community Hospital and CarePlus Center of $4.3 million and net revenues from Big South Fork Medical Center of $1.8 million. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we believe demand for our services was reduced. Also reducing revenue were staffing issues and supply shortages caused by cash constraints during the 2020 period, which required us to divert patients to third party facilities.
Net revenues for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 include bad debt expense elimination of $7.1 million and $8.5 million, respectively, for doubtful accounts and $45.5 million and $99.3 million, respectively, for contractual allowances. In a continued effort to refine our revenue recognition estimates, the Company practices the full retrospective approach, evaluating and analyzing the realizability of gross service revenues quarterly, to make certain that we are properly allowing for bad debt and contractual adjustments.
Direct Costs of Revenue
Direct costs of revenue decreased by $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. We attribute the decrease primarily to Jamestown Regional Medical Center, which was temporarily suspended beginning in June 2019, as well as decreases in the number of patients served at Jellico Community Hospital, CarePlus Center and Big South Fork Medical Center. As a percentage of net revenues, direct costs increased to 163.7% in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 92.2% in 2019. We attribute the increase in the direct costs as a percentage of net revenues to the COVID-19 pandemic and the diversion of patients to third party facilities due to staffing issues and supply shortages caused by cash constraints during the year ended December 31, 2020. While the number of patients served decreased, certain direct costs of revenue remained.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses decreased by $4.5 million, or 27.8%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared 2019. The decrease in general and administrative expenses was mainly due to the temporary cessation of operations of Jamestown Regional Medical Center in June 2019. Also, contributing to the decrease were acquisition costs incurred in the 2019 period for the acquisition of Jellico Community Hospital and CarePlus Center on March 5, 2019 and reductions in insurance expense, compensation related expenses and directors fees.
Asset Impairment
As a result of the closure of Jellico Community Hospital on March 1, 2021, we determined that the hospital’s intangible asset, which was a certificate of need valued at $250,000, was impaired as of December 31, 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expense was $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $0.8 million in 2019 as certain fixed assets were fully depreciated during 2019.
Loss from Continuing Operations Before Other Income (Expense), Net and Income Taxes
Our operating loss increased by $1.5 million for year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019. We attribute the increase in the loss primarily to the reduction in revenues.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income (expense), net of $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $8.0 million of HHS Provider Relief Funds, partially offset by ($1.4) million in penalties associated with non-payment of payroll taxes and ($1.2) million of loss on the sale of accounts receivable under a sales agreement. Other income (expense), net of ($9.3) million for the year ended December 31, 2019 included ($6.9) million in penalties for non-payment of debentures on the maturity dates, ($1.0) million of penalties related to past due payments of payroll taxes and ($1.4) million of losses on sales of accounts receivable under sales agreements.
Net Gain from Legal Settlements
We settled several legal proceedings during the year ended December 31, 2020, which resulted in a net gain from legal settlements of $0.7 million. The settlement of obligations under a financing lease for property and equipment resulted in $0.9 million of the gain and we recorded $0.2 million in gains from other settlements. Partially offsetting the gains from legal settlements was a $0.4 million loss from a potential legal settlement related to a lawsuit by certain employees against the Company.
Gain on Bargain Purchase
In the year ended December 31, 2019, we realized a $0.3 million gain on the bargain purchase of Jellico Community Hospital, which was acquired on March 5, 2019. The gain was associated with the intangible asset acquired in the acquisition.
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt
We recorded a $2.0 million gain on extinguishment of debt in the year ended December 31, 2020, which resulted from the Exchange, Redemption and Forbearance Agreement (the “Exchange and Redemption Agreement”) that we entered into on August 31, 2020. Under the Exchange and Redemption Agreement, stock and debentures and associated accrued interest were exchanged for shares of the Company’s Series N Preferred Stock. The Exchange and Redemption Agreement is more fully discussed below under the heading Liquidity and Capital Resources and in Notes 9, 13 and 14 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Instrument
The change in the fair value of derivative instrument for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $0.1 million resulted from a late payment penalty, which increased the principal amount of a debenture that contains a conversion feature indexed to the Company’s common stock.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9.8 million compared to $21.7 million in 2019. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $6.3 million for default interest on past due debentures and note payable, $2.1 million for interest associated with loans from a former member of our Board of Directors and approximately $1.2 million of interest expense on notes payable and finance lease obligations. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $1.6 million for interest associated with loans from a former member of our Board of Directors, and $16.2 million for the amortization of debt discount and deferred financing costs related to debentures and note payable, including $9.5 million for the modification of warrants issued in connection with debentures and approximately $3.6 million of interest expense on debentures, notes payable, finance lease obligations and the settlement of a prepaid forward purchase contract.
Benefit from Income Taxes
The net income tax benefit was $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We did not incur income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the U.S. Congress approved the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The CARES Act allows a five-year carryback privilege for federal net operating tax losses that arose in a tax year beginning in 2018 and through 2020. As a result, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded approximately $1.1 million in income tax refunds from the carryback of certain of our federal net operating losses. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an additional $0.3 million of income tax benefits resulting from carryback adjustments related to prior years, partially offset by $0.1 million for the provision for state income taxes.
Net Loss from Continuing Operations
Our net loss from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $17.6 million compared to a loss of $46.6 million in 2019. The improvement was primarily due to other income (expense), net of approximately $5.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to other income (expense), net of ($9.3) million in 2019, a $0.7 million net gain from legal settlements and a gain of $2.0 million on extinguishment of debt in the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease in interest expense of $11.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 and a $1.3 million income tax benefit in the year ended December 31, 2020. Partially offsetting the improvement was an increase in the loss from continuing operations before other income (expense) and income taxes of $1.5 million.
The following table presents key financial metrics that management uses to monitor the results for our Hospital Operations:
(1) In addition to the net revenues generated from our hospital operations in 2019, we generated $75,460 of revenues related to non-hospital operations. Thus, the total net revenues were $16.0 million for 2019.
Our Hospital Operations have historically generated operating losses. We served less patients during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 as a result of the suspension of operations at Jamestown Regional Medical Center, which did not operate during 2020 following the termination of the Medicare program in June 2019. Also, reducing the number of patients served was the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as staffing issues and shortages of hospital supplies due to cash constraints, which required us to divert patients to third-party facilities during 2020. Net revenues and direct costs per patient increased in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 due to the type of services billed. Direct costs per patient were also impacted by the use of contract labor versus employees for patient care during the year ended December 31, 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we financed our operations from the issuances of equity, debentures and notes payable, loans from Mr. Diamantis, a former member of our Board of Directors, and the sale of accounts receivable under sales agreements. Also, during the year ended December 31, 2020 we received approximately $2.3 million from PPP Notes and approximately $12.5 million from HHS Provider Relief Funds. On June 30, 2020, we entered into an exchange agreement with Mr. Diamantis, wherein we exchanged the amount owed to Mr. Diamantis for principal and interest on that date, which totaled $18.8 million, for shares of the Company’s Series M Convertible Preferred Stock. On August 31, 2020, we entered into the Exchange and Redemption Agreement with certain institutional investors in the Company as discussed in the paragraph below. Each of these financing transactions is more fully discussed in Notes 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 13 and 14 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Under the Exchange and Redemption Agreement, the investors agreed to reduce their holdings of the Company’s debentures (the debentures are more fully discussed in Note 9 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements) by approximately $19.3 million (including accrued interest and penalties) by exchanging the debentures and all of the outstanding shares of the Company’s Series I-1 Convertible Preferred Stock and Series I-2 Convertible Preferred Stock (the preferred stock is more fully discussed in Note 13 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements) for 30,435.52 shares of the Company’s newly-authorized Series N Preferred Stock.
The investors continued to own, after the initial exchange, approximately $14.9 million (including accrued interest and penalties) of debentures, but agreed that the Company could redeem $10 million of its obligations under these debentures held by the investors at face value, plus accrued interest and penalties. These debentures included approximately $4.9 million under debentures and accrued interest that have been guaranteed by Mr. Diamantis. This redemption right was exercisable for 90 days, or until November 29, 2020. If it had been exercised in full, the remaining debentures held by the investors (totaling approximately $4.9 million, including accrued interest and penalties) would have been exchanged for approximately 4,900 additional shares of Series N Preferred Stock.
During the 90-day redemption period (or until the occurrence of certain specified events, if earlier), the investors agreed to forbear from exercising any remedies against the Company or Mr. Diamantis as a result of any existing defaults under the outstanding securities. During that period, additional interest did not accrue and would have been forgiven if the redemption right was exercised in full. If the redemption right was not exercised in full, all such amounts would become due and payable. The redemption right was not exercised and all such amounts have become due and payable.
Future cash needs for working capital, capital expenditures, debt obligations and potential acquisitions will require management to seek additional equity or obtain additional credit facilities. The Company and our facilities may also receive additional government assistance. The sale/issuances of additional equity will result in additional dilution to our stockholders. A portion of our cash may be used to acquire or invest in complementary businesses or products or to obtain the right to use complementary technologies. From time-to-time, in the ordinary course of business, we evaluate potential acquisitions of such businesses, products or technologies.
Going Concern and Liquidity
Under ASU 2014-15, Presentation of Financial Statements-Going Concern (Subtopic 205-40) (“ASC 205-40”), the Company has the responsibility to evaluate whether conditions and/or events raise substantial doubt about its ability to meet its future financial obligations as they become due within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. As required by ASC 205-40, this evaluation shall initially not take into consideration the potential mitigating effects of plans that have not been fully implemented as of the date the financial statements are issued. Management has assessed the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern in accordance with the requirement of ASC 205-40.
As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company had a working capital deficit and an accumulated deficit of $56.5 million and $868.5 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020. In addition, the Company had a loss from continuing operations of approximately $17.6 million and cash used in operating activities of $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of the date of this report, our cash is deficient and payments for our operations in the ordinary course are not being made. The continued losses and other related factors, including the payment defaults under the terms of outstanding notes payable and debentures as more discussed in Notes 8 and 9 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements, raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for twelve months from the filing date of this report. Our fixed operating expenses include payroll, rent, finance lease payments and other fixed expenses, as well as the costs required to operate our Hospital Operations. Our fixed operating expenses were approximately $1.5 million per month for the year ended December 31, 2020.
We need to raise additional funds immediately and continue to do so until we begin to realize positive cash flow from operations. There can be no assurance that we will be able to achieve our business plan, which is to acquire and operate clusters of rural hospitals, raise any additional capital or secure the additional financing necessary to implement our current operating plan. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to significantly reduce our operating costs, increase our revenues and eventually achieve profitable operations. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if we are unable to continue as a going concern.
Also, during the year ended December 31, 2020 we received approximately $2.3 million from PPP Notes and Company-owned facilities received approximately $12.5 million of HHS Provider Relief Funds, $8.0 million of which was recorded as other income and the remainder was recorded as a liability at December 31, 2020. The PPP Notes and accrued interest are forgivable as long as the borrower uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintains its payroll levels. The amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if the borrower terminates employees or reduces salaries. The Company is in the process of applying for forgiveness for the PPP Notes and accrued interest. The HHS Provider Relief Funds are grants, not loans, and HHS will not require repayment, but providers are restricted and the funds must be used only for grant approved purposes as more fully discussed in Note 1 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements. We received approximately $1.2 million in cash from the issuance of a promissory note during the year ended December 31, 2020 that was used to repay amounts due under accounts receivable sales agreements and $2.1 million from the sale of accounts receivable under sales agreements. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, Mr. Diamantis loaned the Company $7.6 million, the majority of which was used for working capital purposes, and we repaid Mr. Diamantis $4.2 million.
As of December 31, 2020, we were party to legal proceedings, which are presented in Note 16 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
The following table presents our capital resources as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The following table presents the major sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The components of cash used in operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are presented in the following table:
Cash used by investing activities of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was used to purchase $0.4 million of hospital equipment, partially offset by $0.1 million provided by the sale of property and equipment. The cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $0.7 million was used primarily for the acquisition of Jellico Community Hospital.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $17.1 million and primarily included $7.6 million in loans from a former member of our Board of Directors, $2.3 million from PPP Notes, $12.5 million from HHS Provider Relief Funds, $2.1 million from the sales of accounts receivable and $1.2 million from the issuance of an installment note payable. Partially offsetting these cash receipts were $0.9 million in payments of debentures, $1.6 million of notes payable payments, $4.2 million in payments of loans owed to a former member of our Board of Directors, $1.7 million in payments of accounts receivable under sales agreements and $0.2 million of finance lease obligation payments. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $14.2 million primarily included $16.7 million in loans from a former member of our Board of Directors, $3.8 million from the issuances of debentures, $1.6 million in proceeds from notes payable and $2.6 million in proceeds from the sales of accounts receivable under sales agreements. Partially offsetting these cash receipts were $2.3 million in payments of loans from a former member of our Board of Directors, $5.0 in payments of a note payable, $2.8 million in payments of accounts receivable under sales agreements, $0.1 million of finance lease obligation payments and $0.1 million in payment of financing fees.
The Company had 39,648,679 and 964,894 shares of common stock issued and outstanding at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued an aggregate of 313,000 shares of its common stock upon conversion of $277,994 of stated value of its Series I-2 Convertible Preferred Stock and 38,371,250 shares of its common stock upon conversion of $1,001,000 of stated value of shares of its Series N Preferred Stock.
These provisions have resulted in significant dilution of the Company’s common stock and have given rise to reverse splits of the Company’s common stock, including a reverse stock split effected on July 31, 2020, which is more fully described in Note 1 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
The terms of certain of the warrants, convertible preferred stock and convertible debentures issued by the Company provide for reductions in the per share exercise prices of the warrants and the per share conversion prices of the debentures and preferred stock (if applicable and subject to a floor in certain cases), in the event that the Company issues common stock or common stock equivalents (as that term is defined in the agreements) at an effective exercise/conversion price that is less than the then exercise/conversion prices of the outstanding warrants, preferred stock or debentures, as the case may be. In addition, the majority of these equity-based securities contain exercise or conversion prices that vary based upon the price of the Company’s common stock on the date of exercise/conversion (see Notes 3, 12, 13, 14 and 20 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements). These provisions have resulted in significant dilution of the Company’s common stock and have given rise to reverse splits of the Company’s common stock, including a reverse stock split effected on July 31, 2020, which is more fully described in Note 1 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements. As a result of these down round provisions, the potential common stock equivalents, including common stock outstanding totaled 8.9 billion at December 31, 2020 and 25.9 billion at March 31, 2021.
OTHER MATTERS
Inflation
We do not believe inflation has a significant effect on the Company’s operations at this time.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Under SEC regulations, we are required to disclose the Company’s off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors. Off-balance sheet arrangements consist of transactions, agreements or contractual arrangements to which any entity that is not consolidated with us is a party, under which we have:
● Any obligation under certain guarantee contracts.
● Any retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support to that entity for such assets.
● Any obligation under a contract that would be accounted for as a derivative instrument, except that it is both indexed to the Company’s stock and classified in stockholder’s equity in the Company’s statement of financial position.
● Any obligation arising out of a material variable interest held by us in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to us, or engages in leasing, hedging or research and development services with us.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.