Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is intended to assist in understanding and assessing the trends and significant changes in our results of operations and financial condition. Historical results may not be indicative of future performance. This discussion includes forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Such statements involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the headings “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” This discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. In this discussion, we use certain non-GAAP financial measures. An explanation of these non-GAAP financial measures and a reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures are included in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.” Investors should not consider non-GAAP financial measures in isolation or as substitutes for financial information presented in compliance with GAAP.
Overview
We are a civil infrastructure company that specializes in the building and maintenance of transportation networks. Our operations leverage a highly-skilled workforce, strategically located HMA plants, substantial construction assets and select material deposits. We provide construction products and services to both public and private infrastructure projects, with an emphasis on highways, roads, bridges, airports and commercial and residential sites in the southeastern United States.
Our public projects are funded by federal, state and local governments and include roads, highways, bridges, airports and other forms of infrastructure. Public transportation infrastructure projects historically have been a relatively stable portion of state and federal budgets and represent a significant share of the United States construction market. Federal funds are allocated on a state-by-state basis, and each state is required to match a portion of the federal funds that it receives. Federal highway spending uses funds predominantly from the Highway Trust Fund, which derives its revenues from fuel taxes and other user fees.
In addition to public infrastructure projects, we provide a wide range of large site work construction and HMA paving services to private construction customers, including commercial and residential developers and local businesses.
Fiscal 2021 Developments
COVID-19
We did not incur significant disruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. However, we continue to closely monitor the impact of the pandemic on all aspects of our business, including its impact on our customers, employees, suppliers and vendors. Among the primary risks to our business from the pandemic are (i) employee absences, which could adversely affect our productivity and our ability to complete projects in accordance with our contractual obligations, and could require us to temporarily close our facilities or project sites, (ii) potential disruptions in our supply chains for raw materials or equipment, whether as a result of facility closures or otherwise, which could increase our labor and materials costs and impair our ability to manufacture HMA or the ability of our subcontractors to complete their required tasks, and (iii) the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customers, which could cause these customers to cancel or delay current or prospective projects or become delinquent in their payments to us for work that we have performed. These risks materialized in varying degrees during fiscal 2021, but none of these risks, individually or in the aggregate, have significantly impacted our operations to date. In addition, the extent to which our operations may be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic going forward will also depend on the duration of the pandemic, the emergence of different COVID-19 variants, the efficacy and adoption rates of vaccines, and actions by government authorities to contain the outbreak or mitigate the impact of the pandemic. For example, we continue to monitor the impact of vaccination requirements imposed by our customers or governmental authorities on our workforce, which could increase employee turnover and thereby impair our ability to perform our construction projects.
Business Acquisitions
We completed eight acquisitions during the fiscal year, through which we added eighteen HMA plants and five aggregates facilities located in North Carolina and Alabama. As a result of these acquisitions, we entered into several new markets, while also securing crushed stone and aggregates sources for certain of our markets as part of our vertical integration strategy and adding a diverse fleet of trucks and construction equipment to support our operations. For more information about our acquisitions during fiscal 2021, see Note 4 - Business Acquisitions to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Amended and Restated Credit Agreement
In June 2021, we amended and restated our existing Credit Agreement to, among other things, increase the amount of our Term Loan to an initial aggregate principal amount of $200 million (the full amount of which was drawn immediately) and the amount of our Revolving Credit Facility to an initial aggregate principal amount of $225 million. We used a portion of the proceeds advanced to us to refinance our indebtedness outstanding on the restatement date and to pay fees and expenses incurred in connection with the transaction, with the remainder available for our general corporate purposes, including permitted acquisitions. For more information about the Credit Agreement, see Note 11 - Debt to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Inflation, Supply Chain and Labor
During fiscal 2021, we began to experience an upward trend in several inflation-sensitive inputs necessary for us to provide our products and services, including upward pressure on wages and increases in the cost of raw materials used to produce HMA and other items that are critical to our business, including fuel, concrete and steel. In addition, we experienced some disruptions from various participants in our supply chain, including subcontractors, materials suppliers and equipment manufacturers, who provide the raw materials, equipment, vehicles, construction supplies and other services we require in order to manufacture HMA and perform our construction projects. To date, we have been able to mitigate some of the effects of inflation, supply chain disruptions and labor constraints on our business by increasing prices for our products and including the anticipated cost increases in the construction
projects we bid. However, we are limited in our ability to pass through increased costs for projects already in our backlog and, under those circumstances, may be unable to recoup losses or diminished profit margins by passing these costs through to our customers.
How We Assess Performance of Our Business
Revenues
We derive our revenues predominantly by providing construction products and services for both public and private infrastructure projects, with an emphasis on highways, roads, bridges, airports and commercial and residential sites. Our projects represent a mix of federal, state, municipal and private customers. We also derive revenues from the sale of HMA, aggregates, and liquid asphalt cement to customers. We recognize revenues derived from projects as we satisfy our performance obligations over time (formerly known as the percentage-of-completion method), measured by the relationship of total cost incurred compared to total estimated contract costs (cost-to-cost input method). Changes in job performance, job conditions and estimated profitability, including those arising from contract penalty provisions and final contract settlements, may result in revisions to estimated costs and income, and are recognized in the period in which the revisions are determined. Revenues derived from the sale of HMA, aggregates, and liquid asphalt cement are recognized when the risks associated with ownership have passed to the customer.
Gross Profit
Gross profit represents revenues less cost of revenues. Cost of revenues consists of all direct and indirect costs associated with construction contracts, including raw materials, labor, equipment costs, depreciation, lease expenses, subcontract costs and other expenses at our HMA plants, aggregates mining facilities, and liquid asphalt cement terminal. Our cost of revenues is directly affected by fluctuations in commodity prices, primarily liquid asphalt and diesel fuel. From time to time, when appropriate, we limit our exposure to changes in commodity prices by entering into forward purchase commitments. In addition, our public infrastructure contracts often provide for price adjustments based on fluctuations in certain commodity-related product costs. These price adjustment provisions are in place for most of our public infrastructure contracts, and we seek to include similar provisions in our private contracts.
Depreciation, Depletion, Accretion and Amortization
Property, plant and equipment are initially recorded at cost or, if acquired as a business combination, at fair value. Depreciation on property, plant and equipment is computed on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the asset. Amortization expense is the periodic expense related to leasehold improvements and intangible assets. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the lesser of the life of the underlying asset or the remaining lease term. Our intangible assets were recognized as a result of certain acquisitions and are generally amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Mineral reserves are depleted in accordance with the units-of-production method as aggregates are extracted, using the initial allocation of cost based on proven and probable reserves.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include costs related to our operational offices that are not allocated to direct contract costs and expenses related to our corporate offices. These expenses consist primarily of salaries and personnel costs for our administration, finance and accounting, legal, information systems, human resources and certain managerial employees. General and administrative expenses also include acquisition expenses, audit, consulting and professional fees, stock-based compensation expense, travel, insurance, office space rental costs, property taxes and other corporate and overhead expenses.
Gain on Sale of Equipment, Net
In the normal course of business, we sell construction equipment for various reasons, including when the cost of maintaining the asset exceeds the cost of replacing it. The gain or loss on the sale of equipment reflects the difference between the carrying value at the date of disposal and the net consideration received from the sale of equipment during the period.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net primarily represents interest incurred on our long-term debt, such as the Term Loan and the Revolving Credit Facility, as well as the changes in fair values of interest swap agreements and amortization of deferred debt issuance costs. These amounts are partially offset by interest income earned on short-term investments of cash balances in excess of our current operating needs.
Other Key Performance Indicators - Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, and Adjusted Net Income
Adjusted EBITDA represents net income before, as applicable from time to time, (i) interest expense, net, (ii) provision (benefit) for income taxes, (iii) depreciation, depletion, accretion and amortization, (iv) equity-based compensation expense, (v) loss on the extinguishment of debt, (vi) certain management fees and expenses and (vii) nonrecurring legal settlement costs and associated legal expenses unrelated to the Company’s core operations. Adjusted EBITDA Margin represents Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of revenues for each period. Adjusted net income represents net income before nonrecurring legal settlement costs and associated legal expenses unrelated to the Company’s core operations. These metrics are supplemental measures of our operating performance that are neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. These measures have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to net income or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP as an indicator of our operating performance. We present Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin and Adjusted net income because management uses these measures as key performance indicators, and we believe that securities analysts, investors and others use these measures to evaluate companies in our industry. Our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin and Adjusted net income may not be comparable to similarly named measures reported by other companies. Potential differences may include differences in capital structures, tax positions and the age and book depreciation of intangible and tangible assets.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income, the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA and the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA Margin for the periods presented (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)Reflects fees and reimbursement of certain out-of-pocket expenses under a management services agreement with SunTx Capital Partners, the Company’s controlling stockholder (see Note 17 - Related Parties to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report).
(2)Reflects $3.2 million legal settlement and associated legal expenses (see Note 26 - Legal Settlement to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report).
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income, the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to adjusted net income for the periods presented (in thousands):
(1)Reflects $3.2 million legal settlement and associated legal expenses (see Note 26 - Legal Settlement to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report).
Results of Operations - Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2020
The following table sets forth selected financial data for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 (“fiscal 2021”) and September 30, 2020 (“fiscal 2020”) (in thousands, except percentages). Refer to the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, filed with the SEC on December 11, 2020, for a discussion of results for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019.
Revenues. Revenues for fiscal 2021 increased $125.0 million, or 15.9%, to $910.7 million from $785.7 million for fiscal 2020. The increase included $87.0 million of revenues attributable to acquisitions completed during or subsequent to fiscal 2020 and an increase of approximately $38.0 million of revenues in our remaining markets from contract work and sales of HMA and aggregates to third parties.
Gross Profit. Gross profit for fiscal 2021 decreased $2.3 million, or 1.9%, to $119.9 million from $122.2 million for fiscal 2020. The lower gross profit was the result of a decrease in gross profit margin to 13.2% for fiscal 2021 from 15.6% for fiscal 2020, primarily due to (i) lower margins on construction projects in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 due to delays related to weather, labor and trucking and supply chain issues, and (ii) lower profit margins on the projects we assumed in connection with the North Carolina acquisitions we completed during fiscal 2021 and low utilization of the asphalt plants and equipment acquired in those acquisitions.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses for fiscal 2021 increased $23.3 million, or 33.9%, to $91.9 million from $68.6 million for fiscal 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily the result of (i) a $2.0 million increase in equity-based compensation expense, (ii) a $3.2 million legal settlement, as described in Note 26 - Legal Settlement, and an increase of $0.7 million for legal fees associated with this settlement, (iii) a $7.8 million increase in management personnel payroll and benefits, (iv) a $3.5 million increase attributable to general and administrative expenses of businesses acquired subsequent to September 30, 2020, and (v) a $3.5 million increase in other professional fees, primarily driven by expenses incurred in support of acquisition activities, information technology expenses and increased accounting and consulting fees.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net for fiscal 2021 decreased $0.7 million, or 22.8%, to $2.4 million compared to $3.1 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease in interest expense, net reflects a $1.2 million decrease in interest expense and a decrease of $0.5 million in interest income. The decrease was primarily due to $0.9 million of unrealized gain on interest rate swaps for fiscal 2021, compared to an unrealized loss on interest rate swaps of $1.4 million for fiscal 2020. This change was offset by an increase in interest paid due to
the increase in long-term debt at September 30, 2021 compared to September 30, 2020. The decrease in interest income was due to a decrease in interest rates earned on our deposits.
Provision for Income Taxes. Our effective tax rate increased to 29.3% for fiscal 2021, from 24.0% for fiscal 2020. Our higher effective tax rate was due to the unfavorable impact of a non-deductible legal settlement and related legal expenses, as described in Note 26 - Legal Settlement, and other fiscal 2021 permanent non-deductible expenses.
Earnings from Investment in Joint Venture. Earnings from investment in joint venture decreased $0.6 million during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, as the construction project from which these earnings were derived had a lower level of activity during fiscal 2021.
Net Income. Net income decreased $20.1 million, or 49.9%, to $20.2 million for fiscal 2021 compared to $40.3 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease in net income was primarily a result of lower gross profit and higher general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a decrease in interest expense, net, all as described above.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin were $90.6 million and 9.9%, respectively, for fiscal 2021, compared to $98.9 million and 12.6%, respectively, for fiscal 2020. The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA primarily resulted from lower gross profit and an increase in general and administrative expenses. The lower Adjusted EBITDA Margin was primarily the result of a decrease in Adjusted EBITDA and increase in revenues, all as described above. For a description of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, as well as a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, see “How We Assess Performance of Our Business.”
Adjusted Net Income. Adjusted net income decreased $16.7 million to adjusted net income of $24.0 million for fiscal 2021, compared to adjusted net income of $40.7 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease in adjusted net income was primarily a result of lower gross profit and higher general and administrative expenses, all as described above.
Inflation and Price Changes
Except as described above in Item 1 of this report under the heading “2021 Fiscal Year Developments - Inflationary Trends,” inflation had an immaterial impact on our results of operations for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 due to relatively low inflation in the United States in recent years and our ability to recover increasing costs by charging higher prices for our products, including through sale price escalator clauses in most of our public infrastructure sector contracts. Inflation risk varies with the level of activity in our industry, the number, size and strength of competitors and the availability of products to supply a local market. For more information, see the discussion under the heading “Inflation Risk” included in