Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Result of Operations
Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis section or MD&A, other than purely historical information, including estimates, projections, statements relating to our business plans, objectives and expected operating results, and the assumptions upon which those statements are based, are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act. These forward-looking statements generally are identified by the words “may,” “will,” “could,” “would,” “should,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “approximately,” “estimate,” “predict,” “project,” “potential,” “continue,” “ongoing,” or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology, although the absence of these words does not necessarily mean that a statement is not forward-looking. Historical results may not indicate future performance. Our forward-looking statements reflect our current views about future events, are based on assumptions and are subject to known and unknown risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by these statements. Factors that may cause differences between actual results and those contemplated by forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, the risk factors described in this report. Except to the extent required by law, we undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether because of new information, future events, a change in events, conditions, circumstances or assumptions underlying such statements, or otherwise.
Plan of Operations
Our plan is to develop our brand name, to have it strongly associated with all of our distributed products and to focus on finding and developing the best nutritional supplement product options for North America and beyond.
We believe that we may be able to offer products that could capitalize on the growing alcohol beverage market and changing consumer habits in the industry. Human Brands’ diversified operating divisions currently own and manage over 250,000 agave plants, several premium spirit brands, three hospitality concepts, and holds exclusive import/export rights for a variety of spirit brands primarily in the tequila industry. It currently has several wholly-owned subsidiaries that focus on five key areas of business: (i) agave, (ii) bulk tequila production, (iii) brand development, (iv) import/export, and (v) hospitality.
An experienced but limited core management team is in place and has, on a limited basis, reviewed, studied and analyzed the alcoholic beverage product market. In the event that the Company can secure additional capital in sufficient amounts and on a timely basis, the Company may be able to establish a procurement program and may be able to work with outside professionals to build its business, create brands through eco-friendly packaging and distinctive labeling, and develop key distribution relationships.
Basis of Presentation
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). These accounting principles require us to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions. We believe that the estimates, judgments and assumptions upon which we rely are reasonable based upon information available to us at the time that these estimates, judgments and assumptions are made. These estimates, judgments, and assumptions can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Our financial statements would be affected to the extent there are material differences between these estimates and actual results. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP and does not require management’s judgment in its application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this report.
Results of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
We did not record any revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. We are contemplating various opportunities as a means to generate future sales revenue; however, we can provide no assurance that our efforts will successfully result in any new revenues.
Gross Margin
Gross margin is calculated by subtracting cost of sales from revenue. Gross margin percentage is calculated by dividing gross margins by revenue.
We did not record any cost of goods sold for either of the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019. As such, we did not realize any gross margin for either of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses from continuing operations totaled $263,626 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $141,255 in operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019, or a decrease of $122,371.
Our operating expenses are primarily comprised of compensation and benefits, professional fees and other general and administrative costs. The increase in operating expenses was due to an increase in professional services rendered in relation to our financial reporting and other matters, and fees incurred from various state compliance filings.
We expect our operating expenses to increase proportionally to our business activities as we begin to execute upon our Plan of Operations in future periods. We also anticipate incurring additional costs and expenses as a result of our lack of positive cash flow and lack of profits.
Other Income (Expense)
Net other expenses totaled $302,595 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $824,431 in net other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The Company has issued various convertible notes to help finance its operations, some of which have embedded derivative features. The value of these instruments will fluctuate as the trading price of our common stock changes. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an unrealized gain of $104,386, compared to an unrealized loss of $292,536 during the year ended December 31, 2019 from the change in the value of these derivative features. During the year ended December 31, 2020 we recorded a derivative liability expense of $129,961, compared to no derivative liability expense recorded during the year ended December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded interest expense on convertible notes or $227,570, compared to interest expense of $490,548 during the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded interest expense related to the amortization of debt discounts totaling $49,450 compared to $17,347 during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net loss from continuing operations
We incurred a net loss from continuing operations of $566,221, or $0.00 per share, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a net loss of $965,686, or $0.00 per share, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The weighted average number of basic and fully diluted shares outstanding for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 9,259,486,613, compared to 8,833,435,867 for the year ended December 31, 2019. There are no dilutive equivalents included in our calculation of fully diluted shares for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive due to our net loss per share.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern, which contemplates, among other things, the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the ordinary course of business.
The Company sustained a net loss of $566,221 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Because of the absence of positive cash flows from operations, the Company requires additional funding to execute upon its Plan of Operation. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
We are presently unable to meet our obligations as they come due. At December 31, 2020, we had $111 in assets and a working capital deficit of $5,583,345. Our working capital deficit is largely due to the balance of our convertible notes payable and related derivative liabilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used net cash of $101,408 from our operating activities from continuing operations compared to $55,669 cash used in our operating activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by our financing activities from continuing operations was $101,500 compared to $55,500 cash provided by or used in our financing activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We anticipate that our cash requirements will arise from the need to fund our growth from operations, pay current and prior period obligations and future capital expenditures. The primary sources of funding in the near term for such requirements are expected to be cash generated from raising additional funds by the issuance of convertible notes. However, we can provide no assurances that we will be able to generate sufficient cash flow or obtain additional financing on terms satisfactory to us if at all, to remain a going concern. Our continuation as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to generate sufficient cash flow to meet our obligations on a timely basis and ultimately to attain profitability. In addition, our Plan of Operation for the next twelve months is to raise capital to continue to expand our operations. We are presently engaged in capital raising activities through one or more private offerings of our company’s securities. See “Note 2- Going Concern” in our financial statements for additional information as to the possibility that we may not be able to continue as a “going concern.”
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.