Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with the Company’s risk factors and its consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 1A and Item 8, respectively, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information set forth in this Item 7 constitutes “forward-looking statements” as that term is used in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements are based, in whole or in part, on management’s beliefs, estimates, assumptions, and currently available information. For a more detailed discussion of what constitutes a forward-looking statement and of some of the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from such forward-looking statements, please refer to the “Safe Harbor Statement” on page 3 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We use certain operating performance measures, specifically consolidated gross margin, operating margin by segment and consolidated operating margin, to manage our businesses, set operational goals, and establish performance targets for incentive compensation for our employees. We define consolidated gross margin as a percentage of total consolidated gross profit to total consolidated net sales. We define operating margin by segment as a percentage of total income from operations by segment to total net sales by segment and consolidated operating margin as a percentage of total consolidated income from operations to total consolidated net sales. We believe gross margin and operating margin may be useful to investors in evaluating the profitability of our segments and Company on a consolidated basis.
Company Overview
The Company serves customers primarily in North America including renewable energy (solar) developers, institutional and commercial growers of food and plants, home improvement retailers, wholesalers, distributors, and contractors. Our operational infrastructure provides the necessary scale to support local, regional, and national customers in each of our markets.
The Company operates and reports its results in the following three reporting segments:
•Renewable Energy and Conservation;
•Residential Products; and
•Infrastructure Products.
The segments and end markets our businesses serve are subject to economic conditions that are influenced by various factors. These factors include but are not limited to changes in general economic conditions, interest rates, exchange rates, commodity costs, demand for residential construction, demand for repair and remodeling, governmental policies and funding, tax policies and incentives, tariffs, trade policies, the level of non-residential construction and infrastructure projects, the need for protection of high value assets, demand for renewable energy sources, and climate change. We believe the key elements of our strategy outlined in Item 1. Business will allow us to respond timely to these factors.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth selected results of operations data (in thousands) and its percentages of net sales for the years ended December 31:
The following table sets forth the Company’s net sales by reportable segment for the years ended December 31 (in thousands):
Consolidated net sales increased by $134.3 million, or 15.0%, for 2020 compared to 2019. The 15.0% increase in revenue was driven by the Renewable Energy and Conservation and Residential Products segments. Sales generated from our 2020 acquisitions of Thermo, Delta Separations and Architectural Mailboxes, and the prior year acquisition of Apeks, contributed 10.0% or $89.9 million to the growth from the prior year. Organic growth of 4.9%, or $44.4 million was a result of increased volume in our Residential Products segment, which more than offset the organic volume declines in both our Renewable Energy and Conservation and our Infrastructure Products segments.
Net sales in our Renewable Energy and Conservation segment increased 20.0%, or $74.5 million, to $447.6 million in 2020 compared to $373.0 million in 2019. Sales generated by the current year acquisitions of Thermo and Delta Separations, along with the prior year acquisition of Apeks, contributed $84.6 million, or 22.7%, to the increase in the current year. Organic revenue decline of $10.1 million partially offset this increase, the result of continued weakness in cannabis and hemp markets more than offsetting participation gains in our renewable energy related business. Backlog improved 22% year over year for this segment, driven by strength in the fruit and vegetable market and strong end market demand in renewable energy.
Net sales in our Residential Products segment increased 13.3%, or $61.2 million, to $522.8 million in 2020 compared to $461.6 million in 2019. The increase from the prior year was the result of continued solid activity in the repair and remodel market, participation gains across our various distribution channels along with $5.3 million of sales generated by our 2020 acquisition of Architectural Mailboxes.
Net sales in our Infrastructure Products segment decreased 2.2%, or $1.4 million, to $62.2 million in 2020 compared to $63.6 million in 2019, Volume declined as the pandemic continued to impact existing and new project schedules, especially in segments like airport runway maintenance, where customers have delayed spending. The volume decline was partially offset by an increase in pricing to customers. Ending backlog improved slightly from the prior year.
Our consolidated gross margin increased to 24.8% for 2020 compared to 24.5% for 2019. This increase was due to improved operating execution in all of our core businesses the result of effective price and material cost management, benefits from our 80/20 simplification initiatives, and incremental costs for design refinement and field improvements for our solar tracking solution incurred in the prior year. Partially offsetting the above improvements were lower gross margins generated from our recent acquisitions.
Selling, general, and administrative ("SG&A") expenses increased by $10.1 million, or 7.2%, to $149.2 million for 2020 from $139.1 million for 2019. The $10.1 million increase was primarily due to $13.8 million of incremental SG&A expenses recorded year over year for our recent acquisitions and transaction costs to complete those acquisitions closed during the year, along with investments in the development of our organization and safety of our team by reallocating SG&A spending, primarily travel related expenditures. Partially offsetting these increases was decreased spending for exit activity costs of approximately $4.0 million. SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased to 14.4% for 2020 compared to 15.5% for 2019.
The following table sets forth the Company’s income from operations and income from operations as a percentage of net sales by reportable segment for the years ended December 31 (in thousands):
The Renewable Energy and Conservation segment generated an operating margin of 9.1% in 2020 compared to 12.7% in 2019. The decrease in operating margin was the net result of expected lower margins generated by our recent acquisitions as we continue to integrate them operationally, offset by favorable product and services mix and strong execution in our renewable energy business, as well as the absence of incremental costs incurred during the prior year for design refinement and field improvements for our solar tracking solution.
Our Residential Products segment operating margin increased to 18.1% in 2020 compared to 13.7% in 2019. The increase in operating margin was largely the result of volume leverage, effective price and material cost management and continued benefits from 80/20 simplification initiatives, along with a $3.1 million decrease in exit activity costs compared to the prior year.
Our Infrastructure Products segment operating margin increased to 11.6% in 2020 compared to 10.1% in 2019. The increase in operating margin year over year was the result of strong execution to compensate for volume declines in non-fabricated products, mainly from our airport customers along with favorable alignment of material costs to customer selling prices.
Unallocated corporate expenses decreased $1.0 million, or 2.8%, for 2020 from $36.2 million for 2019 to $35.2 million for 2020. The decrease in expense was the result of lower performance-based compensation expenses partially offset by transaction costs to complete those acquisitions closed during the year.
Interest expense decreased $1.6 million to $0.7 million for 2020 from $2.3 million for 2019. The decrease in expense resulted from the redemption of the Company's outstanding $210 million of 6.25% Senior Subordinated Notes during the first quarter of 2019. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $85.0 million outstanding on its revolving credit facility, the result of funds borrowed to help finance the acquisition of TerraSmart in December 2020. During 2019, no amounts were outstanding under our revolving credit facility.
The Company recorded other income of $1.3 million in 2020 and other expense of $0.4 million in 2019, respectively. The change from the prior year was the result of the $1.9 million pre-tax gain on the sale of the Company's self-guided apartment tour application business within the Residential Products segment.
We recognized a provision for income taxes of $24.5 million, an effective tax rate of 22.7%, for 2020 compared with a provision for income taxes of $18.2 million, an effective tax rate of 23.2%, for 2019. The effective tax rates for 2020 and 2019 exceeded the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% due to state taxes and nondeductible permanent differences partially offset by favorable discrete items.
Outlook
For 2021, we enter the year with confidence in our end markets but remain cautious about the ongoing pandemic landscape, the recovery of the U.S. and global economy, availability and input cost of key materials, as well as recent operating disruptions related to severe weather across the U.S. We will continue executing our current operating playbook, maintaining a safe environment for our people, and supporting our customers. As in 2020, we will continue working on the business and investing to strengthen our businesses and uphold our commitments to our stakeholders.
The Company is providing its guidance for revenues and earnings for the full year 2021. Gibraltar expects 2021 consolidated revenues to be in the range of $1.30 billion and $1.35 billion, up from $1.03 billion for 2020. GAAP EPS for full year 2021 is expected to be between $2.78 and $2.95, compared with $2.53 in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal capital requirements are to fund our operations' working capital and capital improvements and to provide capital for acquisitions. We will continue to invest in growth opportunities as appropriate while focusing on working capital efficiency and profit improvement opportunities to minimize the cash invested to operate our business. The following table sets forth our liquidity position as of:
We believe that our cash on hand and available borrowing capacity provided under our Sixth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the "Senior Credit Agreement") provide us with ample liquidity and capital resources to weather the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic while continuing to invest in operational excellence, growth initiatives and the development of our organization. After pausing earlier in the year as the pandemic unfolded, we continued with our strategic initiatives to invest in opportunities that strengthen our business platforms for the markets we serve through the acquisitions of Architectural Mailboxes, Sunfig and TerraSmart in the fourth quarter of 2020. We continue to remain focused on managing our working capital, which may include adjusting scheduled deliveries of inventory to match current demand levels, closely monitoring customer credit and collection activities, and working to extend payment terms. We believe our liquidity, together with the cash expected to be generated from operations, should be sufficient to fund working capital needs and growth initiatives.
Our Senior Credit Agreement provides the Company with liquidity and capital resources for use by our U.S. operations. Historically, our foreign operations have generated cash flow from operations sufficient to invest in working capital and fund their capital improvements. As of December 31, 2020, our foreign subsidiaries held $21.8 million of cash in U.S. dollars.
During 2020, we opted to defer remittance of the employer portion of Social Security tax as provided in the Coronavirus, Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act"), which allowed us to retain $4.4 million in cash during 2020 that would have otherwise been remitted to the federal government. The deferred tax payments will be repaid equally in 2021 and 2022. The CARES Act, along with other foreign government initiatives, also provides for job retention programs, which have allowed some of our businesses to receive payroll tax credits or subsidies during 2020.
Over the long-term, we expect that future investments, including strategic business opportunities such as acquisitions, may be financed through a number of sources, including internally available cash, availability under our revolving credit facility, new debt financing, the issuance of equity securities, or any combination of the above. All potential acquisitions are evaluated based on our acquisition strategy, which includes the enhancement of our existing products, operations, or capabilities, expanding our access to new products, markets, and customers, with the goal of creating compounding and sustainable shareholder value.
These expectations are forward-looking statements based upon currently available information and may change if conditions in the credit and equity markets deteriorate or other circumstances change. To the extent that operating cash flows are lower than current levels, or sources of financing are not available or not available at acceptable terms, our future liquidity may be adversely affected.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth selected cash flow data for the years ended December 31 (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations for 2020 of $73.0 million consisted of income from continuing operations of $83.3 million, non-cash net charges totaling $33.4 million, which include depreciation, amortization, gain on sale of business, stock compensation, and other non-cash charges, offset by a net investment in working capital and other net assets of $43.7 million. The investment in working capital and other net assets was largely by an investment of $42.4 million in Thermo, one of our recent acquisitions, which was undercapitalized at purchase, along with a decrease in accrued expenses and other non-current liabilities correlated to the timing of customer billings and payments.
Net cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations for 2019 of $112.5 million consisted of income from continuing operations of $59.9 million, non-cash net charges totaling $40.0 million, which include depreciation, amortization, stock compensation, and other non-cash charges, and a decrease in working capital and other net assets of $12.6 million. The decrease in net working capital and other net assets was largely the result of planned inventory management reduction initiatives along with more favorable timing of customer payments on contracts, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable resulting from increased sales volume in our Renewable Energy and Conservation segment.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of continuing operations for 2020 of $324.7 million consisted of net cash paid of $313.7 million for the acquisitions of five businesses in 2020 and capital expenditures of $13.1 million, partially offset by net proceeds of $2.0 million from the sale of a business within the Residential Products segment and proceeds of $0.1 million from the sale of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities of continuing operations for 2019 of $17.3 million consisted of capital expenditures of $8.8 million and net cash paid for the acquisition of Apeks LLC of $8.6 million, partially offset by net proceeds of $0.1 million from the sale of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for 2020 of $79.5 million was primarily driven by proceeds from a draw on our revolving credit facility of $85 million, as well as the $1.1 million in net proceeds from stock option exercises, offset by $6.6 million in purchases of treasury stock related to the net settlement of tax obligations for participants in the Company's equity incentive plans.
Net cash used in financing activities for 2019 of $217.1 million was primarily driven by the $212.0 million repayment of our 6.25% Notes and other debt, as well as the $4.3 million purchase of treasury stock related to the net settlement of tax obligations for participants in the Company's equity incentive plans, and the $1.2 million payment of debt issuance costs, all which were slightly offset by $0.5 million in net proceeds from stock option exercises.
See Note 9 to the Company's consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Form 10-K for further information on the Company’s Senior Credit Agreement.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any off balance sheet arrangements that had or were reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on the Company's financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes by category our Company’s expected future cash outflows associated with contractual obligations in effect at December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1) Includes amounts due to retired participants of the Management Stock Purchase Plan (MSPP). Excludes the future payments due to active participants of the MSPP who have not notified the Company of their intended retirement date, which represents a liability of $12.8 million as of December 31, 2020. The timing of future payments to active participants cannot be accurately estimated as we are uncertain of when active participants’ service to the Company will terminate. Our policy does not recognize the contractual obligation until the participant has officially retired.
(2) The purchase obligations are primarily comprised of purchase orders issued in the normal course of business for inventory, minimum quantities of certain raw materials. Also included in is a contractual obligation related to cloud services agreement.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make decisions based upon estimates, assumptions, and factors it considers relevant to the circumstances. Such decisions include the selection of applicable principles and the use of judgment in their application, the results of which could differ from those anticipated.
A summary of the Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 of the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our most critical accounting estimates that require the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments include:
•revenue recognition on contracts;
•the assessment of recoverability of goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets; and
•the estimation of fair value for acquired assets and liabilities assumed in business combination transactions.
Management reviews these estimates on a regular basis and makes adjustments based on historical experience, current conditions, and future expectations. Management believes these estimates are reasonable, but actual results could differ from these estimates.
Revenue Recognition on Contracts
The vast majority of our sales contracts are for standard products with revenue recognized at the point in time we transfer control to the customer. The point in time we transfer control is based on when we determine the customer has legal title, significant risks and rewards of ownership of the asset, and we have a present right to payment for the product. However, revenue representing 40%, 41% and 38% of our 2020, 2019 and 2018 consolidated net sales, respectively, was recognized over time under the cost-to-cost method as we satisfied our performance obligations. This method of revenue recognition pertains to activities within the Renewable Energy and Conservation and the Infrastructure Products segments.
Revenue recognized on contracts over time using the cost-to-cost method for measuring progress is recognized as work progresses toward completion based on the ratio of cumulative costs incurred to date to estimated total contract costs at completion. Revenues are recognized proportionally as costs are incurred under this method. Estimates of the total costs at completion for the performance obligations involve subjective judgment and estimation to determine total costs expected to be incurred by the time the performance obligation has been completed and accepted by the customer. The estimates of total costs to be incurred at completion of each contract are sensitive to significant judgments and assumptions, such as the expected costs to complete installation, which are affected by customer site-specific conditions as well as availability and cost of third-party contractors to complete the installation process. These estimates, judgments and assumptions impact the timing and amount of net sales and cost of sales recognized on in-progress performance obligations with customers. We continuously review our estimates and the progress and performance of the performance obligation for substantially all contracts that we recognize revenue over time under the cost-to-cost method. Any adjustments or changes in these estimates affecting sales, costs and profits are recognized in the period in which the change becomes known using the cumulative catch-up method of accounting, resulting in the cumulative effect of changes reflected in the period. A significant change in an estimate on one or more contracts could have a material effect on our results of operations.
Contract costs include all direct costs related to contract performance. Selling and administrative expenses are charged to operations as incurred. Provisions for estimated losses on uncompleted contracts are made in the period in which such losses are determined. Because of inherent uncertainties in estimating costs, it is reasonably possible that changes in performance could result in revisions to cost and revenue, which are recognized in the period when the revisions are determined.
Goodwill and Other Indefinite-lived Intangible Asset Impairment Testing
Our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset balances of $514.3 million and $56.6 million, respectively, which in aggregate represent 47% of total assets as of December 31, 2020, are subject to impairment testing. We test goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment on an annual basis as of October 31 and at interim dates when indicators of impairment are present. Indicators of impairment could include a significant long-term adverse change in business climate, poor indicators of operating performance, or a sale or disposition of a significant portion of a reporting unit.
We test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level. We identify our reporting units by assessing whether the components of our Company constitute businesses for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews the operating results of those components. We have ten reporting units, nine of which have goodwill.
During interim periods, we evaluate the potential for goodwill impairment using a qualitative assessment by considering factors such as, but not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry conditions, the competitive environment, changes in the market for our products and services, regulatory and political developments, entity specific factors such as strategy, changes in key personnel, and overall financial performance. If, after completing this assessment, it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we proceed to a quantitative impairment test. During 2020, the Company considered the current and future macroeconomic and market conditions, along with its current market capitalization, projected cash flows and internal and external forecasts, and projections relating to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on each of its reporting units. The Company determined that a triggering event has not occurred which would require an interim impairment test to be performed. During the interim periods of 2020, we concluded that no indicators of impairment existed at interim dates and did not perform any quantitative interim impairment tests related to goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets.
The Company conducts its annual impairment test on all ten reporting units as of October 31, during which we test goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment. On an annual basis, the quantitative goodwill impairment test consists of comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with the carrying amount of the reporting unit including goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in the amount by which the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit.
The annual quantitative goodwill impairment test requires subjective and complex judgment due to the significant estimation required in determining the fair value of the reporting units and the fair value of indefinite-lived intangible assets. Reporting unit fair value estimates include significant assumptions such as: revenue growth rates, operating margins, company-specific risk premiums used in the weighted-average cost of capital, and EBITDA multiples, which are affected by expectations about future market or economic conditions. The fair value estimates for indefinite-lived intangible assets include significant assumptions such as revenue growth rates and estimated royalty rates, which are affected by the market for comparable intellectual property licensing arrangements and expectations about future market or economic conditions. The Company performs sensitivity analysis on significant assumptions to evaluate how changes in the estimated fair values of reporting units and indefinite-lived intangible assets respond to changes in assumptions, specifically the revenue growth rates and the weighted-average cost of capital.
As a result of our quantitative testing, none of the reporting units with goodwill as of our testing date had carrying values in excess of their fair values, nor were any of the reporting units "at-risk" of impairment. The Company quantitatively defines "at risk" as a percentage of the excess of the reporting unit's fair value over its carrying amount that is less than 10%. An "at risk" reporting unit qualitatively represents a reporting unit with a higher degree of uncertainty of the reporting unit's ability to meet its forecasted cash flows based upon revenue growth rate and operating margin assumptions relied upon in the estimation of its fair value. There were no impairment charges against goodwill recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Indefinite-Lived Intangibles
We test our indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment by comparing the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset, determined using a discounted cash flow model, with its carrying amount. Each reporting period, we perform an evaluation of the remaining useful life of our indefinite-lived intangible assets to determine whether events and circumstances continue to support an indefinite useful life. If an indefinite-lived intangible asset is subsequently determined to have a finite useful life, the asset is tested for impairment and then amortized prospectively over its estimated remaining useful life, and accounted for in the same manner as other intangible assets that are subject to amortization.
The assumptions used to determine the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets are consistent with the assumptions employed in the determination of the fair values of our reporting units. An impairment loss would be recognized for the carrying amount in excess of its fair value. The fair values of the impaired trademarks were determined using an income approach consisting of the relief-from-royalty method. The Company did not recognize any impairment charges on our indefinite-lived intangible assets in 2020 and 2019. During 2018, the Company recognized $1.2 million of impairment charges on our indefinite-lived intangible assets.
Accounting for Acquired Assets and Liabilities
When we acquire a business, we allocate the purchase price to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the transaction at their respective estimated fair values. We record any premium over the fair value of net assets acquired as goodwill. Significant judgment is necessary to determine the fair value of the purchase price. The allocation of the purchase price involves judgments and estimates both in characterizing the assets and in determining their fair value. The way we characterize the assets has important implications, as long-lived assets with definitive lives, for example, are depreciated or amortized, whereas goodwill is tested annually for impairment, as explained above.
With respect to determining the fair value of assets, the most subjective estimates involve valuations of long-lived assets, such as identified intangible assets and property, plant, and equipment. We use all available information to make these fair value determinations and engage independent valuation specialists to assist in the fair value determination of the acquired long-lived assets. The fair values of long-lived assets are determined using valuation techniques that use discounted cash flow methods, independent market appraisals, and other acceptable valuation techniques. The significant assumptions used to estimate the value of the intangible assets included discount rates, customer attrition, and certain assumptions that form the basis of the forecasted results (e.g., revenue growth rates and operating profit margin). The significant assumptions related to estimating the fair value of the intangible assets above are forward looking and could be affected by future economic market conditions.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to the Company's consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Form 10-K for further information on recent accounting pronouncements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
Other Topics Adopted
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) issued a final rule in May 2020 that amends the financial statement requirements for acquisitions and dispositions of businesses. The amendments primarily relate to disclosures required by Rule 3-05 and Article 11 of Regulation S-X and modifies the tests provided in Rule 1-02(w) of Regulation S-X used to determine whether a subsidiary or an acquired or disposed business is significant and modifies the number of years of audited financial statements required for acquisitions with significance levels greater than specified percentages. The amendments are effective for annual periods beginning after January 1, 2021 with early adoption permitted. We have elected to early adopt these amendments during the fourth quarter of 2020.
In August 2020, the SEC issued a final rule about the Modernization of Regulation S-K Items 101, 103 and 105, which became effective on November 9, 2020. The rule is intended to streamline disclosures about the business, legal proceeding and risk factors, and it adds new disclosure requirements about human capital resource.
In November 2020, the SEC issued a final rule about Management's Discussion and Analysis, Selected Financial Data, and Supplementary Financial Information, which became effective on February 10, 2021. The rule is intended to eliminate duplicate disclosures and to improve and simplify the disclosures within Management's Discussion and Analysis Items 301, 302 and 303. Early adoption is permitted on an Item-by-Item basis, provided that the Company complies fully with all areas of that Item. We have elected to early adopt the amendments of Item 301 for this Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 and expect adoption of Items 302 and 303 in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021.