Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Presentation
This discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this document. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons of 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 on our Annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019. The following discussion (as well as other discussions in this document) contains forward-looking statements. Please see “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements.
The Company
Rollins, Inc. (the “Company”) is an international service company with headquarters located in Atlanta, Georgia, providing pest and termite control services through its wholly-owned subsidiaries to both residential and commercial customers in the United States, Canada, Australia, Europe, and Asia with international franchises in Canada, Central and South America, the Caribbean, the Middle East, Asia, Europe, Africa, and Australia. Services are performed through a contract that specifies the treatment and the pricing arrangement with the customer.
The Company has one reportable segment, its pest and termite control business. The Company’s results of operations and its financial condition are not reliant upon any single customer or a few customers or the Company’s foreign operations.
Overview
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
General Operating Comments 	
2020 marked the Company’s 23rd consecutive year of increased revenues. Revenues for the year rose 7.2 percent to $2.161 billion compared to $2.015 billion for the prior year. Income before income taxes increased 35.8% to $354.7 million compared to $261.2 million the prior year. Net income increased 28.3% to $260.8 million, with earnings per diluted share of $0.53 compared to $203.3 million, or $0.41 per diluted share for the prior year. The drop in net income from 2018 to 2019 was primarily attributed to the pension settlement loss recorded in 2019.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact
As the pandemic challenges grew early in 2020, the Company made numerous operational adjustments to address the economic, health and safety challenges from the COVID-19 pandemic. These included new COVID-related procedures, modified customer service and related protocols, daily health screenings before entering shared offices, and a transition to remote work locations to reduce concentrations of personnel in offices where appropriate. Cost containment efforts included furloughs, layoffs, elimination of non-essential travel, postponing capital expenditures, and temporary salary reductions for upper management, among other actions.
Customer retention during the pandemic is less predictable, and of greater immediate concern compared with our normal operations, however, our residential pest and termite control business has remained reasonably consistent with some growth over prior years. With many sheltering or working from home, we have experienced higher than normal demand for our residential services. Our commercial pest control business has been more adversely impacted, as it crosses multiple industries such as healthcare, food processing, logistics, grocery, retail and hospitality. Each of these industries is being impacted differently by the pandemic. Many of our commercial customers continue to operate as “essential” businesses; however, unfortunately there are a notable number of others that have closed, at least temporarily. We expect this impact will persist through much of 2021 until the majority of the population has been vaccinated against the virus. The Company’s residential and termite revenues grew 13.4% and 9.6%, respectively, in 2020 compared to 2019 while our commercial pest control revenues fell by 0.5%.
While we have a substantial amount of intangible assets on our balance sheet, based on our revenue growth this year, we do not anticipate any significant long-term loss in revenues or cash flows that would approach a level for impairment of intangible assets.
All of our critical supply-chain vendors have remained operational, and we have engaged additional new sources to supplement our existing suppliers, especially for critical PPE and other COVID-19 related items. Fleet suppliers and support vendors continue to serve our needs.
Results of Operations-2020 Versus 2019
Overview
The Company’s revenues increased to $2.161 billion in 2020, a 7.2% increase compared to 2019. Gross margin increased to 51.5% for 2020 from 50.7% in 2019. Sales, general and administrative expense were 30.4% of revenues in 2020 compared to 30.9% in 2019. The Company’s depreciation and amortization expense as a percent of revenue increased 2.5% to 4.1% in 2020 compared to 4.0% in 2019. Rollins’ net income of $260.8 million in 2020 was an increase of $57.5 million, or 28.3%, compared to $203.3 million in 2019. Net profit margin improved to 12.1% in 2020 from 10.1% in 2019. Rollins continued to expand our global brand recognition with acquisitions in the United States, Canada, United Kingdom, Australia, and Asia as well as expanded our Orkin international franchise program in numerous countries around the globe. The Company continues to seek new international opportunities.
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $2.161 billion, an increase of $145.7 million, or 7.2%, from 2019 revenues of $2.015 billion. Growth accounted for approximately 3.8% of our increase, and our acquisitions contributed the remaining revenue growth. We experienced strong growth in residential pest control, increasing 13.4%, while termite and ancillary revenues grew 9.6%. Year over year commercial revenues were down 0.5% as commercial pest control was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 virus due to various levels of government-driven shutdowns. The Company’s revenue mix for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of 45% residential pest control, 36% commercial pest control and 19% termite and ancillary revenues (such as moisture control, insulation, deck and gutter work).
During 2020, the Company chose to forgo the normal mid-year price increase, which historically contributes approximately 1.0% to our annual revenue growth. Approximately 80% of the Company’s pest control revenue was recurring in 2020, as well as in 2019.
The Company’s foreign operations accounted for approximately 7% and 8% of total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company established new franchises in several international countries around the globe in 2020 while closing or acquiring others, for a total of 94 Orkin international franchises and nine Australia franchises at December 31, 2020, compared to 97 Orkin international franchises, one Canadian Critter Control franchises and ten Australia franchises at December 31, 2019. The Australia franchises operate under the Murray Pest Control and Scientific Pest Management names.
Revenue from franchising was up 5.6% in 2020 compared to 2019 as the Company continued to expand Orkin’s international footprint and recognition of initial franchise fees. International and domestic franchising revenue was less than 1% of the Company’s revenues for 2020. Orkin had 143 and 147 franchises (domestic and international) at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company continued its strategy of buying back Critter Control franchises during 2020, resulting in a drop in franchises to 79 at December 31, 2020, compared to 85 at December 31, 2019.
Cost of Services Provided
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, cost of services provided increased $55.0 million, or 5.5%, compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Gross margin for the year increased to 51.5% for 2020 from 50.7% in 2019. Margin improvements were driven primarily from lower service wage growth compared to revenue growth, and from fleet savings driven by improvements in our routing and scheduling efficiencies and lower fuel prices.
Depreciation and Amortization
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, depreciation and amortization increased $7.2 million, or 8.9%, compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The dollar increase was primarily due to depreciation increasing $4.0 million, or 10.9%, from the depreciation of acquired and purchased assets and depreciation from various IT related projects. Amortization of intangible assets increased $3.2 million, or 7.3%, for 2020 due to the additional amortization of customer contracts from several acquisitions over the last year, including a full year of amortization for Clark Pest Control acquired in April 2019, as well as several smaller foreign and domestic companies.
Sales, General and Administrative
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, sales, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses increased $32.8 million, or 5.3%, compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. SG&A decreased to 30.4% of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 30.9% in 2019. The Company eliminated any non-essential spending at the start of the pandemic which lowered expenses in several areas. Travel restrictions reduced typical training, site visits and conference costs. Conversely, we incurred higher than normal expenses in 2019 related to acquisition preparation and integration activities for Clark Pest Control.
Gain / Loss on Sales of Assets, Net
The Company recorded a $1.6 million net loss on sales of assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a net gain on sales of assets of $0.6 million in 2019. The Company’s 2020 losses came primarily from liquidating the pension plan assets from the 2019 pension plan settlement. During 2019, the Company recorded gains from the sale of owned vehicles and other owned property.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $5.1 million and $6.9 million respectively, driven largely by borrowings to fund acquisitions, among other things.
Taxes
The Company’s effective tax rate increased to 26.5% in 2020 compared to 22.1% in 2019, due primarily to state and foreign income tax changes and limited tax deductibility for the accelerated stock vesting expense recognized in 2020. The 2019 rate was lower due to beneficial adjustments related to the 2019 pension settlement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and Cash Flow
Cash from operating activities is the principal source of cash generation for our businesses.
The most significant source of cash in Rollins’ cash flow from operations is customer-related activities, the largest of which is collecting cash resulting from services sold. The most significant operating use of cash is to pay our suppliers, employees, tax authorities and others for a wide range of material and services.
The Company’s cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 were $98.5 million, $94.3 million, and $115.5 million, respectively.
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
The Company’s operations generated cash of $435.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily from net income of $260.8 million, compared with cash provided by operating activities of $319.6 million in 2019 and $299.4 million in 2018. The Company believes its current cash and cash equivalents balances, future cash flows expected to be generated from operating activities, available borrowings under its $175.0 million revolving credit facility and $250.0 million term loan facility will be sufficient to finance its current operations and obligations, and fund expansion of the business for the foreseeable future.
The Company settled its obligations under the Rollins, Inc. Pension Plan in 2019 without making any additional contributions during the years ended December 31, 2019 or 2018. The plan was fully funded with a prepaid balance. The plan assets exceeded the plan benefit obligations, and $31.8 million remained after settlement. The Company sold illiquid benefit plan asset investments during 2020 and used $18.0 million and $11.0 million of the $31.8 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, to fund its 401(k) match obligations. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had approximately $1.2 million remaining of benefit plan assets which will likely be reverted to the Company per ERISA regulations in 2021.
The Company has one remaining pension in one of its wholly-owned subsidiaries. An employer contribution of $0.1 million was made during the year ended December 31, 2019. No contributions were made during 2020 or 2018. While the Company’s management does not expect to make a contribution to its remaining pension plan during fiscal year 2021, additional plan contributions, if any, will not have a material effect on the Company’s financial position, results of operations or liquidity.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
The Company used $162.4 million in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $455.1 million and $101.4 million during 2019 and 2018, respectively. The Company invested approximately $23.2 million in capital expenditures during 2020 compared to $27.1 million and $27.2 million during 2019 and 2018, respectively. Capital expenditures for the year consisted primarily of property purchases, equipment replacements and technology-related projects. The Company expects to invest between $25.0 million and $30.0 million in 2021 in capital expenditures. During 2020, the Company and its subsidiaries acquired McCall Pest Management, Inc, the remaining Clark Pest Control locations, and Adam’s Pest Control in Australia as well as several other small to mid-sized companies for a total of $147.6 million compared to $430.6 million and $76.8 million in acquisitions during 2019 and 2018, respectively. The expenditures for the Company’s acquisitions were funded through existing cash balances, borrowings on our line of credit, a term loan, and other operating cash flows. The Company continues to seek new acquisitions.
Cash Used in or Provided by Financing Activities
The Company used $281.3 million in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. During 2019, the Company generated $111.7 million from financing activities compared to using $175.4 million during 2018. The Company repaid $88.5 million of its outstanding debt balance throughout 2020, net of borrowings, compared to borrowing $291.5 million during 2019, net of repayments. A total of $160.5 million was paid in cash dividends ($0.33 per share) during the year ended December 31, 2020 including a special dividend paid in December 2020 of $0.09 per share, compared to $153.8 million in cash dividends paid ($0.31 per share) during the year ended December 31, 2019, including a special dividend paid in December 2019 of $0.03 per share and $152.7 million paid in cash dividends ($0.31 per share) during the year ended December 31, 2018, including a special dividend paid in December 2018 of $0.06 per share.
The Company reclassified certain prior period amounts in the Statement of Cash Flows from Operating Activities to Financing Activities for payment of contingent consideration to conform to the current period presentation.
The Company did not purchase shares on the open market during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. There remain 11.4 million shares, adjusted for the December 10, 2020 three-for-two stock split, authorized to be repurchased under prior Board approval. The Company repurchased $8.3 million, $10.0 million, and $9.5 million of common stock for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, from employees for the payment of taxes on vesting restricted shares.
The Company’s $98.5 million of total cash at December 31, 2020 is primarily cash held at various banking institutions. Approximately $71.3 million is held in cash accounts at international bank institutions and the remaining $27.2 million is primarily held in Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) insured non-interest-bearing accounts at various domestic banks which at times may exceed federally insured amounts.
The Company’s international business is expanding, and we intend to continue to grow the business in foreign markets in the future through reinvestment of foreign deposits and future earnings as well as acquisitions of unrelated companies. Repatriation of cash from the Company’s foreign subsidiaries is not a part of the Company’s current business plan.
Rollins maintains adequate liquidity and capital resources, without regard to its foreign deposits, that are directed to finance domestic operations and obligations and to fund expansion of its domestic business.
For Information regarding our Revolving Credit Agreement see Note 4 - Debt of the Notes to Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K).
Litigation
For discussion on the Company’s legal contingencies, see Note 15 - Commitments and Contingencies to the accompanying financial statements.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements, Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities and Commitments
The Company has no material off balance sheet arrangements.
The impact that the Company’s contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods is as follows:
1. These amounts represent expected payments with interest for unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2020.
2. Minimum pension funding requirements are not included as funding will not be required.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company views critical accounting policies and estimates to be those that are very important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations, and that require management’s most difficult, complex or subjective judgments. The circumstances that make these judgments difficult or complex relate to the need for management to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. We believe our critical accounting policies to be as follows:
Accrual for Termite Contracts-The Company maintains an accrual for termite claims representing the estimated costs of reapplications, repairs and associated labor and chemicals, settlements, awards and other costs relative to termite control services. Factors that may impact future costs include termiticide life expectancy and government regulation. It is significant that the actual number of claims has decreased in recent years due to changes in the Company’s business practices. However, it is not possible to precisely predict future significant claims. Accruals for termite contracts are included in other current liabilities and long-term accrued liabilities on the Company’s consolidated statements of financial position.
Accrued Insurance-The Company retains, up to specified limits, certain risks related to general liability, workers’ compensation and auto liability. Risks are managed through either high deductible insurance or a non-affiliated group captive insurance member arrangement. The estimated costs of existing and future claims under the retained loss program are accrued based upon historical trends as incidents occur, whether reported or unreported (although actual settlement of the claims may not be made until future periods) and may be subsequently revised based on developments relating to such claims. The Company contracts with an independent third-party actuary on a semi-annual basis to provide the Company an estimated liability based upon historical claims information. The actuarial study is a major consideration in establishing the reserve, along with management’s knowledge of changes in business practice and existing claims compared to current balances. Management’s judgment is inherently subjective as a number of factors are outside management’s knowledge and control. Additionally, historical information is not always an accurate indication of future events. The Company continues to be proactive in safety and risk management to develop and maintain ongoing programs to reduce and prevent claims. Initiatives that have been implemented include required pre-employment screening and ongoing motor vehicle record review for all drivers, post-offer physicals for new employees, pre-hire, random and post incident drug testing, increased driver training and post-injury nurse triage for work-related injuries. The accruals and reserves we hold are based on estimates that involve a degree of judgment and are inherently variable and could be overestimated or insufficient. If actual claims exceed our estimates, our operating results could be materially affected, and our ability to take timely corrective actions to limit future costs may be limited.
Revenue Recognition- the Company’s Revenue recognition policy is to recognize revenue upon transfer of control of promised products or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. We enter into contracts that can include various combinations of products and services, each of which are distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations. Revenue is recognized net of allowances for refunds and any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
More on the Company’s revenue recognition policy can be found in the Company’s Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies with the heading Revenue Recognition.
Contingency Accruals-The Company is a party to legal proceedings with respect to matters in the ordinary course of business. In accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 450 “Contingencies,” Management estimates and accrues for its liability and costs associated with the litigation. Estimates and accruals are determined in consultation with outside counsel. Because it is not possible to accurately predict the ultimate result of the litigation, judgments concerning accruals for liabilities and costs associated with litigation are inherently uncertain and actual liabilities may vary from amounts estimated or accrued. However, in the opinion of management, the outcome of the litigation will not have a material adverse impact on the Company’s financial condition or results of operations. Contingency accruals are included in other current liabilities and long-term accrued liabilities on the Company’s consolidated statements of financial position.
Recent Accounting Guidance
See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K) for further discussion.
Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements regarding: (1) the Company continuing to expand its growth through the franchise program of its Orkin brand; (2) management’s belief that the Company competes favorably with competitors as the world’s largest pest and termite control company; (3) compliance with environmental and regulatory laws, legislative and regulatory requirements may have a material effect on the Company’s capital expenditures, earnings, and competitive position and subject us to the possibility of regulatory and private actions or proceedings; (4) failure to comply with consumer protection, privacy solicitation laws or regulations could subject us to involvement in lawsuits, enforcement actions and other claims by third parties or governmental authorities, losses to our reputation, business or licenses or substantial fines, damages or penalties that may affect how the business is operated, which, in turn, could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows; (5) franchise dispute could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows; (6) our belief that our maintenance of supplies is sufficient to fulfill our immediate needs and to alleviate any potential short-term shortage in availability of such supplies; (7) the suitability and adequacy of our facilities to meet our current and reasonably anticipated future needs; (8) our belief that the development and retention of high-quality talent leads to a better customer experience and better customer retention; (9) our belief that if we make it a priority to promote and create a diverse, equitable and inclusive workplace, it will result in higher levels of satisfaction and engagement, stronger staff retention, higher productivity, and a heightened sense of belonging; (10) our goals to create organizational change focusing on inclusion for all employees; (11) our belief that our commitment to offer employees the opportunity to participate in various community outreach programs will help us meet our goals of attracting, developing and retaining high-quality employees and create a significant impact in local communities over time; (12) our belief that no pending claim, proceeding or litigation, either alone or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect on our business, financial position, results of operations, liquidity, cash flow or prospects; (13) our belief that we establish sufficient loss contingency reserves based upon outcomes of such pending claims, proceedings or litigation that we currently believe to be probable and reasonably estimable; (14) our belief that our financial statements filed with the SEC on Forms 10-K and 10-Q for the relevant periods that are subject to the SEC investigation fairly present in all material respects our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows as of their respective balance sheet dates and for the periods then ended; (15) our expectation that the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, specifically, that a notable number of our commercial customers will continue to be forced to temporarily close their doors, will persist until the majority of the population has been vaccinated against the virus; (16) our anticipation that we will not experience any significant long-term loss in revenues or cash flows, in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, that would approach a level for impairment of intangible assets; (17) the belief that our current cash and cash equivalents balances, future cash flows expected to be generated from operating activities, available borrowings under our $175.0 million revolving credit facility and $136.0 million currently outstanding under our term loan facility will be sufficient to finance our current operations and obligations, and fund expansion of the business for the foreseeable future, (18) the belief that we have adequate liquid assets, funding sources and insurance accruals to satisfy any claims; (19) our expectation to continue our payment of cash dividends, subject to the earnings and financial condition of the Company and other relevant factors; (20) plans regarding future acquisitions and franchise expansions, including our belief that acquisitions have been and may continue to be an important element of our business strategy; (21) our belief that we maintain adequate liquidity and capital resources, without regard to its foreign deposits, to finance domestic operations and obligations and to fund expansion of our domestic business; (22) plans to continue funding future defined benefit plan obligations with a possible reversion of any remaining pension assets to us in compliance with ERISA regulations; (23) our belief that the Company will not make a contribution to its remaining pension plan during fiscal year 2021; (24) our belief that any potential additional pension plan contributions will not have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations or liquidity; (25) our projected 2021 capital expenditures; (26) the plans to grow the business in foreign markets through reinvestment of foreign deposits and future earnings and through acquisitions of unrelated companies with no expectation of repatriation of cash from our foreign subsidiaries; (27) our ability to mitigate investment risks with respect to the Waltham Services, LLC Hourly Employee Pension Plan by evaluating the appropriateness of the funds’ judgments and assumptions by reviewing the financial data included in the funds’ financial statements for reasonableness; (28) our belief that we have adequate liquid assets, funding sources and insurance accruals to accommodate certain insurance claims; (29) our expectation that we will maintain compliance with the covenants contained in our Revolving Credit Agreement throughout 2021; (30) the expected impact and amount of our contractual obligations; (31) our expectations regarding termite claims and factors that impact future costs from those claims; (32) the expected cost of termite renewals; (33) the expected collectability of accounts receivable; (34) our belief that our tax positions are fully supportable; (35) expectations and plans regarding any losses from franchisees; (36) our beliefs about our accounting policies and the impact of recent accounting pronouncements; (37) our belief that our exposure to market risks arising from changes in foreign exchange rates will not have a material impact upon our results of operations going forward; (38) our ability to utilize all of our foreign net operating losses and the reasonable possibility that the Company’s unrecognized tax benefits will decrease in the next 12 months; (39) our reasonable certainty that we will exercise the renewal options on our operating leases; (40) expectations regarding the recognition of compensation costs related to time-lapse restricted shares; (41) our belief that maintaining and enhancing our brands increases our ability to enter new markets and launch new and innovative services that better serve the needs of our customers; (42) our ability to be proactive in safety and risk management to develop and maintain ongoing programs to reduce claims; and (43) our expected return on defined benefit pension plan assets; (44) the potential limitation of our ability to take timely corrective actions to limit future costs if actual claims related to our defined benefit pension plan exceed our accruals and reserves; (45) our potential suspension of future services for customers with past due balances; and (46) management’s intention that our floating-to-fixed interest rate swap for an aggregate notional amount of $100.0 million will hedge a portion of the Company’s floating rate indebtedness under the Credit Facility.
Our actual results could differ materially from those indicated by the forward-looking statements because of various risks, timing and uncertainties including, without limitation, the failure to maintain and enhance our brands and develop a positive client reputation; our ability to protect our intellectual property and other proprietary rights; actions taken by our franchisees, subcontractors or vendors that may harm our business; general economic conditions; the impact of the extent and duration of economic contraction related to COVID-19 on general economic activity for the remainder of 2021 and beyond; the impact of future developments related to the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business, results of operations, accounting assumptions and estimates and financial condition; potential increases in labor costs; our inability to attract and retain skilled workers; competitive factors and pricing practices; changes in industry practices or technologies; the degree of success of our termite process reforms and pest control selling and treatment methods; our ability to identify and integrate potential acquisitions; unsuccessful expansion into international markets; climate and weather trends; a breach of data security resulting in the unauthorized access of personal, financial, or other data or information about our customers, employees, third parties, or of our proprietary confidential information; damage to our brands or reputation; possibility of an adverse ruling against us in pending litigation, regulatory action or investigation; changes in various government laws and regulations, including environmental regulations; the effectiveness of our risk management and safety program; general market risk; management’s substantial ownership interest and its impact on public stockholders and the availability of the Company’s common stock to the investing public; and the existence of certain anti-takeover provisions in our governance documents, which could make a tender offer, change in control or takeover attempt that is opposed by the Company’s Board of Directors more difficult or expensive. All of the foregoing risks and uncertainties are beyond our ability to control, and in many cases, we cannot predict the risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those indicated by the forward-looking statements. The Company does not undertake to update its forward-looking statements.