Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on September 18, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”) that we have not yet identified. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies. Our sponsor is Nebula Caravel Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and an affiliate of certain of our officers and directors (our “Sponsor”).
Our registration statement for our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) was declared effective on December 8, 2020. On December 11, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 27,500,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A common stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), which included 2,500,000 Units issued pursuant to the partial exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $275.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $15.7 million, inclusive of $9.6 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 5,166,667 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”) to our Sponsor, each exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common stock at $11.50 per share, at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds to us of $7.8 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $275.0 million of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants in the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) located in the United States with American Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”) having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company. Except with respect to interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account that may be released to the Company for amounts withdrawn to fund the Company’s working capital requirements, subject to an annual limit of $500,000, and/or to pay taxes, the funds held in the Trust Account will not be released until the earliest of: (1) the completion of the initial Business Combination; (2) the redemption of any Public Shares properly submitted in connection with a stockholder vote to amend the Company’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation (the “Certificate of Incorporation”) (i) to modify the substance or timing of the Company’s obligation to provide for the redemption of its Public Shares in connection with an initial Business Combination or to redeem 100% of its Public Shares if the Company does not complete its initial Business Combination within the completion window or (ii) with respect to any other material provisions relating to the rights of holders of the Class A common stock prior to the initial Business Combination or pre-initial Business Combination business activity; and (3) the redemption of all of the Public Shares if the Company is unable to complete its initial Business Combination within the completion window, subject to applicable law.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or December 11, 2022, (or 27 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or March 11, 2023, if the Company has executed a letter of intent, agreement in principle or definitive agreement for an initial Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering) (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (2) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account calculated as of two business days prior to the consummation of the initial Business Combination, including interest (net of amounts withdrawn to fund our working capital requirements, subject to an annual limit of $500,000, and/or to pay for the Company’s taxes and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish rights of holders of the Public Shares (the “Public Stockholders”) as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law; and (3) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
On February 10, 2021, we entered into a Business Combination Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Business Combination Agreement”) with Fetch Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and direct wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”), and A Place for Rover, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Rover”), providing for, among other things, and subject to the terms and conditions therein, a business combination between the Company and Rover pursuant to which, among other things, (i) Merger Sub will merge with and into Rover, the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub will cease and Rover will continue as the surviving corporation in the merger and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company and (ii) the Company will change its name to “Rover Group, Inc.” (together with the other transactions related thereto, the “Proposed Transactions”). Rover is the world’s largest online marketplace for pet care. Rover connects pet parents with caring pet care providers who offer overnight services, including boarding and in-home pet sitting, as well as daytime services, including doggy daycare, dog walking, drop-in visits, and grooming. Following the Proposed Transactions, it is expected that Rover’s common shares will be listed on The Nasdaq Capital Market.
Consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement is subject to customary conditions of the respective parties, including the approval of the Proposed Transactions by the Company’s stockholders in accordance with the Company’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation and the completion of a redemption offer whereby the Company will be providing its public stockholders with the opportunity to redeem their shares of Class A common stock for cash equal to their pro rata share of the aggregate amount on deposit in the Company’s trust account.
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, we entered into a backstop subscription agreement with True Wind Capital II, L.P. and True Wind Capital II-A, L.P. (together, the “TWC Funds”) (the “Sponsor Backstop Subscription Agreement”), pursuant to which the TWC Funds agreed to, among other things, purchase shares of our common stock in an aggregate amount of up to $50,000,000 (or such greater amount at the election of the TWC Funds) to the extent of the amount of redemptions of shares of our common stock. The TWC Funds also agreed to purchase additional shares of our common stock in an aggregate amount of up to $50,000,000 if mutually agreed with Rover.
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, certain accredited investors (the “PIPE Investors”), entered into subscription agreements (the “PIPE Subscription Agreements”) pursuant to which the PIPE Investors have committed to purchase 5,000,000 shares of our common stock (the “PIPE Shares”) at a purchase price per share of $10.00 and an aggregate purchase price of $50,000,000 (the “PIPE Investment”). The purchase of the PIPE Shares is conditioned upon, and will be consummated concurrently with, the closing of the initial business combination. Certain offering related expenses are payable by us, including customary fees payable to the placement agents, Deutsche Bank Securities and Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC. The purpose of the sale of the PIPE Shares is to raise additional capital for use in connection with the Proposed Transactions and to meet the minimum cash requirements provided in the Business Combination Agreement.
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, we entered into stockholder support agreements with Rover and certain stockholders of Rover (the “Rover Holders Support Agreements”), pursuant to which such stockholders agreed to approve the Business Combination Agreement and the Proposed Transactions.
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, our Sponsor, Rover and the Persons set forth on Schedule I thereto (such Persons, together with our Sponsor, the “Sponsor Parties”) entered into a sponsor support agreement (the “Sponsor Support Agreement”), pursuant to which, among other things, (i) each Sponsor Party and each of our directors agreed to vote to adopt and approve the Business Combination Agreement and all other documents and transactions contemplated thereby, (ii) each Sponsor Party agreed to deliver a duly executed copy of the Investors Rights Agreement and the Lock-Up Agreement (as defined below) at the closing of our initial business combination and (iii) each Sponsor Party agreed to subject certain shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase our common stock to certain vesting and forfeiture provisions based on the number of stockholders (if any) that exercise their rights to redeem their shares of our common stock pursuant to our certificate of incorporation and, following the closing of our initial business combination, based on the achievement of certain trading price targets following the closing of our initial business combination, in each case subject to the terms and conditions of our Sponsor Support Agreement.
At the closing of our initial business combination, we will enter into an investors rights agreement (the “Investors Rights Agreement”) with our Sponsor, certain affiliates of our Sponsor and certain Rover stockholders, pursuant to which, among other things, (i) we will agree to register for resale, pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act, certain shares of our common stock and other equity securities of the Company that are held by the parties thereto from time to time, (ii) in the event that we sell Backstop Shares (as defined in the Investor Rights Agreement) with an aggregate purchase price of at least $15 million, we will include one individual designated by our Sponsor in the slate of nominees recommended by our Board of Directors (or duly constituted committee thereof) for election as directors at each annual meeting of stockholders at which such nominee’s term expires, subject to our Sponsor and its Affiliates (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement) beneficially owning a certain minimum number of shares of our common stock and (iii) we will waive the corporate opportunities doctrine with respect to our Sponsor, its affiliates (including portfolio companies), their respective investors and the director nominees of the foregoing.
At the closing of our initial business combination, we will enter into a lock-up agreement with our Sponsor, certain affiliates of our Sponsor and certain Rover stockholders (the “Lock-Up Agreement”) containing restrictions on transfer with respect to shares of our common stock held by each such holder (subject to certain exceptions, the “Lock-Up Shares”) for a period ending on the date that is 6 months after the date the closing of our initial business combination occurs, provided that, if during such 6 month period the volume weighted average price of our common stock is greater than or equal to $16.00 over any twenty trading days within any thirty trading day period (“Triggering Event III”), 50% of each applicable holder’s Lock-Up Shares shall be released from such lock-up on the later of (i) Triggering Event III and (ii) the date that is 90 days after the closing under the Business Combination Agreement. In addition, Rover equityholders will be subject to substantially similar lock-up terms pursuant to our amended and restated bylaws following the closing of our initial business combination.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2020 related to our formation, the preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a target for its initial Business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from September 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $115,000 which consisted of approximately $58,000 in general and administrative costs and approximately $57,000 in franchise tax expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $1.0 million in our operating bank account and working capital of approximately $1.6 million.
Our liquidity needs have been satisfied prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering through receipt of a $25,000 capital contribution from our Sponsor in exchange for the issuance of shares of the Company’s Class B common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Founder Shares”), to our Sponsor and the advancement of funds by our Sponsor to cover our expenses in connection with the Initial Public Offering. In addition, our Sponsor advanced approximately $176,000 to us under a promissory note (the “Note”). The Company repaid the Note in full as of December 11, 2020. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement, our liquidity needs have been satisfied from the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans (“Working Capital Loans”). As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under the Working Capital Loan.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or our officers and directors to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
We continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On September 24, 2020, our Sponsor subscribed to purchase 7,906,250 Founder Shares for an aggregate price of $25,000, and subsequently paid for the subscription on September 28, 2020. In September and October 2020, our Sponsor transferred $25,000 Founder Shares to each of Messrs. Kerko, Wagner, Thompson and Ms. Wellman, the Company’s independent director nominees, in each case at the original per share purchase price. On November 18, 2020, our Sponsor cancelled 718,750 shares of Class B common stock, resulting in an aggregate of 7,187,500 shares of Class B common stock outstanding. All shares and associated amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the share cancellation. The Initial Stockholders agreed to forfeit up to 937,500 Founder Shares to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the Founder Shares would represent 20% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering. On December 11, 2020, the underwriters partially exercised the over-allotment option; thus, an aggregate of 312,500 Founder Shares were forfeited accordingly.
The Initial Stockholders agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) with respect to 100% of the Founder Shares, only if the closing price of the common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing any time 90 days after completion of the initial Business Combination or (B) if True Wind Capital Management, L.P., an affiliate of the Sponsor (“True Wind Capital”) provides funds toward the consummation of the initial Business Combination in an amount not less than $50,000,000 in the aggregate, then with respect to 50% of the Founder Shares, the earlier to occur of: (i) 180 days after completion of the initial Business Combination; or (ii) if the closing price of the common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing any time 90 days after completion of the initial Business Combination and with respect to the remaining 50% of the Founder Shares, only if the closing price of the common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing any time 90 days after completion of the initial Business Combination.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 5,166,667 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds to us of $7.8 million.
Each Private Placement Warrant is exercisable for one whole share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor was added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account. If we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless. Except as set forth below, the Private Placement Warrants will be non-redeemable for cash and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by the Sponsor or their permitted transferees.
The Sponsor agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of its Private Placement Warrants until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Related Party Loans
On September 18, 2020, our Sponsor agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $350,000 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to the “Note. This loan was non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. We borrowed approximately $176,000 under the Note and repaid this Note in full as of December 11, 2020.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us with Working Capital Loans. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. To date, the Company had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Commitments and Contingencies
Forward Purchase Agreements
In connection with the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, we entered into forward purchase agreements with certain institutional accredited investors (“Forward Purchasers”) that will provide for the aggregate purchase of at least $100,000,000 of Class A common stock at $10.00 per share, in a private placement that will close concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination. The Forward Purchasers’ commitments under the forward purchase agreements are subject to certain conditions described in the prospectus for the Initial Public Offering. The obligations under the forward purchase agreements will not depend on whether any shares of Class A common stock are redeemed by our Public Stockholders. The Forward Purchasers will not receive any Founder Shares or warrants as part of the forward purchase agreements. The forward purchase shares will be identical to the shares of Class A common stock included in the Units being sold in the Initial Public Offering, except that the forward purchase shares will be subject to certain transfer restrictions and have certain registration rights.
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants or warrants issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares), as well as the Forward Purchasers and their permitted transferees, are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $5.5 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. An additional fee of $0.35 per unit, or $9.6 million in the aggregate, will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The Company has identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in gain on marketable securities, dividends and interest held in Trust Account in the accompanying statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of Class A common stock (including shares of Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our shares of Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020, 26,197,659 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption were presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Net Income Per Share of Common Stock
Net income per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the periods. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 10,666,667 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method.
Our statement of operations includes a presentation of income per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per share of common stock, basic and diluted for shares of Class A common stock are calculated by dividing the income (loss) earned on investments held in the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes and working capital amounts available to be withdrawn from the Trust Account, which was $0 for the period from September 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, by the weighted average number of Class A common stock outstanding for the period. Net loss per share of common stock, basic and diluted for shares of Class B common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss of approximately $115,000, less income attributable to Class A common stock by the weighted average number of Class B common stock outstanding for the period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.