ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included under Item 8, hereof. For purposes of this section, "Repay", the “Company", "we", or "our" refer to (i) Hawk Parent Holdings, LLC and its subsidiaries ("Predecessor") for the year ended December 31, 2018 and the period from January 1, 2019 through July 10, 2019 (each referred to herein as a "Predecessor Period") prior to the consummation of the Business Combination and (ii) Repay Holdings Corporation and its subsidiaries (the "Successor ") for the period from July 11, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (the "Successor Period") and the year ended December 31, 2020 after the consummation of the Business Combination, unless the context otherwise requires. Certain figures have been rounded for ease of presentation and may not sum due to rounding. The combined year ended December 31, 2019 represents the aggregated total of the Predecessor Period and Successor Period.
Overview
We provide integrated payment processing solutions to industry-oriented markets in which merchants have specific transaction processing needs. We refer to these markets as “vertical markets” or “verticals.” Our proprietary, integrated payment technology platform reduces the complexity of the electronic payments process for businesses, while enhancing their consumers’ overall experience. We intend to continue to strategically target verticals where we believe our ability to tailor payment solutions to our customer needs, our deep knowledge of our vertical markets and the embedded nature of our integrated payment solutions will drive strong growth by attracting new customers and fostering long-term customer relationships.
Since a significant portion of our revenue is derived from volume-based payment processing fees, card payment volume is a key operating metric that we use to evaluate our business. We processed approximately $15.2 billion of total card payment volume for the year ending December 31, 2020, and our year-over-year card payment volume growth was approximately 42%.
Business Combination
The Company was formed upon closing of the merger (the “Business Combination”) of Hawk Parent Holdings LLC (together with Repay Holdings, LLC and its other subsidiaries, “Hawk Parent”) with a subsidiary of Thunder Bridge Acquisition, Ltd., (“Thunder Bridge”), a special purpose acquisition company, on July 11, 2019. On the closing of the Business Combination, Thunder Bridge changed its name to “Repay Holdings Corporation.”
As a result of the Business Combination, Thunder Bridge was identified as the acquirer for accounting purposes, and Hawk Parent, which is the business conducted prior to the closing of the Business Combination, is the acquiree and accounting Predecessor. The acquisition was accounted for as a business combination using the acquisition method of accounting, and the Successor’s financial statements reflect a new basis of accounting that is based on the fair value of net assets acquired. As a result of the application of the acquisition method of accounting as of the effective time of the Business Combination, the financial statements for the Predecessor period and for the Successor period are presented on different bases. The historical financial information of Thunder Bridge prior to the Business Combination has not been reflected in the Predecessor period financial statements.
Key Factors Affecting Our Business
Key factors that we believe impact our business, results of operations and financial condition include, but are not limited to, the following:
●
the dollar amount volume and the number of transactions that are processed by the customers that we currently serve;
●
our ability to attract new merchants and onboard them as active processing customers;
●
our ability to (i) successfully integrate recent acquisitions and (ii) complete future acquisitions;
●
our ability to offer new and competitive payment technology solutions to our customers; and
●
general economic conditions and consumer finance trends.
Acquisitions
On February 10, 2020, we announced the acquisition of Ventanex for up to $50.0 million, which includes a $14.0 million performance-based earnout. The closing of the acquisition was financed with a combination of cash on hand and new borrowings under our existing credit facility. See Note 5 to the audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On July 23, 2020, we announced the acquisition of cPayPlus for up to $16.0 million, which includes a $8.0 million performance-based earnout. The closing of the acquisition was financed with cash on hand. See Note 5 to the audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On October 27, 2020, we announced the acquisition of CPS for up to $93 million, which includes up to $15 million in performance-based earnouts. The acquisition closed on November 2, 2020 and was financed with cash on hand. See Note 5 to the audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Key Components of Our Revenues and Expenses
Revenues
Revenue. As our customers process increased volumes of payments, our revenues increase as a result of the fees we charge for processing these payments. Most of our revenues are derived from volume-based payment processing fees (“discount fees”) and other related fixed per transaction fees. Discount fees represent a percentage of the dollar amount of each credit or debit transaction processed and include fees relating to processing and services that we provide. The transaction price for such processing services are determined, based on the judgment of the Company’s management, considering factors such as margin objectives, pricing practices and controls, customer segment pricing strategies, the product life cycle and the observable price of the service charged to similarly situated customers. We believe our chargeback rate was less than 1% of our card payment volume, during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
As discussed in Note 3 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, Repay adopted ASC 606 on January 1, 2019, using the modified retrospective method and applying the standard to all contracts not completed on the date of adoption. Results for the reporting period beginning January 1, 2019 are presented under ASC 606, while the 2018 amounts continue to be reported in accordance with the Company's historical accounting practices under previous guidance.
The primary impact to the Company’s consolidated financial statements as a result of the adoption of ASC 606 is a change in total net revenue attributable to the presentation of interchange, network and other fees on a net basis, driven by changes in principal and agent considerations, as compared to previously being presented on a gross basis. Under the modified retrospective method, the Company did not restate its 2018 consolidated financial statements for these effects.
Expenses
Interchange and network fees. Interchange and network fees consist primarily of pass-through fees which generally increase in proportion to card payment volume increases. These include interchange fees, dues and assessments, and other pass-through costs. Beginning January 1, 2019, as a result of the adoption of ASC 606, interchange and network fees are not presented as operating expenses, but as a reduction of revenue.
Other costs of services. Other costs of services primarily include commissions to our software integration partners and other third-party processing costs, such as front and back-end processing costs and sponsor bank fees.
Selling, general and administrative. Selling, general and administrative expenses include salaries, share-based compensation and other employment costs, professional service fees, rent and utilities, and other operating costs.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation expense consists of depreciation on our investments in property, equipment and computer hardware. Depreciation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the asset. Amortization expense for software development costs and purchased software is recognized on the straight-line method over a three-year estimated useful life, over a ten-year estimated useful life for customer relationships and channel relationships, and a two-year estimated useful life for non-competition agreements.
Interest expense. Prior to the closing of the Business Combination, interest expense consisted of interest in respect of our indebtedness under our Predecessor Credit Agreement (as defined below), which was terminated in connection with the
closing of the Business Combination. In periods after the closing of the Business Combination, interest expense consists of interest in respect of our indebtedness under the Successor Credit Agreement (as defined below), which was entered into in connection with the Business Combination and amended in February 2020 and November 2020.
Change in fair value of tax receivable liability. This amount represents the change in fair value of the tax receivable agreement liability. The TRA liability is carried at fair value; so, any change to the valuation of this liability is recognized through this line in other expense. The change in fair value can result from the redemption or exchange of Post-Merger Repay Units for Class A common stock of Repay Holdings Corporation, or through accretion of the discounted fair value of the expected future cash payments.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
For purposes of this results of operations discussion, we have combined the results of the Predecessor for the period from January 1, 2019 to July 10, 2019 with the results of the Successor for the period from July 11, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (“2019 combined period”).
Revenue
Total revenue was $155.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $104.6 million for the 2019 combined period, an increase of $50.4 million or 48.2%. This increase was the result of newly signed customers, the growth of our existing customers, as well as the acquisitions of TriSource, APS, Ventanex, cPayPlus, and CPS. For the year ended December 31, 2020, incremental revenues of approximately $40.4 million are attributable to TriSource, APS, Ventanex, cPayPlus and CPS.
Other Costs of Services
Other costs of services were $41.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $25.9 million for the 2019 combined period, an increase of $15.6 million or 60.2%. For the year ended December 31, 2020, incremental costs of services of approximately $14.5 million are attributable to TriSource, APS, Ventanex, cPayPlus and CPS.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $87.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $97.0 million for the 2019 combined period, a decrease of $9.7 million or 10.0%. This decrease was primarily due to one-time expenses associated with the Business Combination in 2019, offset by increases in share-based compensation and other operating costs.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses were $60.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $30.0 million for the 2019 combined period, an increase of $30.8 million or 102.8%. The increase was primarily due to fair value adjustments to intangibles resulting from the Business Combination, as well as additional depreciation and amortization of fixed assets and intangibles from the acquisitions of TriSource, APS, Ventanex, cPayPlus and CPS.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
Change in the fair value of contingent consideration was $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of fair value adjustments related to the contingent consideration for the acquisitions of TriSource, APS, and Ventanex.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $14.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $9.1 million for the 2019 combined period, an increase of $5.4 million or 59.3%. This increase was due to a higher average outstanding principal balance under our Successor Credit Agreement as compared to the average outstanding principal balance under the Predecessor Credit Agreement.
Change in Fair Value of Tax Receivable Liability
We incurred a change in the fair value of the tax receivable liability of $12.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.6 million for the 2019 combined period, an increase of $10.8 million. This increase was due to larger fair value adjustments related to the tax receivable liability, primarily as a result of changes to the discount rate used to determine the fair value of the liability, as well as, additional accretion expense associated with the increase in the TRA liability as a result of Post-Merger Repay Unit exchanges that occurred during the year.
Income Tax
The income tax benefit was $12.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $5.0 million for the period from July 11, 2019 to December 31, 2019, which reflects the expected income tax benefit to be received on the net earnings related to the Company’s economic interest in Hawk Parent. This was a result of additional expenses incurred by the Company, primarily driven by stock-based compensation deductions, the amortization of assets acquired in Business Combination and acquisitions of TriSource, APS, Ventanex, cPayPlus and CPS, as well as, amortization associated with the step-up in basis received as a result of Post-Merger Repay Unit exchanges.
For results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, see Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s 2019 Form 10-K.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This report includes certain non-GAAP financial measures that our management uses to evaluate our operating business, measure our performance and make strategic decisions.
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that represents net income prior to interest expense, tax expense, depreciation and amortization, as adjusted to add back certain non-cash and non-recurring charges, such as non-cash loss on extinguishment of debt, non-cash change in fair value of contingent consideration, non-cash change in fair value of assets and liabilities, share-based compensation charges, transaction expenses, management fees, legacy commission related charges, employee recruiting costs, other taxes, strategic initiative related costs and other non-recurring charges.
Adjusted Net Income is a non-GAAP financial measure that represents net income prior to amortization of acquisition-related intangibles, as adjusted to add back certain non-cash and non-recurring charges, such as non-cash loss on extinguishment of debt, non-cash change in fair value of contingent consideration, non-cash change in fair value of assets and liabilities, share-based compensation expense, transaction expenses, management fees, legacy commission related charges, employee recruiting costs, loss on disposition of property and equipment, strategic initiative related costs and other non-recurring charges, net of tax effect associated with these adjustments. Adjusted Net Income is adjusted to exclude amortization of all acquisition-related intangibles as such amounts are inconsistent in amount and frequency and are significantly impacted by the timing and/or size of acquisitions. Management believes that the adjustment of acquisition-related intangible amortization supplements GAAP financial measures because it allows for greater comparability of operating performance. Although we exclude amortization from acquisition-related intangibles from our non-GAAP expenses, management believes that it is important for investors to understand that such intangibles were recorded as part of purchase accounting and contribute to revenue generation.
Adjusted Net Income per share is a non-GAAP financial measure that represents Adjusted Net Income divided by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock outstanding (on as-converted basis) for the Successor Period from July 11, 2019 to December 31, 2019 and the year ended December 31, 2020 (excluding certain shares that were subject to forfeiture).
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income, and Adjusted Net Income per share provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating its operating results in the same manner as management. However, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income, and Adjusted Net Income per share are not financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered as a substitute for net income, operating profit, or any other operating performance measure calculated in accordance with GAAP. Using these non-GAAP financial measures to analyze our business has material limitations because the calculations are based on the subjective determination of management regarding the nature and classification of events and circumstances that investors may find significant. In addition, although other companies in our industry may report measures titled Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted Net Income per share, or similar measures, such non-GAAP financial measures may be calculated differently from how we calculate our non-GAAP financial measures, which reduces their overall usefulness as comparative measures. Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income, and Adjusted Net Income per share alongside other financial performance measures, including net income and our other financial results presented in accordance with GAAP.
The following tables set forth a reconciliation of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. Due to the Predecessor and Successor periods, for the convenience of readers, we have presented the year ended December 31, 2019 on both a Predecessor and Successor basis and a combined basis (reflecting simple arithmetic combination of the GAAP Predecessor and Successor periods with adjustments) in order to present a meaningful comparison against the corresponding periods.
REPAY HOLDINGS CORPORATION
Reconciliation of GAAP Net Income to Non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA
REPAY HOLDINGS CORPORATION
Reconciliation of GAAP Net Income to Non-GAAP Adjusted Net Income
(a)
See footnote (m) for details on our amortization and depreciation expenses.
(b)
Reflects write-offs of debt issuance costs relating to Hawk Parent’s term loans and prepayment penalties relating to its previous debt facilities.
(c)
Reflects the changes in management’s estimates of future cash consideration to be paid in connection with prior acquisitions from the amount estimated as of the most recent balance sheet date.
(d)
Reflects the changes in management’s estimates of the fair value of the liability relating to the Tax Receivable Agreement
(e)
Represents compensation expense associated with equity compensation plans, totaling $19,445,800 for the year ended December 31, 2020, $908,978 for the period from January 1, 2019 to July 10, 2019, $22,013,287 as a result of new grants made in the Successor Period from July 11, 2019 to December 31, 2019, and $796,967 for the year ended December 31, 2018.
(f)
Primarily consists of (i) during the year ended December 31, 2020, professional service fees and other costs incurred in connection with the acquisition of CPS, and additional transaction expenses incurred in connection with the Business Combination and the acquisitions of TriSource Solutions, APS Payments, Ventanex and cPayPlus, which closed in prior periods, as well as professional service expenses related to the June and September 2020 equity offerings, (ii) during the period from July 11 2019 to December 31, 2019, professional service fees and other costs in connection with the Business Combination, the acquisitions of TriSource and APS Payments, and (iii) during the period from January 1, 2019 to July 10, 2019 and the year ended December 31, 2018, professional service fees and other costs in connection with the Business Combination.
(g)
Reflects management fees paid to Corsair Investments, L.P. pursuant to the management agreement, which terminated upon the completion of the Business Combination.
(h)
Represents payments made to certain employees in connection with significant restructuring of their commission structures. These payments represented commission structure changes which are not in the ordinary course of business.
(i)
Represents payments made to third-party recruiters in connection with a significant expansion of our personnel, which Repay expects will become more moderate in subsequent periods.
(j)
Reflects franchise taxes and other non-income based taxes.
(k)
Consulting fees relating to Repay’s processing services and other operational improvements that were not in the ordinary course as well as one-time fees relating to special projects for new market expansion that are not anticipated to continue in the ordinary course of business are reflected in the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 and 2018. Additionally, one-time expenses related to the creation of a new entity in connection with equity arrangements for the members of Hawk Parent in connection with the Business Combination are reflected in the twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
(l)
For the year ended December 31, 2020, reflects expenses incurred related to one-time accounting system and compensation plan implementation related to becoming a public company, as well as extraordinary refunds to customers and other payments related to COVID-19. For the year ended December 31, 2019, reflects expenses incurred related to other one-time legal and compliance matters, as well as a one-time credit issued to a customer which was not in the ordinary course of business. For the year ended December 31, 2018 reflects reversal of adjustments over the prior and current periods made for legal expenses incurred related to a dispute with a former customer, for which we were reimbursed in the current period as a result of its settlement.
(m)
For the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects (i) amortization of the customer relationships intangibles acquired through Hawk Parent’s acquisitions of PaidSuite and Paymaxx during the year ended December 31, 2017 and the recapitalization transaction in 2016, through which Hawk Parent was formed in connection with the acquisition of a majority interest in Repay Holdings, LLC by certain investment funds sponsored by, or affiliated with, Corsair, (ii) customer relationships, non-compete agreement, software, and channel relationship intangibles acquired through the Business Combination, and (iii) customer relationships, non-compete agreement, and software intangibles acquired through Repay Holdings, LLC’s acquisitions of TriSource Solutions, APS Payments, Ventanex, and cPayPlus. For the year ended December 31, 2019, reflects amortization of customer relationships intangibles acquired through Hawk Parent’s acquisitions and the 2016 Recapitalization transaction and the acquisition of TriSource. This adjustment excludes the amortization of other intangible assets which were acquired in the regular course of business, such as capitalized internally developed software and purchased software. For the year ended December 31, 2018, reflects amortization of customer relationships intangibles acquired through Hawk Parent’s acquisitions of PaidSuite and Paymaxx during the year ended December 31, 2017 and the 2016 Recapitalization transaction. See additional information below for an analysis of our amortization expenses:
(1)
Adjusted Net Income is adjusted to exclude amortization of all acquisition-related intangibles as such amounts are inconsistent in amount and frequency and are significantly impacted by the timing and/or size of acquisitions (see corresponding adjustments in the reconciliation of net income to Adjusted Net Income presented above). Management believes that the adjustment of acquisition-related intangible amortization supplements GAAP financial measures because it allows for greater comparability of operating performance. Although we exclude amortization from acquisition-related intangibles from our non-GAAP expenses, management believes that it is important for investors to understand that such intangibles were recorded as part of purchase accounting and may contribute to revenue generation. Amortization of intangibles that relate to past acquisitions will recur in future periods until such intangibles have been fully amortized. Any future acquisitions may result in the amortization of additional intangibles.
(n)
Represents the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock outstanding (on as-converted basis) for the year ended December 31, 2020, and the period from July 11, 2019 to December 31, 2019 (in each case, excluding shares that were subject to forfeiture)
(o)
Adjustment for incremental depreciation and amortization recorded due to fair-value adjustments under ASC 805 in the Successor Period.
(p) Represents pro forma income tax adjustment effect associated with items adjusted above. As Hawk Parent, as the accounting Predecessor, was not subject to income taxes, the tax effect above was calculated on the adjustments related to the Successor period only.
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the combined year ended December 31, 2019 was $68.2 million and $48.4 million, respectively, representing a 40.7% year-over-year increase. Adjusted Net Income for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the combined year ended December 31, 2019 was $43.7 million and $39.5 million, respectively, representing a 10.8% year-over-year increase. Our net loss attributable to the Company for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the combined year ended December 31, 2019 was $34.8 million and $40.0 million, respectively, representing a 13.1% year-over-year decrease.
These increases in Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income, for the year ended December 31, 2020 are the result of the growing card payment volume and revenue figures described above, new customers, and same store sales growth from existing customers as well as the acquisitions of TriSource, APS, Ventanex, cPayPlus and CPS. The increase in net income (loss) attributable to the Company for the year ended December 31, 2020, is primarily the result of one-time expenses incurred in connection with the Business Combination.
For discussion on Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net income, and net income (loss) attributable to the Company for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, see Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s 2019 Form 10-K.
Seasonality
We have experienced in the past, and may continue to experience, seasonal fluctuations in our volumes and revenues as a result of consumer spending patterns. Volumes and revenues during the first quarter of the calendar year tend to increase in comparison to the remaining three quarters of the calendar year on a same store basis. This increase is due to consumers’ receipt of tax refunds and the increases in repayment activity levels that follow. Operating expenses show less seasonal fluctuation, with the result that net income is subject to the similar seasonal factors as our volumes and revenues.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically financed our operations and working capital through net cash from operating activities. We also finance our operations through proceeds from the issuance of our Class A common stock in June 2020 and our January 2021 convertible notes offering. As of December 31, 2020, we had $92.6 million of cash and cash equivalents and available borrowing capacity of $75.6 million under the Successor Credit Agreement. This balance does not include restricted cash, which reflects cash accounts holding reserves for potential losses and customer settlement funds of $13.9 million as of December 31, 2020. In February 2021, we used a portion of the proceeds from the January 2021 convertible notes offering to prepay in full the entire principal amount of the term loans then outstanding under the Successor Credit Agreement and also terminated in full all delayed draw term loan commitments then outstanding. At that time, we also amended and restated the Successor Credit Agreement and entered into the Amended Credit Agreement, which establishes a $125.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility in favor of Hawk Parent.
Our primary cash needs are to fund working capital requirements, invest in technology development, fund acquisitions and related contingent consideration, make scheduled principal payments and interest payments on our outstanding indebtedness and pay tax distributions to members of Hawk Parent. We expect that our cash flow from
operations, current cash and cash equivalents and available borrowing capacity under the Amended Credit Agreement will be sufficient to fund our operations and planned capital expenditures and to service our debt obligations for the next twelve months.
We are a holding company with no operations and depend on our subsidiaries for cash to fund all of our consolidated operations, including future dividend payments, if any. We depend on the payment of distributions by our current subsidiaries, including Hawk Parent, which distributions may be restricted by law or contractual agreements, including agreements governing their indebtedness. For a discussion of those considerations and restrictions, refer to Part II, Item 1A "Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Class A Common Stock."
Cash Flows
The following table present a summary of cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated:
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $28.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $12.9 million from July 11, 2019 to December 31, 2019.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $8.4 million from January 1, 2019 to July 10, 2019.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $24.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2018.
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, the period from July 11, 2019 to December 31, 2019, the period from January 1, 2019 to July 10, 2019, and the year ended December 31, 2018 reflects net income as adjusted for non-cash operating items including depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation, and changes in working capital accounts.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $146.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the acquisition of Ventanex, cPayPlus, and CPS, as well as capitalization of software development activities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $335.1 million from July 11, 2019 to December 31, 2019, due to the Business Combination, the acquisitions of TriSource and APS, and capitalization of software development activities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $4.0 million from January 1, 2019 to July 10, 2019 due to capitalization of software development activities and fixed asset additions.
Net cash used in investing activities was $5.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2018 due to capitalization of software development activities and fixed asset additions.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $186.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to proceeds from the issuance of new shares in the June 2020 offering of Class A common stock, new borrowings related to the acquisition of Ventanex under the Successor Credit Agreement, as well as funds received related to the exercise of warrants, offset by repayment of the outstanding revolver balance related to the Successor Credit Agreement in connection with its
amendment and the acquisition of Ventanex, and repayments of the term loan principal balance under the Successor Credit Agreement.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $360.0 million from July 11, 2019 to December 31, 2019, due to borrowings under our Successor Credit Agreement of $220.0 million, offset by debt issuance costs of $6.1 million. The Company received proceeds from the Business Combination of $148.9 million and a private placement offering of $135.0 million, offset by payments of $93.3 million to settle our Predecessor Credit Agreement and $38.7 million to repurchase outstanding Thunder Bridge warrants.
Net cash used in financing activities was $9.4 million from January 1, 2019 to July 11, 2019 due to $2.5 million of principal payments related to our Predecessor Credit Agreement and tax distributions of $6.9 million to Hawk Parent’s members.
Indebtedness
Predecessor Credit Agreement
Hawk Parent was previously party to the Revolving Credit and Term Loan Agreement, dated as of September 28, 2017, and amended at December 15, 2017 (the “Predecessor Credit Agreement”), with SunTrust Bank, as administrative agent and lender, and the other lenders party thereto. In connection with the completion of the Business Combination, all outstanding loans were repaid and the Predecessor Credit Agreement was terminated.
Successor Credit Agreement
In connection with the Business Combination, on July 11, 2019, TB Acquisition Merger Sub LLC, Hawk Parent and certain subsidiaries of Hawk Parent, as guarantors, entered into a Revolving Credit and Term Loan Agreement (the “Successor Credit Agreement”) with certain financial institutions, as lenders, and Truist Bank (formerly SunTrust Bank), as the administrative agent.
As of December 31, 2020, the Successor Credit Agreement provides for a senior secured term loan facility of $255.0 million, a delayed draw term loan of $60.0 million, and a revolving credit facility of $30.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had $0.0 million drawn against the revolving credit facility. We paid $231,168, and $30,764 in fees related to unused commitments for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the period from July 11, 2019 to December 31, 2019, respectively See Note 10 to the financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
As of December 31, 2020, we had term loan borrowings of $248.3 million, net of deferred issuance costs, under the Successor Credit Agreement, and we were in compliance with its restrictive financial covenants.
Amended Credit Agreement
In February 2021, we also amended and restated the Successor Credit Agreement and entered into the Amended Credit Agreement, which establishes a $125.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility in favor of Hawk Parent. We currently expect that we will remain in compliance with the restrictive financial covenants of the Amended Credit Agreement, prospectively.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020 related to processing minimums, operating leases, borrowings, and contingent consideration:
(a)
Certain of the agreements with third-party processors require us to submit a minimum monthly number of transactions for processing. If we submit a number of transactions that is lower than the minimum, we are required to pay to the processor the fees it would have received if we had submitted the required minimum number of transactions.
(b)
We estimated interest payments through the maturity of the revolving credit facility by applying the interest rate of 4.00% in effect on our borrowings as of December 31, 2020, plus an unused fee rate of 0.50%.
(c)
Represents contingent consideration associated with the acquisitions of Ventanex, cPayPlus, and CPS.
Potential payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement are not reflected in this table. See the section entitled “- Tax Receivable Agreement” below.
Tax Receivable Agreement
Upon the completion of the Business Combination, we entered into that certain Tax Receivable Agreement (the “Tax Receivable Agreement” or “TRA”) with holders (other than the Company) of limited liability company interests of Hawk Parent (the “Post-Merger Repay Units”). As a result of the TRA, we established a liability in our consolidated financial statements. Such liability, which will increase upon the exchanges of Post-Merger Repay Units for Class A common stock, generally represents 100% of the estimated future tax benefits, if any, relating to the increase in tax basis that will result from exchanges of the Post-Merger Repay Units for shares of Class A common stock pursuant to the Exchange Agreement and certain other tax attributes of the Company and tax benefits of entering into the TRA, including tax benefits attributable to payments under the TRA.
Under the terms of the TRA, we may elect to terminate the TRA early but will be required to make an immediate payment equal to the present value of the anticipated future cash tax savings. As a result, the associated liability reported on our consolidated financial statements may be increased. We expect that the payment obligations of the Company required under the TRA will be substantial. The actual increase in tax basis, as well as the amount and timing of any payments under the TRA, will vary depending upon a number of factors, including the timing of redemptions or exchanges by the holders of Post-Merger Repay Units, the price of our Class A common stock at the time of the redemption or exchange, whether such redemptions or exchanges are taxable, the amount and timing of the taxable income we generate in the future, the tax rate then applicable and the portion of our payments under the TRA constituting imputed interest. We expect to fund the payment of the amounts due under the TRA out of the cash savings that we actually realize in respect of the attributes to which TRA relates. However, the payments required to be made could be in excess of the actual tax benefits that we realize and there can be no assurance that we will be able to finance our obligations under the TRA.
Critical Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For information related to recent accounting pronouncements and the impact of these pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 2. Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We provide integrated payment processing solutions to niche markets that have specific transaction processing needs; for example, personal loans, automotive loans, and receivables management. We contract with our customers through contractual agreements that set forth the general terms and conditions of the service relationship, including rights of obligations of each party, line item pricing, payment terms and contract duration. Most of our revenues are derived from volume-based payment processing fees (“discount fees”) and other related fixed per transaction fees. Discount fees represent a percentage of the dollar amount of each credit or debit transaction processed and include fees relating to processing and services that we provide. As our customers process increased volumes of payments, our revenues increase as a result of the fees we charge for processing these payments.
Our performance obligation in our contracts with customers is the promise to stand-ready to provide front-end authorization and back-end settlement payment processing services ("processing services") for an unknown or unspecified quantity of transactions and the consideration received is contingent upon the customer’s use (e.g., number of transactions submitted and processed) of the related processing services. Accordingly, the total transaction price is variable. These services are stand-ready obligations, as the timing and quantity of transactions to be processed is not determinable. Under a stand-ready obligation, our performance obligation is satisfied over time throughout the contract term rather than at a point in time. Because the service of standing ready to perform processing services is substantially the same each day and has the same pattern of transfer to the customer, we have determined that our stand-ready performance obligation comprises a series of distinct days of service. Discount fees and other fixed per transaction fees are recognized each day using a time-elapsed output method based on the volume or transaction count at the time the merchants’ transactions are processed.
Revenues are also derived from transaction or service fees (e.g. chargebacks, gateway) as well as other miscellaneous service fees. These services are considered immaterial in the overall context of our contractual arrangements and, as such, do not represent distinct performance obligations. Instead, the fees associated with these services are bundled with the processing services performance obligation identified.
The transaction price for such processing services are determined, based on the judgment of our management, considering factors such as margin objectives, pricing practices and controls, customer segment pricing strategies, the product life cycle and the observable price of the service charged to similarly situated customers.
We follow the requirements of Topic 606-10-55-36 through -40, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, Principal Agent Considerations, in determining the gross versus net revenue recognition for performance obligation(s) in the contract with a customer. Revenue recorded with the Company acting in the capacity of a principal is reported at on a gross basis equal to the full amount of consideration to which we expect in exchange for the good or service transferred. Revenue recorded with the Company acting in the capacity of an agent is reported on a net basis, exclusive of any consideration provided to the principal party in the transaction.
The principal versus agent evaluation is matter of judgment that depends on the facts and circumstances of the arrangement and is dependent on whether we control the good or service before it is transferred to the customer or whether we are acting as an agent of a third party. This evaluation is performed separately for each performance obligation identified.
Interchange and network fees
Within our contracts with customers, we incur interchange and network pass-through charges from the third-party card issuers and payment networks, respectively, related to the provision of payment authorization and routing services. We have determined that we are acting as an agent with respect to these payment authorization and routing services, based the fact that we have no discretion over which card-issuing bank or payment network will be used to process a transaction and is unable to direct the activity of the merchant to another card-issuing bank or payment network. As such, we view the card-issuing bank and the payment network as the principal for these performance obligations, as these parties are primarily responsible for fulfilling these promises to the merchant. Therefore, revenue allocated to the payment authorization performance obligation is presented net of interchange and card network fees paid to the card issuing banks and card networks, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, in connection with the adoption of ASC 606.
Indirect relationships
As a result of our past acquisitions, we have legacy relationships with Independent Sales Organizations (“ISO”), whereby we act as the merchant acquirer for the ISO. The ISO maintains a direct relationship with the sponsor bank and the transaction processor, rather than the Company. Consequently, we recognize revenue for these relationships net of the residual amount remitted to the ISO, based on the fact that the ISO is primarily responsible for providing the transaction processing services to the merchant. We are not focused on this sales model, and we expect this relationship will represent an increasingly smaller portion of the business over time.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over tangible and intangible assets acquired less liabilities assumed arising from business combinations. Goodwill is generally allocated to reporting units based upon relative fair value (taking into consideration other factors such as synergies) when an acquired business is integrated into multiple reporting units. Repay’s reporting units are at the operating segment level or one level below the operating segment level for which discrete financial information is prepared and regularly reviewed by management. When a business within a reporting unit is disposed of, goodwill is allocated to the disposed business using the relative fair value method. Relative fair value is estimated using a discounted cash flow analysis.
We test goodwill annually for impairment, as well as upon an indicator of impairment, at the reporting unit level. As of the most recent impairment analysis date, the fair value of each reporting unit exceeded its carrying value. We did not record any goodwill impairment charges for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Intangibles
Intangible assets include acquired merchant relationships, residual buyouts, trademarks, tradenames, website development costs and non-compete agreements. Merchant relationships represent the fair value of customer relationships we
purchased. Residual buyouts represent the right to not have to pay a residual to an independent sales agent related to certain future transactions of the agent’s referred merchants.
We amortize definite lived identifiable intangible assets using a method that reflects the pattern in which the economic benefits of the intangible asset are expected to be consumed or otherwise utilized. The estimated useful lives of our customer-related intangible assets approximate the expected distribution of cash flows, whether straight-line or accelerated, generated from each asset. The useful lives of contract-based intangible assets are equal to the terms of the agreement.
Management evaluates the remaining useful lives and carrying values of long lived assets, including definite lived intangible assets, at least annually or when events and circumstances warrant such a review, to determine whether significant events or changes in circumstances indicate that a change in the useful life or impairment in value may have occurred. There were no impairment charges during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Income Taxes
Under ASC 740, “Income Taxes,” deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences attributable to net operating losses, tax credits, and temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. Our income tax expense/benefit, deferred tax assets and tax receivable liability reflect management’s best assessment of estimated current and future taxes. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining the consolidated income tax expense/benefits, deferred tax assets and tax receivable agreement liability. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including projected future taxable income and results of recent operations. Estimating future taxable income is inherently uncertain, requires judgment and is consistent with estimates we are using to manage our business. If we determine in the future that we will not be able to fully utilize all or part of the deferred tax assets, we would record a valuation allowance through earnings in the period the determination was made.
Equity Units Awarded
We measure restricted shares awarded to management based on the fair value of the awards on the date of the grant and recognizes compensation expense for those awards over the requisite service period. The restricted share awards vest over varying periods with all of the current outstanding restricted share awards being fully vested in 2024.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements not yet Adopted
Accounting for Income Taxes
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, "Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes ("ASU No. 2019-12"). ASU No. 2019-12 simplifies the accounting for income taxes, eliminates certain exceptions within Income Taxes (Topic 740), and clarifies certain aspects of the current guidance to promote consistency among reporting entities, and is effective for fiscal years, and for interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. Most amendments within ASU No. 2019-12 are required to be applied on a prospective basis, while certain amendments must be applied on a retrospective or modified retrospective basis. We are currently in the process of evaluating the effects of ASU No. 2019-12 on our consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any material off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020 (Successor), as of December 31, 2019 (Successor), or for the period from January 1, 2019 to July 10, 2019 (Predecessor).