Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our financial statements include all of our majority-owned and controlled subsidiaries. Investments in less-than-majority-owned joint ventures over which we have the ability to exercise significant influence are accounted for under the equity method. Preparation of our financial statements requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of our assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We continually evaluate these estimates, including those related to our allowances for doubtful accounts; reserves for excess and obsolete inventories; allowances for recoverable sales and/or value-added taxes; uncertain tax positions; useful lives of property, plant and equipment; goodwill and other intangible assets; environmental, warranties and other contingent liabilities; income tax valuation allowances; pension plans; and the fair value of financial instruments. We base our estimates on historical experience, our most recent facts and other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of our assets and liabilities. Actual results, which are shaped by actual market conditions, may differ materially from our estimates.
We have identified below the accounting policies and estimates that are the most critical to our financial statements.
Goodwill
We test our goodwill balances at least annually, or more frequently as impairment indicators arise, at the reporting unit level. Our annual impairment assessment date has been designated as the first day of our fourth fiscal quarter. Our reporting units have been identified at the component level, which is the operating segment level or one level below our operating segments.
We follow the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) guidance found in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 350 that simplifies how an entity tests goodwill for impairment. It provides an option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, and whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test.
We assess qualitative factors in each of our reporting units that carry goodwill. Among other relevant events and circumstances that affect the fair value of our reporting units, we assess individual factors such as:
•
a significant adverse change in legal factors or the business climate;
•
an adverse action or assessment by a regulator;
•
unanticipated competition;
•
a loss of key personnel; and
•
a more-likely-than-not expectation that a reporting unit or a significant portion of a reporting unit will be sold or otherwise disposed of.
We assess these qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. The quantitative process is required only if we conclude that it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. However, we have an unconditional option to bypass a qualitative assessment and proceed directly to performing the quantitative analysis. We applied the quantitative process during our annual goodwill impairment assessments performed during the fourth quarters of fiscal 2021 and 2020 and applied both the qualitative and quantitative processes during our annual goodwill impairment assessment performed during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019.
In applying the quantitative test, we compare the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value. If the calculated fair value is less than the current carrying value, then impairment of the reporting unit exists. Calculating the fair value of a reporting unit requires our use of estimates and assumptions. We use significant judgment in determining the most appropriate method to establish the fair value of a reporting unit. We estimate the fair value of a reporting unit by employing various valuation techniques, depending on the availability and reliability of comparable market value indicators, and employ methods and assumptions that include the application of third-party market value indicators and the computation of discounted future cash flows determined from estimated cashflow adjustments to a reporting unit’s annual projected earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”), or adjusted EBITDA, which adjusts for one-off items impacting revenues and/or expenses that are not considered by management to be indicative of ongoing operations. Our fair value estimations may include a combination of value indications from both the market and income approaches, as the income approach considers the future cash flows from a reporting unit’s ongoing operations as a going concern, while the market approach considers the current financial environment in establishing fair value.
In the applying the market approach, we use market multiples derived from a set of similar companies. In applying the income approach, we evaluate discounted future cash flows determined from estimated cashflow adjustments to a reporting unit’s projected EBITDA. Under this approach, we calculate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. In applying the discounted cash flow methodology utilized in the income approach, we rely on a number of factors, including future business plans, actual and forecasted operating results, and market data. The significant assumptions employed under this method include discount rates; revenue growth rates, including assumed terminal growth rates; and operating margins used to project future cash flows for a reporting unit. The discount rates utilized reflect market-based estimates of capital costs and discount rates adjusted for management’s assessment of a market participant’s view with respect to other risks associated with the projected cash flows of the individual reporting unit. Our estimates are based upon assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which by nature are uncertain and unpredictable.
Changes in the Composition of Reporting Units in Fiscal 2020
On June 1, 2019, the composition of our reportable segments was revised. Prior to implementing the revised segment reporting structure beginning in fiscal 2020, our previously disclosed Industrial segment comprised two operating segments, the CPG operating segment and the PCG operating segment. Each of these operating segments comprised several reporting units, all of which were tested during the annual goodwill impairment tests during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019, 2020 and 2021.
Also, in connection with our Map to Growth, we realigned certain businesses and management structure within our SPG segment. As such, our former Wood Finishes Group reporting unit was split into two separate reporting units: Guardian and Wood Finishes Group. Additionally, our former Kop-Coat Group reporting unit was split into two reporting units: Kop-Coat Industrial Protection Products and Kop-Coat Group. We performed an interim goodwill impairment test for each of the new reporting units upon the change in reportable segments, business realignment and management structure using a quantitative assessment. We concluded that the estimated fair values exceeded the carrying values for these new reporting units, and accordingly, no indications of impairment were identified as a result of these changes during the first quarter of fiscal 2020.
Conclusion on Annual Goodwill Impairment Tests
As a result of the annual impairment assessments performed for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, there were no goodwill impairments.
Other Long-Lived Assets
We assess identifiable, amortizable intangibles and other long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in facts and circumstances indicate the possibility that the carrying values of these assets may not be recoverable over their estimated remaining useful lives. Factors considered important in our assessment, which might trigger an impairment evaluation, include the following:
•
significant under-performance relative to historical or projected future operating results;
•
significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets;
•
significant changes in the strategy for our overall business; and
•
significant negative industry or economic trends.
Measuring a potential impairment of amortizable intangibles and other long-lived assets requires the use of various estimates and assumptions, including the determination of which cash flows are directly related to the assets being evaluated, the respective useful lives over which those cash flows will occur and potential residual values, if any. If we determine that the carrying values of these assets may not be recoverable based upon the existence of one or more of the above-described indicators or other factors, any impairment amounts would be measured based on the projected net cash flows expected from these assets, including any net cash flows related to eventual disposition activities. The determination of any impairment losses would be based on the best information available, including internal estimates of discounted cash flows; market participant assumptions; quoted market prices, when available; and independent appraisals, as appropriate, to determine fair values. Cash flow estimates would be based on our historical experience and our internal business plans, with appropriate discount rates applied.
Additionally, we test all indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment at least annually during our fiscal fourth quarter. We follow the guidance provided by ASC 350 that simplifies how an entity tests indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment. It provides an option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount before applying traditional quantitative tests. We applied both qualitative and quantitative processes during our annual indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment assessments performed during the fourth quarters of fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019.
The annual impairment assessment involves estimating the fair value of each indefinite-lived asset and comparing it with its carrying amount. If the carrying amount of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value, we record an impairment loss equal to the difference. Calculating the fair value of the indefinite-lived assets requires our significant use of estimates and assumptions. We estimate the fair values of our intangible assets by applying a relief-from-royalty calculation, which includes discounted future cash flows related to each of our intangible asset’s projected revenues. In applying this methodology, we rely on a number of factors, including actual and forecasted revenues and market data.
Our required annual impairment test of each of our indefinite-lived intangible assets performed during fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019 did not result in an impairment charge.
Although no impairment charge was recorded during these periods related to the annual impairment test, we did record intangible impairment charges in fiscal 2020 and 2019. In fiscal 2020, in connection with Map to Growth, we recorded an impairment charge of $4.0 million included in restructuring expense in our Consumer reportable segment for impairment losses on indefinite-lived trade names. In fiscal 2019, we recorded an impairment charge of $4.2 million, of which, $2.0 million was recorded by our CPG reportable segment for impairment losses on indefinite-lived trade names and approximately $2.2 million was recorded by our SPG reportable segment for impairment losses on definite-lived customer-related intangibles. Refer to Note C “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets” for additional details on these indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment charges.
Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes is calculated using the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred income taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effect of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes and certain changes in valuation allowances. We provide valuation allowances against deferred tax assets if, based on available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
In determining the adequacy of valuation allowances, we consider cumulative and anticipated amounts of domestic and international earnings or losses of the appropriate character, anticipated amounts of foreign source income, as well as the anticipated taxable income resulting from the reversal of future taxable temporary differences. We intend to maintain any recorded valuation allowances until sufficient positive evidence (for example, cumulative positive foreign earnings or capital gain income) exists to support a reversal of the tax valuation allowances.
Further, at each interim reporting period, we estimate an effective income tax rate that is expected to be applicable for the full year. Significant judgment is involved regarding the application of global income tax laws and regulations and when projecting the jurisdictional mix of income. Additionally, interpretation of tax laws, court decisions or other guidance provided by taxing authorities influences our estimate of the effective income tax rates. As a result, our actual effective income tax rates and related income tax liabilities may differ materially from our estimated effective tax rates and related income tax liabilities. Any resulting differences are recorded in the period they become known.
Additionally, our operations are subject to various federal, state, local and foreign tax laws and regulations that govern, among other things, taxes on worldwide income. The calculation of our income tax expense is based on the best information available, including the application of currently enacted income tax laws and regulations, and involves our significant judgment. The actual income tax liability for each jurisdiction in any year can ultimately be determined, in some instances, several years after the financial statements have been published.
We also maintain accruals for estimated income tax exposures for many different jurisdictions. Tax exposures are settled primarily through the resolution of audits within each tax jurisdiction or the closing of a statute of limitation. Tax exposures and actual income tax liabilities can also be affected by changes in applicable tax laws, retroactive tax law changes or other factors, which may cause us to believe revisions of past estimates are appropriate. Although we believe that appropriate liabilities have been recorded for our income tax expense and income tax exposures, actual results may differ materially from our estimates.
Contingencies
We are party to various claims and lawsuits arising in the normal course of business. Although we cannot precisely predict the amount of any liability that may ultimately arise with respect to any of these matters, we record provisions when we consider the liability probable and estimable. Our provisions are based on historical experience and legal advice, reviewed quarterly and adjusted according to developments. In general, our accruals, including our accruals for environmental and warranty liabilities, discussed further below, represent the best estimate of a range of probable losses. Estimating probable losses requires the analysis of multiple factors that often depend on judgments about potential actions by third parties, such as regulators, courts, and state and federal legislatures. Changes in the amounts of our loss provisions, which can be material, affect our Consolidated Statements of Income. To the extent there is a
reasonable possibility that potential losses could exceed the amounts already accrued, we believe that the amount of any such additional loss would be immaterial to our results of operations, liquidity and consolidated financial position. We evaluate our accruals at the end of each quarter, or sometimes more frequently, based on available facts, and may revise our estimates in the future based on any new information that becomes available.
Our environmental-related accruals are similarly established and/or adjusted as more information becomes available upon which costs can be reasonably estimated. Actual costs may vary from these estimates because of the inherent uncertainties involved, including the identification of new sites and the development of new information about contamination. Certain sites are still being investigated; therefore, we have been unable to fully evaluate the ultimate costs for those sites. As a result, accruals have not been estimated for certain of these sites and costs may ultimately exceed existing estimated accruals for other sites. We have received indemnities for potential environmental issues from purchasers of certain of our properties and businesses and from sellers of some of the properties or businesses we have acquired. If the indemnifying party fails to, or becomes unable to, fulfill its obligations under those agreements, we may incur environmental costs in addition to any amounts accrued, which may have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
We offer warranties on many of our products, as well as long-term warranty programs at certain of our businesses, and thus have established corresponding warranty liabilities. Warranty expense is impacted by variations in local construction practices, installation conditions, and geographic and climate differences. Although we believe that appropriate liabilities have been recorded for our warranty expense, actual results may differ materially from our estimates.
Pension and Postretirement Plans
We sponsor qualified defined benefit pension plans and various other nonqualified postretirement plans. The qualified defined benefit pension plans are funded with trust assets invested in a diversified portfolio of debt and equity securities and other investments. Among other factors, changes in interest rates, investment returns and the market value of plan assets can (i) affect the level of plan funding, (ii) cause volatility in the net periodic pension cost and (iii) increase our future contribution requirements. A significant decrease in investment returns or the market value of plan assets or a significant decrease in interest rates could increase our net periodic pension costs and adversely affect our results of operations. A significant increase in our contribution requirements with respect to our qualified defined benefit pension plans could have an adverse impact on our cash flow.
Changes in our key plan assumptions would impact net periodic benefit expense and the projected benefit obligation for our defined benefit and various postretirement benefit plans. Based upon May 31, 2021 information, the following tables reflect the impact of a 1% change in the key assumptions applied to our defined benefit pension plans in the United States and internationally:
Based upon May 31, 2021 information, the following table reflects the impact of a 1% change in the key assumptions applied to our various postretirement health care plans:
BUSINESS SEGMENT INFORMATION
We operate a portfolio of businesses and product lines that manufacture and sell a variety of specialty paints, protective coatings, roofing systems, flooring solutions, sealants, cleaners and adhesives. We manage our portfolio by organizing our businesses and product lines into four reportable segments as outlined below, which also represent our operating segments. Within each operating segment, we manage product lines and businesses which generally address common markets, share similar economic characteristics, utilize similar technologies and can share manufacturing or distribution capabilities. Our four operating segments represent components of our business for which separate financial information is available that is utilized on a regular basis by our chief operating decision maker in determining how to allocate the assets of the company and evaluate performance. These four operating segments are each managed by an operating segment manager, who is responsible for the day-to-day operating decisions and performance evaluation of the operating segment’s underlying businesses. We evaluate the profit performance of our segments primarily based on income before income taxes, but also look to earnings (loss) before interest and taxes (“EBIT”), and/or adjusted EBIT, as a performance evaluation measure because interest expense is essentially related to acquisitions, as opposed to segment operations.
Our CPG reportable segment products are sold throughout North America and also account for the majority of our international sales. Our construction product lines are sold directly to contractors, distributors and end-users, such as industrial manufacturing facilities, public institutions and other commercial customers. Products and services within this reportable segment include construction sealants and adhesives, coatings and chemicals, roofing systems, concrete admixture and repair products, building envelope solutions, insulated cladding, flooring systems, and weatherproofing solutions.
Our PCG reportable segment products are sold throughout North America, as well as internationally, and are sold directly to contractors, distributors and end-users, such as industrial manufacturing facilities, public institutions and other commercial customers. Products and services within this reportable segment include high-performance flooring solutions, corrosion control and fireproofing coatings, infrastructure repair systems, fiberglass reinforced plastic gratings and drainage systems.
Our Consumer reportable segment manufactures and markets professional use and do-it-yourself (“DIY”) products for a variety of mainly consumer applications, including home improvement and personal leisure activities. Our Consumer reportable segment’s major manufacturing and distribution operations are located primarily in North America, along with a few locations in Europe and other parts of the world. Our Consumer reportable segment products are primarily sold directly to mass merchandisers, home improvement centers, hardware stores, paint stores, craft shops and through distributors. The Consumer reportable segment offers products that include specialty, hobby and professional paints; caulks; adhesives; cleaners, sandpaper and other abrasives; silicone sealants and wood stains.
Our SPG reportable segment products are sold throughout North America and a few international locations, primarily in Europe. Our SPG product lines are sold directly to contractors, distributors and end-users, such as industrial manufacturing facilities, public institutions and other commercial customers. The SPG reportable segment offers products that include industrial cleaners, restoration services equipment, colorants, nail enamels, exterior finishes, edible coatings and specialty glazes for pharmaceutical and food industries, and other specialty original equipment manufacturer (“OEM”) coatings.
In addition to our four reportable segments, there is a category of certain business activities and expenses, referred to as corporate/other, that does not constitute an operating segment. This category includes our corporate headquarters and related administrative expenses, results of our captive insurance companies, gains or losses on the sales of certain assets and other expenses not directly associated with any reportable segment. Assets related to the corporate/other category consist primarily of investments, prepaid expenses and headquarters’ property and equipment. These corporate and other assets and expenses reconcile reportable segment data to total consolidated income before income taxes and identifiable assets.
We reflect income from our joint ventures on the equity method, and receive royalties from our licensees.
The following table reflects the results of our reportable segments consistent with our management philosophy, and represents the information we utilize, in conjunction with various strategic, operational and other financial performance criteria, in evaluating the performance of our portfolio of product lines.
(a)
The presentation includes a reconciliation of Income (Loss) Before Income Taxes, a measure defined by Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”) in the United States, to EBIT.
(b)
Interest (expense), net includes the combination of interest (expense) and investment income, net.
(c)
EBIT is a non-GAAP measure, and is defined as earnings (loss) before interest and taxes. We evaluate the profit performance of our segments based on income before income taxes, but also look to EBIT, or adjusted EBIT, as a performance evaluation measure because interest expense is essentially related to acquisitions, as opposed to segment operations. We believe EBIT is useful to investors for this purpose as well, using EBIT as a metric in their investment decisions. EBIT should not be considered
an alternative to, or more meaningful than, income before income taxes as determined in accordance with GAAP, since EBIT omits the impact of interest in determining operating performance, which represent items necessary to our continued operations, given our level of indebtedness. Nonetheless, EBIT is a key measure expected by and useful to our fixed income investors, rating agencies and the banking community, all of whom believe, and we concur, that this measure is critical to the capital markets' analysis of our segments' core operating performance. We also evaluate EBIT because it is clear that movements in EBIT impact our ability to attract financing. Our underwriters and bankers consistently require inclusion of this measure in offering memoranda in conjunction with any debt underwriting or bank financing. EBIT may not be indicative of our historical operating results, nor is it meant to be predictive of potential future results.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion includes a comparison of Results of Operations and Liquidity and Capital Resources for the years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020. For comparisons of the years ended May 31, 2020 and 2019, see Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020 as filed on July 27, 2020.
Net Sales
Our CPG segment experienced organic growth driven mainly by market share gains in our construction technologies, led by our insulated concrete form business. In addition, we continued to gain share in our roofing business with innovation and new product releases. Additionally, our commercial sealants and concrete admixture businesses gained market share from our peers and experienced sales increases during fiscal 2021 from distributors who did not order in April and May of the prior fiscal year, due to Covid lockdown restrictions.
Our PCG segment experienced organic declines during the period as restrictions associated with the Covid pandemic impacted the ability of contractors to gain access to the facilities of our end customers. Furthermore, our customers in the energy sector are facing poor economic conditions, which was causing deferrals in industrial maintenance spending. The segment was particularly challenged in emerging markets and in international markets due to severe lockdown restrictions as a result of the Covid pandemic.
Our Consumer segment experienced significant organic growth resulting from a combination of distribution gains and higher DIY demand as consumers are spending more time at home during Covid shutdowns. In addition, growth in our cleaning product businesses contributed to sales growth for the current year.
Our SPG segment experienced strong demand for our businesses serving the cleaning and disinfecting, furniture, outdoor recreational equipment and OEM markets, as well as strong demand for our restoration equipment business as a result of extreme weather events in North America. Additionally, sales of our industrial wood protection products increased during the year, a result of a stronger residential market, which has driven demand for lumber, furniture and cabinets in the United States.
Gross Profit Margin Our consolidated gross profit margin of 39.4% of net sales for fiscal 2021 compares to a consolidated gross profit margin of 38.0% for the comparable period a year ago. This gross profit increase of approximately 1.4% of net sales resulted primarily from a combination of MAP to Growth savings, which include plant consolidations and improved operating discipline, as well as raw material savings due to our centralized procurement initiatives, increases in selling prices and the favorable impact of leveraging from higher sales volume versus the same period a year ago.
Overall, raw material costs were slightly deflationary through the third quarter of fiscal 2021. As indicated previously, several macroeconomic factors resulted in inflation on certain key product categories in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. We expect that these increased costs will be reflected in our results more significantly during fiscal 2022, especially in the first half of the year. We plan to offset these increased costs with commensurate increases in selling prices. Furthermore, we have received “force majeure”
notifications from many of our major material suppliers, which may impact our ability to timely meet customer demand in certain of our businesses and across certain product categories.
The macroeconomic factors identified above include, but are not limited to, the following: (i) supplier refineries operating less due to low gasoline and jet fuel demand; (ii) significant weather events which have disrupted our supply chain, such as the historic winter storm in February 2021, which impacted significant portions of the United States; (iii) intermittent supplier plant shutdowns as a result of the Covid pandemic; (iv) significant worldwide demand during the Covid pandemic for key items such as packaging, solvents, and chemicals used in cleaning products; (v) availability of transportation and fluctuating costs to transport products; and (vi) high global demand as markets reopen and economic stimulus drives growth.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses Our consolidated SG&A expense increased by approximately $115.4 million during fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020, but decreased to 27.3% of net sales for fiscal 2021 from 28.1% of net sales for fiscal 2020. During fiscal 2021, we continued our MAP to Growth and have generated incremental savings within SG&A of approximately $24.0 million. Additional SG&A expense incurred from companies recently acquired was approximately $20.5 million during fiscal 2021.
Our CPG segment SG&A was approximately $9.3 million higher for fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 mainly due to higher commission expense associated with higher roofing sales, which more than offset the incremental MAP to Growth savings generated during the year. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A decreased by 240 basis points (“bps”) due to increased sales volumes, the incremental MAP to Growth savings and a reduction in discretionary spending when compared to the prior year.
Our PCG segment SG&A was approximately $0.2 million lower for fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 but increased by 140 bps as a percentage of net sales, mainly due to the unfavorable deleveraging impact resulting from the decrease in sales year over year. The decrease in SG&A was primarily attributable to incremental MAP to Growth savings, offset somewhat by the additional SG&A generated from companies recently acquired, which totaled approximately $2.1 million.
Our Consumer segment SG&A increased by approximately $45.1 million during fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020, but decreased by 150 bps as a percentage of net sales. The year-over year increase in SG&A was primarily attributable to increases in distribution costs and incentive compensation costs as a result of higher volume, offset somewhat by a reduction in discretionary spending during the period. There were also increases in advertising and promotional expense. Lastly, a recent acquisition contributed approximately $16.0 million of additional SG&A expense during the current period.
Our SPG segment SG&A was approximately $0.3 million higher during fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020, but decreased by 430 bps as a percentage of sales, driven mainly by the 17.5% sales growth in the current year. The increase in SG&A expense is mainly attributable to increased compensation expense as well recent acquisitions, which generated additional SG&A expense of $2.4 million. These increases were partially offset by incremental MAP to Growth savings and reduced discretionary spending.
SG&A expenses in our corporate/other category of $132.4 million during fiscal 2021 increased by $60.7 million from $71.7 million recorded during fiscal 2020. The prior year was impacted by the pandemic's onset, when we experienced lower medical expenses and incentive reversals. By contrast, in the current year we experienced higher insurance costs due to property claims and business interruptions caused by hurricanes and winter storm Uri, as well as higher incentives tied to improved performance.
The following table summarizes the retirement-related benefit plans’ impact on income before income taxes for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020, as this activity has a significant impact on our SG&A expense:
We expect that pension and postretirement expense will fluctuate on year-to-year basis, depending upon the investment performance of plan assets and potential changes in interest rates, both of which are difficult to predict in light of the lingering macroeconomic uncertainties associated with Covid, but which may have a material impact on our consolidated financial results in the future. A
decrease of 1% in the discount rate or the expected return on plan assets assumptions would result in $8.3 million and $6.6 million higher expense, respectively. The assumptions and estimates used to determine the discount rate and expected return on plan assets are more fully described in Note N, “Pension Plans,” and Note O, “Postretirement Benefits,” to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Further discussion and analysis of the sensitivity surrounding our most critical assumptions under our pension and postretirement plans is discussed above in “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Pension and Postretirement Plans.”
Restructuring Expense
These charges are associated with closures of certain facilities as well as the elimination of duplicative headcount and infrastructure associated with certain of our businesses and are the result of the continued implementation of our MAP to Growth, which focuses upon strategic shifts in operations across our entire business.
Our current expectation of future additional restructuring costs is summarized in the table below.
We previously expected these charges to be incurred by the end of calendar year 2020, upon which we expected to achieve an annualized pretax savings of approximately $290 million per year. However, the disruption caused by the outbreak of the Covid pandemic delayed the finalization of our MAP to Growth past the original target completion date of December 31, 2020. We utilized the remainder of fiscal 2021 to drive toward achieving the goals originally set forth in our MAP to Growth. On May 31, 2021, we formally concluded our MAP to Growth. However, certain of these projects will not be finalized until fiscal 2022 and we expect to continue to recognize restructuring expense throughout fiscal 2022, as projects related to our MAP to Growth are executed and completed.
Despite the delay in finalizing our MAP to Growth past the original target completion date, we have exceeded our annualized pretax savings goal of approximately $290 million and made substantial progress on our $230 million working capital improvement goal by May 31, 2021. See Note B, “Restructuring,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for further details surrounding our MAP to Growth.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Asset Impairments During fiscal 2021, we did not record an impairment charge, as compared to $4.0 million of losses recorded during fiscal 2020, which was classified in restructuring expense within our Consumer reportable segment. The impairment charge in fiscal 2020 was recorded as a result of a decision to exit an unprofitable business and abandon a tradename in connection with MAP to Growth. For additional information, refer to Note C, “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Interest Expense
Investment (Income), Net
Income Before Income Taxes (“IBT”)
Our CPG segment results reflect higher selling prices, MAP to Growth savings and the favorable leverage of sales volume increases. Our PCG segment results reflect the impact of the Covid pandemic restrictions, challenges in the energy sector, as well as emerging markets. Our Consumer segment results reflect the large increase in sales and related volume leveraging impact on margins, along with savings from our MAP to Growth. Our SPG segment results reflect sales increases in our restoration equipment, furniture, industrial wood protection products, cleaning and disinfecting, outdoor recreational equipment, food and OEM businesses, in addition to savings from our MAP to Growth and other cost cutting measures.
Income Tax Rate The effective income tax rate was 24.7% for fiscal 2021 compared to an effective income tax rate of 25.2% for fiscal 2020. Refer to Note H, “Income Taxes,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the components of the effective income tax rates.
Net Income
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Operating Activities
Approximately $766.2 million of cash was provided by operating activities during fiscal 2021, compared with $549.9 million of cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2020. The net change in cash from operations includes the change in net income, which increased by $198.4 million year over year.
The change in accounts receivable during fiscal 2021 provided approximately $170.7 million less cash than fiscal 2020. This resulted from the timing of sales, which dipped sharply in the fourth quarter of last year, but rebounded sharply during fiscal 2021. Days sales outstanding (“DSO”) at May 31, 2021 decreased to 62.2 days from 66.3 days at May 31, 2020. All of our reportable segments achieved decreases in DSO during the current year, which reflect prior MAP to Growth efforts to rationalize businesses as a result of changes in market strategy.
During fiscal 2021, we spent approximately $90.1 million more cash for inventory compared to our spending during fiscal 2020. This resulted from efforts to reduce inventory days on hand, which were offset by higher raw material costs and increased demand from our businesses as Covid restrictions begin to lift throughout the world. Days inventory outstanding (“DIO”) at May 31, 2021 decreased slightly to 80.3 days from 80.6 days at May 31, 2020.
The change in accounts payable during fiscal 2021 used approximately $178.5 million less cash than during fiscal 2020. Days payables outstanding (“DPO”) increased by approximately 8.8 days from 81.1 days at May 31, 2020 to 89.9 days at May 31, 2021. The longer DPO is a direct result of moving toward a center-led procurement process that includes negotiating modified payment terms. Cash provided from operations, along with the use of available credit lines, as required, remain our primary sources of liquidity.
The change in other accrued liabilities during fiscal 2021 used approximately $66.7 million less cash than during fiscal 2020 due principally to the increase in customer rebate accruals. Additionally, certain government entities located where we have operations have enacted various pieces of legislation designed to help businesses weather the economic impact of Covid and ultimately preserve jobs. Some of this legislation, such as the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act in the United States, enables employers to postpone the payment of various types of taxes over varying time horizons. As of May 31, 2020, we had deferred $17.7 million of such government payments that would have normally been paid during our fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, but which will be paid in future periods. During fiscal 2021, we deferred an additional $9.4 million of such government payments that would have normally been paid during our fiscal 2021, but which will be paid in future periods. The $9.4 million of deferrals generated during fiscal 2021 is presented net of payments that occurred during fiscal 2021 but which normally would have been paid in prior periods. As of May 31, 2021, we have a total of $27.1 million accrued for such government payments that would have normally been paid already, but which will now be paid in future periods.
Investing Activities
For fiscal 2021, cash used for investing activities increased by $116.8 million to $326.4 million as compared to $209.6 million in the prior year period. This year-over-year increase in cash used for investing activities was mainly driven by $100.1 million in more cash spent on acquisitions as we acquired more and larger businesses in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020.
We also utilized $9.4 million more cash in fiscal 2021 related to capital expenditures. Capital expenditures are made to accommodate our continued growth to achieve production and distribution efficiencies, expand capacity, introduce new technology, improve environmental health and safety capabilities, improve information systems and enhance our administration capabilities. We paid for capital expenditures of $157.2 million, $147.8 million, and $136.8 million during the periods ended May 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Throughout fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, we have been increasing our capital spending in an effort to consolidate ERP systems and our plant footprint, as part of our MAP to Growth, and to meet growing demand.
Our captive insurance companies invest their excess cash in marketable securities in the ordinary course of conducting their operations, and this activity will continue. Differences in the amounts related to these activities on a year-over-year basis are primarily attributable to the rebalancing of the portfolio, along with differences in the timing and performance of their investments balanced against amounts required to satisfy claims. At May 31, 2021 and 2020, the fair value of our investments in marketable securities totaled $168.8 million and $114.0 million, respectively.
As of May 31, 2021, approximately $221.1 million of our consolidated cash and cash equivalents were held at various foreign subsidiaries, compared with approximately $199.6 million as of May 31, 2020. Undistributed earnings held at our foreign subsidiaries that are considered permanently reinvested will be used, for instance, to expand operations organically or for acquisitions in foreign jurisdictions. Further, our operations in the United States generate sufficient cash flow to satisfy U.S. operating requirements. Refer to Note H, “Income Taxes,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding unremitted foreign earnings.
Financing Activities
For fiscal 2021, cash used for financing activities increased by $142.7 million to $459.6 million as compared to $316.9 million in the prior year period. The overall increase in cash used for financing activities was driven principally by debt-related activities. We had no additions to long term or short-term debt during fiscal 2021 compared to $485.3 million in fiscal 2020. This is partially offset by our use of $282.8 million less cash to paydown existing debt in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. Refer to Note G “Borrowings” in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” below for a discussion of significant debt-related activity that occurred in fiscal 2021 and 2020, significant components of our debt, and our available liquidity.
The increase in cash used for financing activities generated by debt-related activities was also somewhat offset by a $75.0 million decrease in cash used for the repurchase of common stock during fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020. This decrease was a result of the macroeconomic uncertainty caused by the Covid pandemic, which led to the temporary suspension of our stock repurchase program during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, which lasted through the second quarter of fiscal 2021. Refer to Note I “Stock Repurchase Program” in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” below for further details on the Company’s stock repurchase program.
The following table summarizes our financial obligations and their expected maturities at May 31, 2021, and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flow in the periods indicated.
(1)
Excluded from other long-term liabilities are our gross long-term liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits, which totaled $11.2 million at May 31, 2021. Currently, we cannot predict with reasonable reliability the timing of cash settlements to the respective taxing authorities related to these liabilities.
(2)
These amounts represent our estimated cash contributions to be made in the periods indicated for our pension and postretirement plans, assuming no actuarial gains or losses, assumption changes or plan changes occur in any period. The projection results assume the required minimum contribution will be contributed.
The U.S. dollar fluctuated throughout the year, and was weaker against other major currencies where we conduct operations at May 31, 2021 versus May 31, 2020, causing a favorable change in the accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) (refer to Note K, “Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss),” to the Consolidated Financial Statements) component of stockholders’ equity of $140.4 million this year versus a unfavorable change of $70.2 million last year. The change in fiscal 2021 was in addition to favorable net changes of $87.1 million related to adjustments required for minimum pension and other postretirement liabilities, unfavorable changes of $23.9 million related to derivatives and unfavorable changes of $1.0 million related to unrealized losses on fixed income securities.
Stock Repurchase Program
Refer to Note I “Stock Repurchase Program” in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” below for a discussion of our stock repurchase program.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet financings. We have no subsidiaries that are not included in our financial statements, nor do we have any interests in, or relationships with, any special-purpose entities that are not reflected in our financial statements.