Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition, cash flows and other changes in financial condition. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and the section titled “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A.
Royalty Pharma plc is an English public limited company incorporated under the laws of England and Wales that was created for the purpose of consolidating our predecessor entities and facilitating the IPO of our Class A ordinary shares that was completed in June 2020. “Royalty Pharma,” “Royalty Pharma Investments,” “RPI,” the “Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Royalty Pharma plc and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis. After the consummation of the Exchange Offer Transactions (as defined below) and execution of the New Management Agreement (as defined below) (collectively, the “Reorganization Transactions”) in February 2020 and before the consummation of the IPO, “Royalty Pharma,” the “Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Royalty Pharma Investments 2019 ICAV. Prior to the Reorganization Transactions, “Royalty Pharma,” the “Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Royalty Pharma Investments, an Irish Unit Trust (“Old RPI”).
Business Overview
We are the largest buyer of biopharmaceutical royalties and a leading funder of innovation across the biopharmaceutical industry. Since our founding in 1996, we have been pioneers in the royalty market, collaborating with innovators from academic institutions, research hospitals and not-for-profits through small and mid-cap biotechnology companies to leading global pharmaceutical companies. We have assembled a portfolio of royalties which entitles us to payments based directly on the top-line sales of many of the industry’s leading therapies, which includes royalties on more than 45 commercial products, including AbbVie and J&J’s Imbruvica, Astellas and Pfizer’s Xtandi, Biogen’s Tysabri, Gilead’s HIV franchise, Merck’s Januvia, Novartis’ Promacta, Vertex’s Kalydeco, Orkambi, Symdeko and Trikafta, and five development-stage product candidates. We fund innovation in the biopharmaceutical industry both directly and indirectly - directly when we partner with companies to co-fund late-stage clinical trials and new product launches in exchange for future royalties, and indirectly when we acquire existing royalties from the original innovators.
Our capital-efficient business model enables us to benefit from many of the most attractive characteristics of the biopharmaceutical industry, including long product life cycles, significant barriers to entry and noncyclical revenues, but with substantially reduced exposure to many common industry challenges such as early stage development risk, therapeutic area constraints, high research and development costs, and high fixed manufacturing and marketing costs. We have a highly flexible approach that is agnostic to both therapeutic area and treatment modality, allowing us to acquire royalties on the most attractive therapies across the biopharmaceutical industry.
We classify our royalty acquisitions by the approval status of the therapy at the time of acquisition:
•Approved Products - We acquire royalties in approved products that generate predictable cash flows and may offer upside potential from unapproved indications. Since inception in 1996 through 2020, we have deployed $13.2 billion of cash to acquire royalties on approved products. From 2012 through 2020, we have acquired $8.4 billion of royalties on approved products.
•Development-Stage Product Candidates - We acquire royalties on development-stage product candidates that have demonstrated strong clinical proof of concept. From 2012, when we began acquiring royalties on development-stage product candidates, through 2020, we have deployed $7.0 billion to acquire royalties on development-stage product candidates.
While we classify our acquisitions in these two broad segments, several of our acquisitions of royalties on approved products were driven by the long-term potential of these products in other, unapproved indications. Similarly, some of our royalty acquisitions in development-stage product candidates are for products that are approved in other indications.
We acquire product royalties in a variety of ways that can be tailored to the needs of our partners. We classify our product royalty acquisitions by the following structures:
•Third-party Royalties - A royalty is the contractual right to a percentage of top-line sales from a licensee’s use of a product, technology or intellectual property. The majority of our current portfolio consists of third-party royalties.
•Synthetic / Hybrid Royalties - A synthetic royalty is the contractual right to a percentage of top-line sales created by the developer and/or marketer of a therapy in exchange for funding. In many of our synthetic royalties, we also make investments in the public equity of the company, where the main value driver of the company is the product for which we concurrently acquired a royalty.
•R&D Funding - We fund R&D, typically for large biopharmaceutical companies, in exchange for future royalties and/or milestones if the product or indication we are funding is approved.
•M&A - We acquire royalties in connection with mergers and acquisitions (“M&A”) transactions, often from the buyers of biopharmaceutical companies when they dispose of the non-strategic assets of the target company following the closing of the acquisition. We also seek to partner with companies to acquire other biopharmaceutical companies that own significant royalties. We may also seek to acquire biopharmaceutical companies that have significant royalties or where we can create royalties in subsequent transactions.
Background and Format of Presentation
In connection with our IPO, we consummated an exchange offer on February 11, 2020 (the “Exchange Date”). Through the exchange offer, investors representing 82% of the aggregate limited partnership in the various partnerships owned by Old RPI (the “Legacy Investors Partnerships”), exchanged their limited partnership interests in the Legacy Investors Partnerships for limited partnership interests in RPI US Partners 2019, LP, a Delaware limited partnership, RPI International Holdings 2019, LP, (together, the “Continuing Investors Partnerships”). The exchange offer transaction together with (i) the concurrent incurrence of indebtedness under a new credit facility and (ii) the issuance of additional interests in Continuing Investors Partnerships to satisfy performance payments payable in respect of assets acquired prior to the date of the IPO are referred to as the “Exchange Offer Transactions.”
Following our IPO, we operate and control the business affairs of Royalty Pharma Holdings Ltd, (“RP Holdings”) through our controlling ownership of RP Holdings’ Class A ordinary shares and RP Holdings’ Class B ordinary shares (the “RP Holdings Class B Interests”). We include RP Holdings and its subsidiaries in our consolidated financial statements. RP Holdings is the sole owner of Royalty Pharma Investments 2019 ICAV, which is an Irish collective asset management entity formed to facilitate our Exchange Offer Transactions.
As a result of the Exchange Offer Transactions, we own, through our wholly-owned subsidiary RPI 2019 Intermediate Finance Trust, a Delaware statutory trust (“RPI Intermediate FT”), an 82% economic interest in Old RPI. Through our 82% indirect ownership of Old RPI, we are legally entitled to 82% of the economics of Old RPI’s wholly-owned subsidiaries, RPI Finance Trust, a Delaware statutory trust (“RPIFT”) and RPI Acquisitions (Ireland), Limited (“RPI Acquisitions”), an Irish private limited company, and 66% of Royalty Pharma Collection Trust, a Delaware statutory trust (“RPCT”).
The remaining 34% of RPCT is owned by the Legacy Investors Partnerships and Royalty Pharma Select Finance Trust, a Delaware statutory trust (“RPSFT”), which is wholly owned by Royalty Pharma Select, an Irish Unit trust. From the Exchange Date until the expiration of the Legacy Investors Partnerships’ investment period on June 30, 2020 (“the Legacy Date”), the Legacy Investors Partnerships had the option to participate proportionately in any investment made by Old RPI. Following the Legacy Date, Old RPI has ceased making new investments and each of Old RPI and the Legacy Investors Partnerships became legacy entities. Following the Legacy Date, we have made and will continue to make new investments solely through our wholly-owned subsidiaries, including RPI Intermediate FT.
Following management’s determination that a high degree of common ownership exists in RPI both before and after the Exchange Date, RPI recognized Old RPI’s assets and liabilities at the carrying value reflected on Old RPI’s balance sheet as of the Exchange Date. Old RPI is our predecessor for financial reporting purposes. The references in the following discussion to all periods ending on and prior to December 31, 2019 refer to the financial results of Old RPI for the same periods.
Understanding Our Financial Reporting
In accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”), most of the royalties we acquire are treated as investments in cash flow streams and are thus classified as financial assets. These investments have yield components that most closely resemble loans measured at amortized cost under the effective interest method accounting methodology. Under this accounting methodology, we calculate the effective interest rate on each financial royalty asset using a forecast of the expected cash flows to be received over the life of the financial royalty asset relative to the initial acquisition price. The yield, which is calculated at the end of each reporting period and applied prospectively, is then recognized via accretion into our income at the effective rate of return over the expected life of the financial royalty asset.
The preparation of our financial statements in this manner requires the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect both our reported assets and liabilities and our income and revenue and expenses. The most significant judgments and estimates applied by management are associated with the measurement of income derived from our financial royalty assets, including management’s judgment in forecasting the expected future cash flows of the underlying royalties and the expected duration of the financial royalty asset. Our cash flow forecasts are generated and updated each reporting period by manually compiling sell-side equity research analysts’ consensus estimates for each of the products in which we own royalties. We then calculate our expected royalty cash flows using these consensus forecasts. In any given reporting period, any decline in the expected future cash flows associated with a financial royalty asset is recognized as a provision which is expensed through our income statement as a non-cash charge.
As a result of the non-cash charges associated with applying the effective interest method accounting methodology, our income statement activity in respect of many of our royalties can be volatile and unpredictable. Small declines in sell-side equity research analysts’ consensus forecasts over a long time horizon can result in an immediate non-cash income statement expense recognition, even though the applicable cash inflows will not be realized for many years into the future. For example, in late 2014 we acquired the cystic fibrosis franchise royalty, which was classified as a financial royalty asset. Beginning in the second quarter of 2015, declines in near-term sales forecasts of sell-side equity research analysts caused us to build up a provision for this financial royalty asset. Over the course of 10 quarters, we recognized non-cash charges to the income statement as a result of these changes in forecasts, ultimately accumulating a peak cumulative non-cash provision of $1.30 billion by September 30, 2017, including non-cash provision expense of $743.2 million in 2016 related to this financial royalty asset. With the approval of the Vertex triple combination therapy, Trikafta, in October 2019, sell-side equity research analysts’ consensus forecasts increased to reflect the larger addressable market and the increase in the expected duration of the Trikafta royalty. While small reductions in the cumulative provision for the cystic fibrosis franchise were recognized in 2017 and 2018, there remained a $1.10 billion cumulative provision balance that was fully offset by a $1.10 billion credit to the provision in 2019 as a result of an increase in sell-side equity research analysts’ consensus forecasts associated with the Trikafta approval. This example illustrates the volatility caused by our accounting model. Therefore, management believes investors should not look to income from royalties or the associated provision for changes in future cash flows as a measure of our near-term financial performance or as a source for predicting future income or growth trends.
Our operations have historically been financed primarily with cash flows generated by our royalties. Due to the nature of our accounting methodology for our financial royalty assets, there is no direct correlation between our income from royalties and our royalty cash receipts. As noted above, income from such royalties is measured at amortized cost under the effective interest method accounting methodology. Given the importance of cash flows to management’s operation of the business and their predictability, management uses royalty receipts as the primary measure of our operating performance. Royalty receipts refer to the summation of the following line items from our GAAP Statement of Cash Flows: Cash collections from financial royalty assets, Cash collections from intangible royalty assets, Other royalty cash collections and Distributions from non-consolidated affiliates (which line item is included in both Net cash provided by operating activities and Net cash used in investing activities).
In addition to analyzing our results on a GAAP basis, management also reviews our results on a non-GAAP basis. The closest comparable GAAP measure to each of the non-GAAP measures that management review is Net cash provided by operating activities. The key non-GAAP metrics we focus on are Adjusted Cash Receipts, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Cash Flow, each of which is further discussed in the section titled “Non-GAAP Financial Results.”
Adjusted Cash Receipts and Adjusted Cash Flow are used by management as key liquidity measures in the evaluation of our ability to generate cash from operations. Both measures are an indication of the strength of the Company and the performance of the business. Management uses Adjusted Cash Flow to compare its performance against non-GAAP adjusted net income used by companies in the biopharmaceutical industry. Adjusted EBITDA, which is derived from Adjusted Cash Receipts, is used by our lenders to assess our ability to meet our financial covenants.
Refer to the section titled “Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for additional discussion of management’s use of non-GAAP measures as supplemental financial measures.
Portfolio Overview
Our portfolio consists of royalties on more than 45 marketed therapies and five development-stage product candidates. The therapies in our portfolio address therapeutic areas such as rare disease, oncology, neurology, infectious disease, cardiology and diabetes, and are delivered to patients across both primary and specialty care settings. The table below includes royalty cash receipts for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 grouped by Growth Products and Mature Products. “Growth Products” are defined as royalties with a duration beyond December 31, 2020. We define all other royalties as “Mature Products.”
(1) The cystic fibrosis franchise includes the following approved products: Kalydeco, Orkambi, Symdeko/Symkevi and Trikafta/Kaftrio.
(2) The HIV franchise includes the following approved products: Atripla, Truvada, Emtriva, Complera, Stribild, Genvoya, Descovy, Odefsey, Symtuza and Biktarvy. Royalties are received on the emtricitabine portion of sales only.
(3) Januvia, Janumet, Other DPP-IVs include the following approved products: Tradjenta, Onglyza, Kombiglyze, Galvus, Eucreas and Nesina. The Other DPP-IVs are marketed by Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Novartis and Takeda.
(4) Other Growth Products include royalties on the following products: Bosulif (a product co-developed by our joint venture investee, Avillion, for which receipts are presented as Distributions from non-consolidated affiliates on the Statement of Cash Flows), Cimzia, Conbriza/Fablyn/Viviant, Entyvio, Lexiscan, Mircera, Myozyme, Nesina, Priligy and Soliqua. Other Growth Products for 2020 also include contributions from the Legacy SLP Interest, a payment from Biohaven in respect of an expired option to exercise additional funding of the Biohaven Series A Preferred Shares which is presented as Proceeds from available for sale debt securities on the Statement of Cash Flows, and a distribution from Avillion in respect of the Merck KGaA Asset, for which development ceased in 2020, and for which the receipt is presented as Distributions from non-consolidated affiliates in both the operating and investing section of the Statement of Cash Flows.
(5) Receipts from Tecfidera milestone payments are presented as Proceeds from available for sale debt securities on the Statement of Cash Flows.
(6) Other Mature Products primarily include royalties on the following products: Prezista, Rotateq and Thalomid.
Financial Overview
Financial highlights
•Net cash provided by operating activities totaled $2.0 billion, $1.7 billion and $1.6 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Net cash provided by operating activities is the closest comparable GAAP financial measure to the supplemental non-GAAP liquidity measures that follow.
•Adjusted Cash Receipts (a non-GAAP metric) totaled $1.8 billion, $2.1 billion and $2.8 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
•Adjusted EBITDA (a non-GAAP metric) totaled $1.6 billion, $2.0 billion and $2.7 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
•Adjusted Cash Flow (a non-GAAP metric) totaled $1.5 billion, $1.6 billion and $2.4 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Understanding Our Results of Operations
In connection with our IPO, Royalty Pharma plc became a holding company whose principal asset is a controlling equity interest in RP Holdings, which is the sole equity owner of Royalty Pharma Investments 2019 ICAV, an entity that is included in our consolidated financial statements. We report non-controlling interests related to four minority interests in our subsidiaries held by third parties.
1. The first minority interest is attributable to the Legacy Investors Partnerships’ 18% ownership interest in Old RPI. The value of this non-controlling interest will decline over time as the assets in Old RPI expire.
2. The second minority interest is attributable to the RP Holdings Class C Special Interests held by EPA Holdings, an affiliate of the Manager. Income will not be allocated to this non-controlling interest until certain conditions are met, which we do not expect to occur for several years.
3. The third minority interest is attributable to the RP Holdings Class B Interests held indirectly by the Continuing Investors, which represent an approximate 36% ownership interest in RP Holdings as of December 31, 2020 and are exchangeable for Class A ordinary shares. The value of this non-controlling interest will decline over time if the investors who indirectly own the RP Holdings Class B Interests exchange those shares for our Class A ordinary shares.
4. The fourth minority interest is attributable to a de minimis interest in RPCT held by certain legacy investors as a result of a 2011 reorganization transaction that created a prior legacy entity. The value of this non-controlling interest will decline over time as the assets in RPCT expire and is expected to be substantially eliminated by the end of 2022.
The fourth non-controlling interest related to ownership in RPCT held by Royalty Pharma Select Finance Trust, a Delaware statutory trust (“RPSFT”), is the only non-controlling interest that existed prior to the Reorganization Transactions and is reflected in our historical financial statements for periods through December 31, 2019 and discussed in this MD&A. The non-controlling interest related to the Legacy Investors Partnerships’ 18% ownership interest in Old RPI exists from the Exchange Date and is reflected in our financial statements from the first quarter of 2020. The other two non-controlling interests are reflected in our financial statements from and after the date of our IPO. All of the results of operations of RP Holdings, Old RPI and RPCT are consolidated into our financial statements.
Following the IPO, EPA Holdings is entitled to receive Equity Performance Awards through its RP Holdings Class C Special Interests. Equity Performance Awards owed to EPA Holdings will be recognized as an equity transaction when the obligation becomes due and will impact the income allocated to non-controlling interests related to the RP Holdings Class C Special Interests at that time.
Total income and other revenues
Total income and other revenues is primarily comprised of income from our financial royalty assets, royalty revenue from our intangible royalty assets, and royalty income arising from successful commercialization of products developed through joint R&D funding arrangements. Most of our royalties on both approved products and development-stage product candidates are classified as financial royalty assets as our ownership rights are generally passive in nature. In instances in which we acquire a royalty that does include more substantial rights or ownership of the underlying intellectual property, we classify such royalties as intangible royalty assets.
We recognize interest income related to our financial royalty assets. Royalty revenue relates solely to revenue from our DPP-IV patent estate for which the patent rights have been licensed to various counterparties. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, the royalty payors accounting for greater than 10% of our total income and other revenues in any one year are shown in the table below:
(1) We did not recognize any income related to Trodelvy prior to 2020.
Income from financial royalty assets
Our financial royalty assets represent investments in cash flow streams with yield components that most closely resemble loans measured at amortized cost under the effective interest method. We calculate the effective interest rate using forecasted expected cash flows to be received over the life of the financial royalty asset relative to the initial acquisition price. Interest income is recognized at the effective rate of return over the expected life of the asset, which is calculated at the end of each reporting period and applied prospectively. As changes in sell-side equity research analysts’ consensus estimates are updated on a quarterly basis, the effective rate of return changes. For example, if sell-side equity research analysts’ consensus forecasts increase, the yield to derive income on a financial royalty asset will increase and result in higher income for subsequent periods.
Variables affecting the recognition of interest income from financial royalty assets on individual products under the prospective effective interest method include any one of the following: (1) additional acquisitions, (2) changes in expected cash flows of the underlying pharmaceutical products, derived primarily from sell-side equity research analysts’ consensus forecasts, (3) regulatory approval of additional indications leading to new cash flow streams, (4) changes to the duration of the royalty (i.e., patent expiration date) and (5) amounts and timing of royalty receipts. Our financial royalty assets are directly linked to sales of underlying pharmaceutical products whose life cycle typically peaks at a point in time, followed frequently by declining sales trends due to the entry of generic competition, resulting in natural declines in the asset balance and periodic interest income over the life of our royalties. The recognition of income from royalties requires management to make estimates and assumptions around many factors, including those impacting the variables noted above.
Revenue from intangible royalty assets
Revenue from intangible royalty assets is derived from our Januvia, Janumet and other DPP-IV patents classified as intangible royalty assets.
Other royalty income
Other royalty income primarily includes income from former royalties for which the asset balances have been fully amortized and royalty income from synthetic royalties arising out of R&D funding arrangements. Occasionally, a royalty asset may be amortized on an accelerated basis due to collectability concerns, which, if resolved, may result in future cash collections when no financial royalty asset remains. Similarly, we may continue to collect royalties on a financial royalty asset beyond the estimated patent expiration date by which the financial royalty asset was amortized in full. In each scenario where a financial royalty asset no longer remains, such income is recognized as other royalty income.
R&D funding expense
R&D funding expense consists of (1) upfront R&D payments we have made to counterparties to acquire royalties on development-stage product candidates and (2) ongoing R&D payments to fund development-stage product candidates undergoing clinical trials with our partners in exchange for royalties if the products are successfully developed and commercialized. These expenditures relate to the activities performed by our counterparties to develop and test new products, to test existing products for treatment in new indications, and to ensure product efficacy and regulatory compliance prior to launch.
Below is a summary of the ongoing R&D agreements in place, upfront R&D funding completed, and the associated R&D funding expense during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Provision for changes in expected cash flows from financial royalty assets
The provision for changes in expected future cash flows from financial royalty assets includes the following activities:
•the movement in the cumulative allowance for changes in expected future cash flows; and
•the movement in the allowance for credit losses subsequent to adoption of ASU 2016-13 on January 1, 2020.
The provision for changes in expected cash flows is the current period activity resulting from adjustments to the cumulative allowance for changes in expected cash flows, which is a netted against the balance sheet account Financial royalty assets, net balance on the consolidated balance sheets. As discussed above, income is accreted on our financial royalty assets using the effective interest method. As we update our forecasted cash flows on a periodic basis and recalculate the present value of the remaining future cash flows, any shortfall when compared to the carrying value of the financial royalty asset is recorded directly to the income statement through the line item Provision for changes in expected future cash flows from financial royalty assets. If, in a subsequent period, there is an increase in expected cash flows or if actual cash flows are greater than cash flows previously expected, we reduce the cumulative allowance previously established for a financial royalty asset for the incremental increase in the present value of cash flows expected to be collected. This results in a credit to provision expense.
Most of the same variables and management’s estimates affecting the recognition of interest income on our financial royalty assets also impact the provision. In any period, we will recognize provision income (i.e., a credit to the provision) or expense as a result of the following factors: (1) changes in expected cash flows of the underlying pharmaceutical products, derived primarily from sell-side equity research analysts’ consensus forecasts, (2) regulatory approval of additional indications which leads to new cash flow streams, (3) changes to the duration of the royalty (i.e., patent expiration date) and (4) amounts and timing of royalty receipts.
Upon the adoption on January 1, 2020 of ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”), we recorded a cumulative adjustment to Retained earnings of $192.7 million to recognize an allowance for current expected credit losses on our portfolio of financial royalty assets. The Provision for changes in expected cash flows from financial royalty assets reflects the activity for the period that relates to the change in estimates applied to calculate the allowance for current expected credit losses, namely any new financial royalty assets with limited protective rights and changes in the underlying cash flow forecasts used in the effective interest model to measure income from our financial royalty assets.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses primarily include Operating and Personnel Payments, bad debt expense, legal reserves, other expenses for professional services, and share-based compensation.
Beginning in 2020, the Operating and Personnel Payments paid to our Manager have been significantly higher than they were in historical periods. Prior to the Reorganization Transactions, the Operating and Personnel Payments were fixed, growing at 5% annually, and not linked to any financial line item. Under the management agreement which is effective from the Exchange Date (“New Management Agreement”), Operating and Personnel Payments for RPI are calculated as 6.5% of the Adjusted Cash Receipts for each quarter and 0.25% of the GAAP value of our security investments as of the end of each quarter. The operating and personnel payments for Old RPI, an obligation of the Legacy Investors Partnerships as a non-controlling interest in Old RPI and for which the expense is reflected in our net income, is payable in equal quarterly installments and is calculated as the greater of $1 million per quarter and 0.3125% of Royalty Investments (as defined in the New Management Agreement). The expenses incurred in respect of RPI’s Operating and Personnel Payments are expected to comprise the most significant component of G&A expenses on an ongoing basis.
Equity in (earnings)/loss of non-consolidated affiliates
Legacy SLP Interest
In connection with the Exchange Offer Transactions, we acquired a new equity method investment from the Continuing Investors Partnerships in the form of a special limited partnership interest in the Legacy Investors Partnerships (the “Legacy SLP Interest”) in exchange for issuing shares in our subsidiary. The Legacy SLP Interest entitles us to the equivalent of performance distribution payments that would have been paid to the general partner of the Legacy Investors Partnerships and a performance income allocation on a similar basis. The performance income allocation attributable to us is equal to the general partner’s former contractual rights to the income of the Legacy Investors Partnerships.
As the Legacy Investors Partnerships are no longer participating in investment opportunities, the value of the Legacy SLP Interest is expected to decline over time. Our equity method investee, the Legacy Investors Partnerships, also owns a non-controlling interest in Old RPI.
The Avillion Entities
During 2014, we entered into an agreement with our equity method investee Avillion Financing I, LP (“Avillion I”) to invest up to $46.0 million over three years to fund a portion of the costs of a pivotal Phase III study for Pfizer’s Bosulif (bosutinib) to expand its label into front-line chronic myeloid leukemia. The FDA approved a supplemental New Drug Application (“sNDA”) for Pfizer’s Bosulif (bosutinib) in December 2017, which triggered a series of contractual fixed payments from Pfizer to Avillion I over a 10-year period, which we recognize through receipt of distributions from non-consolidated affiliates on the Statement of Cash Flows.
In March 2017, we entered into an agreement with BAv Financing II, LP (“Avillion II”, or, together with Avillion I, the “Avillion Entities”), amended in December 2019, to fund up to $19.0 million of the costs of a clinical trial for the use of the Merck KGaA Asset for the treatment of psoriasis in exchange for certain milestone and royalty payments. Development for the Merck KGaA Asset ceased in 2020 and we do not expect to record significant earnings or losses in the future related to this investment.
In 2018, we agreed to fund up to approximately $105 million over multiple years to fund a portion of the costs for Phase II and III clinical trials of Avillion II, who simultaneously entered into a co-development agreement with AstraZeneca to advance PT027 (the “AZ Asset”) through a global clinical development program for the treatment of asthma in exchange for a series of deferred payments and success-based milestones.
The business model of the Avillion Entities includes partnering with global biopharmaceutical companies to perform R&D in exchange for success-based milestones and/or royalties once products are commercialized.
Other (income)/expense, net
Other (income)/expense, net primarily includes the change in fair market value of our equity securities, the unrealized gains or losses on our derivatives and non-derivative forwards, losses on extinguishment of debt and interest income.
Net income attributable to non-controlling interest
Prior to the Exchange Date, the net income attributable to non-controlling interest related to RPSFT’s 20% share of earnings in RPCT, which is a consolidated subsidiary of Old RPI.
As of and following the Exchange Date, the net income attributable to non-controlling interest also includes the Legacy Investors Partnerships’ approximately 18% share of earnings in Old RPI. As the Legacy Investors Partnerships are no longer participating in investment opportunities of RPI, the related net income attributable to this non-controlling interest is expected to decline over time.
In connection with our IPO, this line item also includes net income attributable to the RP Holdings Class B Interests held by the Continuing Investors Partnerships, and will include net income attributable to the Class C Special Interests held by EPA Holdings once certain conditions have been met. Net income attributable to the non-controlling interest related to the RP Holdings Class B Interests held by the Continuing Investors Partnerships will decline over time if the investors who indirectly own the RP Holdings Class B Interests exchange those shares for our Class A ordinary shares.
Results of Operations
For the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
The comparison of our historical results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 is as follows:
Total income and revenues
Income from financial royalty assets
Income from financial royalty assets by product for our top products for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 is as follows, in order of contribution to income for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Income from financial royalty assets increased by $311.1 million, or 18.9%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by increased income from the cystic fibrosis franchise and Imbruvica. Additionally, we recorded $51.7 million in income in 2020 related to new assets acquired in 2020, primarily Evrysdi and Prevymis. Also, a full year of income related to Crysvita and income from Tazverik following its FDA approval date in January 2020, both of which were acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019, contributed to the increase. The increased income was partially offset by declines from maturing assets, such as Lyrica and Letairis.
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Income from financial royalty assets increased by $124.0 million, or 8.1%, in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to increased income from the following royalty assets: Imbruvica, HIV franchise, cystic fibrosis franchise, Letairis, Promacta and Emgality, the latter two of which were newly acquired in 2019. Imbruvica, the HIV franchise and cystic fibrosis franchise generated increased income as a result of strong product performance. We extended the duration of our Letairis royalty as a result of new information, which resulted in increased income from Letairis for the year. Partially offsetting the increase in income from financial royalty assets was a significant decline in income related to Humira, which expired in 2018.
Revenue from intangible royalty assets
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue from intangible royalty interests decreased by $2.4 million, or 1.6%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by the Januvia and Janumet royalties approaching maturity, and the maturity of the other DPP-IVs.
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Revenue from intangible royalty assets increased $11.7 million, or 8.7%, due to a full year of royalties earned on the Januvia and Janumet products marketed by Merck & Co. In 2016, we entered into a contractual amendment to our license agreement and a settlement with Merck & Co. (the “Merck Settlement”) that provided for a cumulative catch-up payment for past-due royalties on Januvia and Janumet products between 2014 and 2016 of $297.5 million in exchange for a five-quarter payment holiday that began in January 2017. In 2018, we only earned royalties on product sales during the last three quarters of the year, following the expiration of the holiday period.
Other royalty income
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Other royalty income decreased by $0.6 million, or 3.3%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the loss of royalty income from Remicade, which expired in 2018, but for which we continued collecting royalties through the three months ended March 31, 2019, as well as the expiration of our Prezista royalty in 2019. The decrease was offset by higher royalty income in 2020 related to Soliqua, the product we co-funded with Sanofi on which we are entitled to royalties indefinitely, and royalty income related to Trodelvy, the product for which we provided upfront R&D funding to Immunomedics in 2018 and which was approved by the FDA in 2020.
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Other royalty income of $19.6 million in 2019 primarily included income from our final royalties on Remicade and royalty income from Soliqua.
Other royalty income of $136.0 million in 2018 primarily included income from our Remicade and Prezista royalties of $93.7 million and $35.6 million, respectively, after the financial royalty assets were amortized.
R&D funding expense
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
R&D funding expense decreased by $56.7 million, or 68.3%, in 2020 as compared to 2019, due to the completion of our funding requirements in the three months ended December 31, 2019 under our agreement with Pfizer. In 2019, we recorded $62.8 million in R&D funding expense under our agreement with Pfizer.
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
R&D funding expense decreased by $309.6 million, or 78.9%, in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to the royalty acquisitions from Immunomedics and Biohaven that occurred in 2018, which resulted in upfront development-stage funding expense of $181.4 million and $103.0 million, respectively. We did not have upfront development-stage funding expense in 2019.
Provision for changes in expected cash flows from financial royalty assets
The breakdown of our provision for changes in expected cash flows includes the
(1) provision for current expected credit losses upon adoption of ASU 2016-13 on January 1, 2020; and
(2) income and expense activity for financial royalty assets whose cash flow forecasts have changed from the prior period.
As the latter activity is a combination of income and expense items, the provision breakdown by product, exclusive of the provision for current expected credit losses, is as follows, based on the largest contributors to each year’s provision income or expense:
Years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
In 2020, we recorded provision expense of $230.8 million for changes in expected cash flows in comparison to provision income of $1.0 billion for 2019. The provision expense for 2020 is primarily driven by current expected credit losses of $156.2 million as a result of our adoption of the new accounting standard in 2020 and for which we did not have comparable activity in 2019. The 2020 provision for current expected credit losses was predominantly driven by increases to our portfolio of financial royalty assets during 2020, such as the additional tranche of Tazverik acquired from Epizyme and our acquisition of the zavegepant royalty from Biohaven.
In 2020, we recognized provision expense of $87.8 million related to IDHIFA, which was acquired in 2020. In addition, we recorded provision expenses of $46.9 million and $40.9 million related to Imbruvica and Tysabri, respectively, due to decreases in sell-side research analysts’ consensus forecasts during 2020. The provision expense was partially offset by the reversal of the cumulative allowance for Xtandi of $187.1 million due to increases in sell-side research analysts’ consensus forecasts during 2020.
In 2019, we recognized provision income of $1.0 billion primarily driven by the full reversal of the remaining provision of $1.1 billion recorded against the cystic fibrosis franchise as a result of the approval of the Vertex triple combination therapy, Trikafta, in October 2019. Upon the approval, we began including sell-side equity research analysts’ consensus forecasts for Trikafta in the consensus forecasts for the franchise and also extended the duration of our expected cash flows from the cystic fibrosis franchise to reflect the longer patent duration of Trikafta. In addition, we recognized provision income for Tysabri of $66.5 million due to increases in sell-side research analysts’ consensus forecasts. The provision income was offset by provision expenses recorded for Xtandi, Soliqua and Emgality totaling $156.8 million, which were all driven by declines in sell-side equity research analysts’ consensus forecasts.
In 2018, we recognized provision income of $57.3 million. The cumulative allowance for Imbruvica of $45.6 million was fully reversed in 2018 due to an increase in sell-side equity research analyst consensus forecasts. In 2018, we partially reversed $43.4 million of cumulative allowance related to Tysabri as Tysabri sales did not decline as quickly as sell-side equity research analysts expected and we saw a subsequent increase in sell-side equity research analyst consensus forecasts in 2018. In addition, we recorded provision income of $31.9 million for Letairis in 2018 due to the delayed entry of generics that was initially expected in the third quarter of 2018, which caused a partial reversal of a previously recognized cumulative provision against this asset. While the cystic fibrosis franchise generated provision income in 2018, this was primarily the result of variability in the consensus forecasts during both years and not representative of any significant underlying driver in franchise product sales.
Throughout 2017, we recorded significant provision expense for Xtandi as consensus forecasts for future years dropped significantly in 2017, contributing to declines in analyst consensus compared to forecasts from prior periods. Product sales and sell-side equity research analyst consensus forecasts improved for Xtandi in 2018, resulting in a partial reversal of the cumulative allowance in late 2018, and net expense of $63.4 million for the year.
G&A expenses
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
G&A expenses increased $78.3 million, or 75.7%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a $39.1 million increase in Operating and Personnel Payments under the New Management Agreement and an increase of $26.2 million in fees related to our debt refinancing in 2020, for which there was no comparable activity in 2019. We also incurred non-recurring professional services costs in connection with the IPO, two full quarters of expense associated with the directors and officers liability insurance policy and $5.7 million of share-based compensation expense, which further contributed to the increased G&A expenses in 2020.
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
G&A expenses increased $41.5 million, or 67.1%, during 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to a $26.4 million increase in costs for consulting and professional services related to our Reorganization Transactions. In addition, the 2018 reversal of an $8.7 million legal reserve from a dispute related to one of our DPP-IV products contributed to the increase year over year in 2019.
Other operating expenses
Years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Other operating expenses was $65.1 million in 2020 due to the recognition of a non-cash impairment charge related to the write-off of our omecamtiv financial royalty asset balance of $90.2 million, net of cumulative allowance of $25.2 million. During the three months ended December 31, 2020, it was announced that omecamtiv, a development stage product did not meet the clinical trial objectives. We did not have comparable activity in 2019 or 2018.
Equity in (earnings)/loss of non-consolidated affiliates
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Equity in earnings of non-consolidated affiliates was $44.5 million in 2020 and was comprised of equity in earnings from the Legacy SLP Interest and equity in losses from the Avillion Entities. Equity in earnings from the Legacy SLP Interest, an investment which arose through the Exchange Offer Transactions, was $62.0 million in 2020.
Equity in losses of the Avillion Entities was $17.6 million and $32.5 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively. Equity in losses of the Avillion Entities was lower in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily driven by a gain related to Avillion II’s completion of the development program for the Merck KGaA Asset during the second quarter of 2020, which triggered a distribution to us in 2020.
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Equity in losses of non-consolidated affiliates was not material in 2019 or in 2018 and related solely to our investment in the Avillion Entities.
Interest expense
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Interest expense decreased by $111.5 million, or 41.5%, in 2020 as compared to 2019, due to the Reorganization Transactions and refinancing of RPIFT’s prior senior secured credit facilities that occurred in February 2020 through the issuance of senior secured credit facilities (“Senior Secured Credit Facilities”) at lower interest rates. The Senior Secured Credit Facilities were subsequently refinanced through the $6.0 billion senior unsecured notes offering completed in September 2020 (the “Notes”). The Notes were issued at a weighted average interest rate of 2.125%, which is lower than the weighted average interest rate on RPIFT’s prior senior secured credit facilities of 3.69% that was applicable in 2019.
Refer to the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section for additional discussion of the Notes and the refinanced senior secured credit facilities.
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Interest expense remained relatively consistent between 2019 and 2018, as expected.
Realized gain on available for sale debt securities
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
We did not record any realized gains on available for sale debt securities subsequent to December 31, 2018 because our contractual agreement in respect of Tecfidera milestones was satisfied as of December 31, 2018. In 2018, four Tecfidera milestones totaling $600.0 million were triggered, with an associated cost basis of $180.5 million.
Other income, net
Years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Other income was $219.2 million in 2020 and was primarily comprised of realized and unrealized gains on equity securities of $247.1 million. We recognized a gain of $292.3 million related to an increase in the share price of Immunomedics common stock as a result of its acquisition by Gilead in the fourth quarter of 2020 and a $66.0 million unrealized gain related to an increase in share price of our investment in Biohaven common stock. These gains were partially offset by an unrealized loss of $120.1 million related to a decrease in share price of our investment in Epizyme common stock. We also recorded income of $18.6 million related to the movement in fair value of our commitment to acquire the Series B Biohaven Preferred Shares (“Series B Forwards”), for which we did not have comparable activity in 2019. We also recorded a loss on debt extinguishment of $30.5 million in 2020 due to unamortized loan issuance costs and original issue discount related to our credit facilities written off as a result of the 2020 debt refinancings, for which we did not have comparable activity in 2019.
Other income was $139.3 million in 2019 and was primarily comprised of the movement in fair market value of equity securities purchased in 2019. As part of our transaction with Epizyme in November 2019, we acquired common stock and warrants with an initial fair value of $87.8 million. By the end of 2019, the market value of the common stock and warrants of Epizyme had increased by $107.0 million to $194.8 million. We also recorded unrealized gains of $67.0 million for the increases in market value of our investment in common stock of Biohaven and Immunomedics. Finally, we recognized an unrealized loss of $72.6 million on our interest rate swaps due to adverse movements in the LIBOR curve.
Other income was $20.9 million in 2018 primary due to the adoption of ASU 2016-01, which resulted in the recognition of $13.9 million in unrealized losses on equity securities in earnings. Unrealized gains and losses on equity securities were previously recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. This loss was offset by increased interest income compared to prior periods due to carrying a significantly larger cash and cash equivalents balance over the year, on which we earned interest.
Net income attributable to non-controlling interest
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net income attributable to the Legacy Investors Partnerships and the Continuing Investors Partnerships was $321.0 million and $317.0 million, respectively, in 2020. The net income attributable to non-controlling interest in 2020 was larger than in 2019 as a result of ownership changes related to the Exchange Offer Transactions and the IPO. As a result of the Exchange Offer Transactions, a new non-controlling interest exists related to the ownership in Old RPI by the Legacy Investors Partnerships of approximately 18%. As a result of the IPO, holders of our Class B ordinary shares also represent a non-controlling interest through the respective holders’ Class B Interests in RP Holdings. We now have four different components of non-controlling interest and total ownership by non-controlling interest of 51% as of December 31, 2020 compared to ownership by non-controlling interest related solely to RPSFT in the prior year period of less than 1% as of December 31, 2019.
During 2020 and 2019, we recorded net income attributable to RPSFT of $88.9 million and $112.9 million, respectively. Income attributable to RPSFT is expected to continue to decline as the assets held by RPCT mature.
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Net income attributable to RPSFT declined by $27.2 million, or 19.4%, in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to declines in expired and maturing royalty assets held by RPCT.
Key recent developments and upcoming events relating to our portfolio
The key developments impacting our cash receipts and income and revenue from our royalty interests are discussed below:
Commercial Products
•Cystic fibrosis franchise. In October 2019, Vertex received approval from the FDA for Trikafta for the treatment of patients with cystic fibrosis ages 12 years and older who have at least one copy of thedel mutation.
In November 2019, Vertex announced that it reached an agreement with France’s Economic Committee of Health Care Products for a national reimbursement deal for Orkambi. As a result, we experienced a reduction in our royalty receipts in 2020 of approximately $41 million, to reflect a true-up related to prior periods where we collected royalties on sales in France of Orkambi at a higher selling price. In October 2019, Vertex announced that it reached an agreement with England’s National Health Service, where eligible patients will receive access to Orkambi and Symkevi, and access to Kalydeco will be expanded.
In August 2020, Vertex announced that the European Commission had granted marketing authorization of Kaftrio in a combination regimen with ivacaftor for the treatment of patients with cystic fibrosis ages 12 years and older with onedel mutation and one minimal function mutation, or twodel mutations in the CFTR gene.
In December 2020, the FDA expanded the eligibility for Trikafta to include people with cystic fibrosis ages 12 and older with certain mutations that are responsive to Trikafta based on in vitro data.
In January 2021, Vertex announced that the FDA accepted a supplemental New Drug Application (sNDA) for Trikafta for the treatment of children with cystic fibrosis ages 6 to 11 who have at least onedel mutation or have certain mutations that are responsive to Trikafta based on in vitro data. The FDA granted Priority Review of the sNDA and assigned a Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) target action date of June 8, 2021.
•Tysabri. In January 2019, Biogen announced the start of the two-year global Phase IIIb NOVA study evaluating the efficacy and safety of extended interval dosing for natalizumab compared to standard interval dosing in patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis. Data from the study is expected to readout in 2021.
In June 2020, Biogen submitted a Supplemental Biologics License Application for a subcutaneous formulation of Tysabri to the FDA. This followed a regulatory submission for a subcutaneous formulation of Tysabri to the European Medicines Agency in March 2020. Biogen expects US and EU approvals for the subcutaneous formulation of Tysabri in mid-2021.
•Imbruvica. In April 2020, Imbruvica received FDA approval for use in combination with rituximab for the treatment of previously untreated patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) or small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL).
In August 2020, the European Commission granted marketing authorization for Imbruvica in combination with rituximab for the treatment of adult patients with previously untreated CLL. This milestone marked the 11th FDA approval for Imbruvica since it was first approved in 2013 and sixth in CLL.
The primary completion date for the Phase III SHINE trial for treatment of frontline mantle cell lymphoma is expected to be June 2021 and AbbVie has indicated that approval could occur in 2022.
The primary completion date for the Phase III GLOW trial of Imbruvica in combination with Venetoclax for treatment of frontline CLL and SLL is expected to be February 2021 and AbbVie has indicated that approval could occur in 2022.
•Xtandi. In October 2018, the European Commission approved Xtandi for the treatment of adult men with high-risk non-metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. Xtandi was previously approved by the EC for the treatment of adult men with metastatic CRPC.
In December 2019, Astellas and Pfizer announced that the FDA approved Xtandi for the treatment of patients with metastatic castration sensitive prostate cancer. Xtandi is currently under review by the European Medicines Agency for the treatment of patients with metastatic castration sensitive prostate cancer.
Astellas and Pfizer have indicated that there could be a potential readout of the Phase III EMBARK trial for high-risk non-metastatic prostate cancer in 2021, with a primary trial completion date anticipated in 2023.
•Trodelvy. In April 2020, Immunomedics announced that the FDA granted accelerated approval of Trodelvy for the treatment of patients with metastatic triple-negative breast cancer who have received at least two prior therapies for metastatic disease.
In September 2020, Gilead and Immunomedics announced that Gilead would acquire Immunomedics for approximately $21 billion in cash and the transaction closed in October 2020. In 2018, we entered into a partnership with Immunomedics whereby we acquired a tiered sales-based royalty on Trodelvy for $175.0 million and acquired 4,373,178 shares of Immunomedics common stock for $75.0 million. Gilead’s acquisition of Immunomedics closed in October, resulting in gross cash proceeds upon redemption of our Immunomedics common stock of approximately $385 million.
In September 2020, Immunomedics presented results from the confirmatory Phase III ASCENT study that showed that Trodelvy significantly extended overall survival and improved overall response rate and clinical benefit rate, compared to treatment of choice standard single-agent chemotherapy in brain metastases-negative patients with metastatic triple negative breast cancer who had previously received at least two prior therapies for metastatic disease.
In December 2020, Gilead filed two supplemental biologics license applications with the FDA for full approval of Trodelvy as a treatment for adult patients with metastatic triple-negative breast cancer and accelerated approval of Trodelvy for metastatic urothelial carcinoma. Gilead anticipates potential approval for both indications in the first half of 2021.
In January 2021, Gilead also announced that progression-free survival data from the Phase III TROPiCS-02 trial testing Trodelvy versus physician’s choice in hormone receptor positive/human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 negative metastatic breast cancer who have previously failed at least two, and no more than four, prior chemotherapy regimens for metastatic disease was expected in the second half of 2021.
In February 2021, Gilead announced that the company expects to submit a European Medicines Agency filing for Trodelvy for the treatment of patients with metastatic triple-negative breast cancer who have received at least two prior therapies for metastatic disease in the first half of 2021.
•Nurtec ODT. In February 2020, Biohaven announced that the FDA approved Nurtec ODT for the acute treatment of migraine in adults. The FDA approval of Nurtec ODT triggered a redemption provision related to our investment in Biohaven’s Series A Preferred Shares, which entitles us to receive a fixed payment amount of $250.0 million payable in nominal quarterly payments from March 31, 2021 through December 31, 2024.
In October 2020, Biohaven announced that the FDA had filed and accepted for review its recently submitted supplemental new drug application for Nurtec ODT for the preventive treatment of migraine. The PDUFA target date for completion of the FDA review of the preventive application for Nurtec ODT is in the second quarter of 2021.
•Evrysdi. In August 2020, the FDA approved Evrysdi, the first at-home, orally administered treatment for spinal muscular atrophy in adults and children ages 2 months and older. In August 2020, the European Medicines Agency accepted the filing for Evrysdi for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy.
The European Medicines Agency’s Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use opinion for Evrysdi is expected in the first half of 2021, and priority review of the Japanese New Drug Application is ongoing.
•Orladeyo. In December 2020, BioCryst announced that Orladeyo was approved by the FDA for prophylaxis to prevent attacks of hereditary angioedema in patients ages 12 years and older.
In January 2021, Orladeyo was approved in Japan, becoming the first and only prophylactic HAE medication approved in the region.
The European Medicines Agency validated BioCryst’s application for Orladeyo and formal review is underway. BioCryst expects a decision from the European Medicines Agency in the second quarter of 2021.
•Tecfidera. We continued collecting milestone receipts quarterly throughout 2018; however, our contractual agreement covering our milestones on cumulative sales of Tecfidera ended in 2018, and therefore receipts from Tecfidera ceased after the final milestone was collected in the first quarter of 2019.
•Humira. Our royalties on Humira expired in June 2018.
•Remicade. The patents covering our royalties on Remicade expired in September 2018.
Development-Stage Product Candidates
•Zavegepant. In December 2019, Biohaven announced positive topline results from the Phase II/III trial of intranasal zavegepant for the acute treatment of migraine.
In October 2020, Biohaven commenced a Phase III pivotal trial of intranasal zavegepant for the acute treatment of migraine.
In October 2020, Biohaven also began a one-year long-term safety trial of zavegepant. Biohaven expects a potential NDA filing at the end of 2021 if the pivotal acute trial proves to be positive.
•Omecamtiv mecarbil. In November 2020, Amgen, Cytokinetics and Servier presented the results of GALACTIC-HF study, a Phase III trial of omecamtiv mecarbil in patients with heart failure, at the American Heart Association Scientific Sessions. The trial met the primary composite endpoint of reduction in cardiovascular death or heart failure events, but did not meet the secondary endpoint of reduction in cardiovascular death. Cytokinetics subsequently regained global rights to develop and commercialize omecamtiv mercarbil when Amgen and Servier elected to terminate their collaboration agreement effective, May 2021. Following the Phase III results and termination of the collaboration, we recorded a $90 million write-off to the royalty investment given the uncertainty around the future of omecamtiv.
•Ibrance. In May 2020, Pfizer reported that the independent data monitoring committee for the PALLAS trial had concluded after the interim analysis that the PALLAS trial was “unlikely to show a statistically significant improvement in the primary endpoint of invasive disease-free survival.” In October 2020, Pfizer announced that the Phase III PENELOPE-B trial did not meet the primary endpoint of improved invasive disease-free survival in women with hormone receptor-positive, human epidermal growth factor-negative early breast cancer who have residual invasive disease after completing neoadjuvant chemotherapy. As a result, we will not be entitled to any royalties or milestone payments from our R&D funding arrangement.
Non-GAAP Financial Results
In addition to analyzing our results on a GAAP basis, management also reviews our results on a non-GAAP basis. There is no direct correlation between income from financial royalty assets and royalty receipts due to the nature of the accounting methodology applied for financial royalty assets. Further, income from financial royalty assets and the provision for changes in expected cash flows related to these financial royalty assets can be volatile and unpredictable. As a result, management places importance on royalty receipts as they are predictable and we use them as a measure of our operating performance. Refer to section titled “Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for additional discussion of management’s use of non-GAAP measures as supplemental financial measures and reconciliations from the most directly GAAP comparable measures of Net cash provided by operating activities.
Adjusted Cash Receipts is a measure calculated with inputs directly from the Statement of Cash Flows and includes (1) royalty receipts by product: (i) Cash collections from royalty assets (financial assets and intangible assets), (ii) Other royalty cash collections, (iii) Distributions from non-consolidated affiliates and (iv) Proceeds from available for sale debt securities; less Distributions to non-controlling interest, which represents distributions to our historical non-controlling interest attributable to a de minimis interest in RPCT held by certain legacy investors and to a new non-controlling interest that was created as a result of the Exchange Offer Transactions in February 2020 related to the Legacy Investors Partnerships’ ownership of approximately 18% in Old RPI. Adjusted Cash Receipts is most directly comparable to the GAAP measure of Net cash provided by operating activities.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Cash Flow are similar non-GAAP liquidity measures that are both most closely comparable to the GAAP measure, Net cash provided by operating activities. Adjusted EBITDA is important to our lenders and is defined under the Credit Agreement as Adjusted Cash Receipts less payments for operating and professional costs. Operating and professional costs are comprised of Payments for operating and professional costs and Payments for rebates from the Statement of Cash Flows.
Adjusted Cash Flow is defined as Adjusted EBITDA less (1) Ongoing development-stage funding payments, (2) Interest paid, net, (3) Swap collateral (posted) or received, net, (4) Swap termination payments and (5) Investment in non-consolidated affiliates, and plus (1) Contributions from non-controlling interest- R&D, all directly reconcilable to the Statement of Cash Flows.
Adjusted Cash Receipts and Adjusted Cash Flow are used by management as key liquidity measures in the evaluation of our ability to generate cash from operations. Both measures are an indication of the strength of the Company and the performance of the business. Management also uses Adjusted Cash Flow to compare its performance against non-GAAP adjusted net income used by companies in the biopharmaceutical industry. Adjusted EBITDA, as derived from Adjusted Cash Receipts, is used by our lenders to assess our ability to meet our financial covenants.
The table below includes the royalty receipts for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 by product for our Growth Products and Mature Products, as defined in “-Portfolio Overview” above.
(1) Other Growth Products include royalties on the following products: Bosulif (a product co-developed by our joint venture investee, Avillion, for which receipts are presented as Distributions from non-consolidated affiliates on the Statement of Cash Flows), Cimzia, Conbriza/Fablyn/Viviant, Entyvio, Lexiscan, Mircera, Myozyme, Nesina, Priligy and Soliqua. Other Growth Products for 2020 also include contributions from the Legacy SLP Interest, a payment from Biohaven in respect of an expired option to exercise additional funding of the Biohaven Series A Preferred Shares which is presented as Proceeds from available for sale debt securities on the Statement of Cash Flows, and a distribution from Avillion in respect of the Merck KGaA Asset, for which development ceased in 2020, and for which the receipt is presented as Distributions from non-consolidated affiliates in both the operating and investing section of the Statement of Cash Flows.
(2) Receipts from our Tecfidera milestone payments are presented as Proceeds from available for sale debt securities on the Statement of Cash Flows.
(3) Other Mature Products primarily include royalties on the following products: Prezista, Rotateq and Thalomid.
Adjusted Cash Receipts (non-GAAP)
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Adjusted Cash Receipts declined by $314.4 million to $1.8 billion in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by increased distributions to non-controlling interest as a result of a new non-controlling interest created related to the Legacy Investors Partnerships’ ownership of approximately 18% in Old RPI following our Exchange Offer Transactions in February 2020. The decline in Adjusted Cash Receipts was further attributable to a decline in royalty receipts related to Mature Products, the most significant of which was Tecfidera. The decline was offset by an increase in royalty receipts from our Growth Products of $426.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019, driven primarily by the performance of cystic fibrosis franchise, Imbruvica and the 2019 acquisition of Promacta. Below we discuss the key drivers of royalty receipts from our Growth Products.
Growth Products
•Cystic fibrosis franchise - Royalty receipts from the cystic fibrosis franchise, which includes Kalydeco, Orkambi, Symdeko/Symkevi and Trikafta/Kaftrio, all approved for patients with certain mutations causing cystic fibrosis, increased by $126.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by the highly successful launch of Trikafta in the United States.
•Tysabri - Royalty receipts from Tysabri, which is marketed by Biogen for the treatment of multiple sclerosis, increased by $13.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019.
•Imbruvica - Royalty receipts from Imbruvica, which is marketed by AbbVie and Johnson & Johnson for the treatment of blood cancers and chronic graft versus host disease, increased by $51.5 million in 2020 compared to 2019, driven by continued penetration in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
•HIV franchise - Royalty receipts from the HIV franchise, which is based on products marketed by Gilead that contain emtricitabine, including Biktarvy, Genvoya and Truvada, among others, increased by $30.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019. This increase was driven by strong performance of Biktarvy offset by decreases in sales of other combination products.
•Januvia, Janumet, Other DPP-IVs - Royalty receipts from the DPP-IVs for type 2 diabetes, which includes Januvia and Janumet, both marketed by Merck, was relatively consistent in 2020 compared to 2019.
•Xtandi - Royalty receipts from Xtandi, which is marketed by Pfizer and Astellas for the treatment of prostate cancer, increased by $26.3 million in 2020 compared to 2019, driven by demand across various prostate cancer indications.
•Promacta - Royalty receipts from Promacta, which is marketed by Novartis for the treatment of chronic immune thrombocytopenia and aplastic anemia, increased by $57.5 million in 2020 compared to 2019. We acquired the Promacta royalty in March 2019 and did not record royalty receipts for Promacta until the second quarter of 2019. We saw overall global growth of Promacta driven by increased use in chronic immune thrombocytopenia and further acceptance as first-line treatment for severe aplastic anemia in the United States.
Mature Products
The decline in our royalty receipts from Mature Products was primarily related to Tecfidera. Our contractual agreement covering our milestones on cumulative sales of Tecfidera up to $20 billion ended in 2018 and therefore, receipts from Tecfidera ceased after the final milestone was collected in the first quarter of 2019. We also saw declines in receipts from the losses of exclusivity for Lyrica and Letairis.
Distributions to Non-Controlling Interest
Distributions to non-controlling interest increased by $389.9 million to $544.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019, which negatively impacts Adjusted Cash Receipts. This increase is due to the additional 18% contractual non-controlling interest held by the Legacy Investors Partnerships that arose in the Exchange Offer Transactions. The increased distributions related to the Legacy Investors Partnerships were partially offset by a decline in distributions related to RPSFT from the maturation of several royalties held by RPCT, including Humira and Remicade.
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Adjusted Cash Receipts declined by $690.3 million in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily as a result of a decline in royalty receipts related to Mature Products, specifically Tecfidera. Our Growth Products increased by $449.6 million in 2019 compared to 2018, driven by the cystic fibrosis franchise, Imbruvica and Promacta, a royalty we acquired in 2019. Below we discuss the key drivers of royalty receipts from our Growth Products.
Growth Products
• Cystic fibrosis franchise - Royalty receipts from the cystic fibrosis franchise increased by $200.5 million in 2019 compared to 2018, driven by continued growth of Symdeko. In addition, we started collecting 100% of the royalties on cystic fibrosis franchise products in the third quarter of 2018, after a pre-existing capped royalty was repaid. For the first three quarters of 2018, we only collected cash receipts from the cystic fibrosis franchise equal to the residual royalty of 25%.
• Tysabri - Royalty receipts from Tysabri declined by $5.9 million in 2019 compared to 2018, driven by competition from new products approved to treat multiple sclerosis. Despite increased competition, Tysabri has shown resilience, highlighting the important role Tysabri plays in the multiple sclerosis treatment paradigm.
• Imbruvica - Royalty receipts from Imbruvica increased by $61.4 million in 2019 compared to 2018, driven by continued penetration in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
• HIV franchise - Royalty receipts from the HIV franchise increased by $38.6 million in 2019 compared to 2018. This increase was driven by strong performance of Truvada and Biktarvy in the United States, offset by decreases in sales of other combination products and decreased royalties on sales outside the United States.
• Januvia, Janumet, Other DPP-IVs - Royalty receipts from the DPP-IVs increased by $36.6 million in 2019 compared to 2018, driven by increased royalties from Januvia and Janumet. As part of the Merck Settlement, we agreed to forgo royalties on Januvia and Janumet for a period that expired in the quarter ending March 31, 2018. The increase reflects a full year of royalty receipts from Januvia and Janumet in 2019, compared to only a partial year of royalty receipts in 2018.
• Xtandi - Royalty receipts from Xtandi increased by $14.1 million in 2019 compared to 2018, driven by demand in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer and non-metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer.
• Promacta - Royalty receipts from Promacta were $86.3 million in 2019. We acquired the Promacta royalty in March 2019 and recorded no royalty receipts for Promacta in 2018.
Mature Products
The declines in our royalty receipts from Mature Products were primarily related to Tecfidera, Humira and Remicade. As sales-based performance targets that trigger our milestones on Tecfidera were met, we continued collecting $150 million in milestone receipts quarterly throughout 2018, with a double milestone collected in the first quarter of 2018. Our contractual agreement covering our milestones on cumulative sales of Tecfidera up to $20 billion ended in 2018 and therefore, receipts from Tecfidera ceased after the final milestone was collected in the first quarter of 2019. We recorded receipts from Tecfidera of $150 million in 2019 compared to $750 million in 2018, a reduction of $600 million. Our Humira and Remicade royalties also matured in June and September 2018, respectively, resulting in a reduction in royalty receipts of $499.1 million and $115.0 million, respectively, compared to 2018.
Distributions to Non-Controlling Interest
Distributions to non-controlling interest decreased by $114.6 million in 2019 compared to 2018, which impacts Adjusted Cash Receipts. This decrease reflects a decline in royalty assets held by RPCT, driven by the maturation of several royalties due to RPSFT, including Humira and Remicade.
Adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP)
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Adjusted EBITDA declined by $405.6 million to $1.6 billion in 2020 compared to 2019 as a result of the factors noted above in “Adjusted Cash Receipts (Non-GAAP).” Payments for operating and professional costs, the only adjustment between Adjusted Cash Receipts and Adjusted EBITDA, increased in 2020 as a result of higher costs for Operating and Personnel Payments under the terms of our New Management Agreement and increased costs for professional services paid in connection with the Reorganization Transactions, our IPO and our Notes issuance.
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Adjusted EBITDA declined by $706.2 million in 2019 compared to 2018 also as a result of the factors noted above in “Adjusted Cash Receipts (Non-GAAP).” Payments for operating and professional costs, the only adjustment between Adjusted Cash Receipts and Adjusted EBITDA, increased in 2019 as a result of higher costs for professional services in connection with the Reorganization Transactions and preparation for our IPO.
Adjusted Cash Flow (non-GAAP)
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Adjusted Cash Flow declined by $153.2 million to $1.5 billion in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily for the same reasons noted above in “Adjusted Cash Receipts (Non-GAAP).” In 2020, we paid $35.4 million to terminate our interest rate swaps executed in connection with the Reorganization Transactions, which was offset by the return of collateral, lower ongoing development stage funding payments and lower interest payments on our refinanced debt.
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Adjusted Cash Flow declined by $723.8 million in 2019 compared to 2018 for the same reasons noted above. Adjusted Cash Flow is also impacted by ongoing development-stage funding payments, which declined slightly in 2019 as co-funding arrangements are coming to an end, and offset by a large net swap collateral posted in 2019 as compared to prior year due primarily to adverse movements in the LIBOR curve.
Non-GAAP Reconciliations
Adjusted Cash Receipts, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Cash Flow are non-GAAP measures presented as supplemental measures to our GAAP financial performance. These non-GAAP financial measures exclude the impact of certain items and therefore have not been calculated in accordance with GAAP. In each case, because our operating performance is a function of our liquidity, the non-GAAP measures used by management are presented and defined as supplemental liquidity measures. We caution readers that amounts presented in accordance with our definitions of Adjusted Cash Receipts, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Cash Flow may not be the same as similar measures used by other companies. Not all companies and analysts calculate the non-GAAP measures we use in the same manner. We compensate for these limitations by using non-GAAP financial measures as supplements to GAAP financial measures and by presenting the reconciliations of the non-GAAP financial measures to their most comparable GAAP financial measures, in each case being Net cash provided by operating activities.
We believe that Adjusted Cash Receipts and Adjusted Cash Flow provide meaningful information about our operating performance because the business is heavily reliant on its ability to generate consistent cash flows and these measures reflect the core cash collections and cash charges comprising our operating results. Management strongly believes that our significant operating cash flow is one of the attributes that attracts potential investors to our business.
In addition, we believe that Adjusted Cash Receipts and Adjusted Cash Flow help identify underlying trends in the business and permit investors to more fully understand how management assesses the performance of the Company, including planning and forecasting for future periods. Adjusted Cash Receipts and Adjusted Cash Flow are used by management as key liquidity measures in the evaluation of the Company’s ability to generate cash from operations. Both measures are an indication of the strength of the Company and the performance of the business. Management uses Adjusted Cash Receipts and Adjusted Cash Flow when considering available cash, including for decision-making purposes related to funding of acquisitions, voluntary debt repayments, dividends and other discretionary investments. Further, these non-GAAP financial measures help management, the audit committee and investors evaluate our ability to generate liquidity from operating activities.
Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA is an important non-GAAP measure in analyzing our liquidity and is a key component of certain material covenants contained within the Company’s credit agreement. Noncompliance with the interest coverage ratio and leverage ratio covenants under the credit agreement could result in our lenders requiring the Company to immediately repay all amounts borrowed. If we cannot satisfy these financial covenants, we would be prohibited under our credit agreement from engaging in certain activities, such as incurring additional indebtedness, paying dividends, making certain payments and acquiring and disposing of assets. Consequently, Adjusted EBITDA is critical to the assessment of our liquidity.
Management uses Adjusted Cash Flow to evaluate its ability to generate cash and performance of the business and to evaluate the Company’s performance as compared to its peer group. Management also uses Adjusted Cash Flow to compare its performance against non-GAAP adjusted net income measures used by many companies in the biopharmaceutical industry, even though each company may customize its own calculation and therefore one company’s metric may not be directly comparable to another’s. We believe that non-GAAP financial measures, including Adjusted Cash Flow, are frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry.
The non-GAAP financial measures used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for the analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. We have provided a reconciliation of each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, in each case being Net cash provided by operating activities below.
To arrive at Adjusted Cash Receipts, we start with the GAAP line item, Net cash provided by operating activities, and adjust for the following items from the Statement of Cash Flows: to add back (1) Proceeds from available for sale debt securities (primarily Tecfidera milestone payments), which are cash inflows that management believes are derived from royalties and form part of our core business strategy, (2) Distributions from non-consolidated affiliates classified as Cash used in investing activities, (3) Interest paid, net of Interest received, (4) Development-stage funding payments, (5) Payments for operating and professional costs, (6) Payments for rebates and (7) Swap termination payments, and to deduct (1) Distributions to non-controlling interest, which represents distributions to our historical non-controlling interest attributable to a de minimis interest in RPCT held by certain legacy investors and to a new non-controlling interest that was created as a result of the Exchange Offer Transactions in February 2020 related to the Legacy Investors Partnerships’ ownership of approximately 18% in Old RPI and (2) Swap collateral posted or (received), net, both of which are excluded when management assesses its operating performance through cash collections, or, Adjusted Cash Receipts.
To arrive at Adjusted EBITDA, we start with Net cash provided by operating activities and adjust for the following items from the Statement of Cash Flows: to add back (1) Proceeds from available for sale debt securities (primarily Tecfidera milestone payments), (2) Distributions from non-consolidated affiliates classified as Cash used in investing activities, (3) Interest paid, net of Interest received and (4) Development-stage funding payments and (5) Swap termination payments, and to deduct (1) Distributions to non-controlling interest and (2) Swap collateral posted or (received), net.
To arrive at Adjusted Cash Flow, we start with Net cash provided by operating activities and adjust for the following items from the Statement of Cash Flows: to add back (1) Proceeds from available for sale debt securities (primarily Tecfidera milestone payments), (2) Distributions from non-consolidated affiliates classified as Cash used in investing activities, (3) Upfront development-stage funding payments and (4) Contributions from non-controlling interest- R&D, and to deduct (1) Distributions to non-controlling interest and (2) Investment in non-consolidated affiliates. This is intended to present an Adjusted Cash Flow measure that is representative of cash generated from the broader business strategy of acquiring royalty-generating assets that are available for reinvestment and for discretionary purposes.
Investments Overview
Ongoing investment in new royalties is fundamental to the long-term prospects of our business. New investments provide a source of growth for our royalty receipts, supplementing growth within our existing portfolio and offsetting declines for products in our portfolio that have lost market exclusivity. We evaluate an array of royalty acquisition opportunities on a continuous basis and expect to continue to make acquisitions in the ordinary course of our business. Our team has established a strong track record of identifying, evaluating and investing in royalties tied to leading products across therapeutic areas and treatment modalities. We invest in approved products and development-stage product candidates that have generated robust proof of concept data. We invest in these therapies through the purchase of royalties, by making hybrid investments and by acquiring businesses with significant existing royalty assets or the potential for the creation of such assets.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we invested $2.3 billion in royalties and related assets, including nine new investments. While volatility exists in the quantum of our new acquisitions on a year-to-year basis due to the unpredictable timing of new investment opportunities, we have consistently deployed significant amounts of cash when measured over multi-year periods. Our approach is rooted in a highly disciplined evaluation process that is not dictated by a minimum annual investment threshold.
Included below is a table of investment activity over each of the last nine years based on the type of investment at the acquisition date. Amounts presented in the table below reflect cash paid at the acquisition date; any associated contractual payments are reflected in the period in which cash was paid.
Summary of royalty acquisition activity
•In January 2021, we acquired royalty interests in seltorexant from Minerva Neurosciences, Inc. for an upfront payment of $60 million and up to $95 million in additional milestone payments, contingent on the achievement of certain clinical, regulatory and commercialization milestones. Seltorexant is currently in Phase III development for the treatment of major depressive disorder (MDD) with insomnia symptoms by Janssen Pharmaceutica, N.V., a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson.
•In December 2020, we acquired royalty interests from BioCryst Pharmaceuticals, Inc. on (1) ORLADEYO (betrotralstat) to support the launch of the product in hereditary angioedema (HAE) and (2) its development stage Factor D inhibitor BCX9930 in exchange for an upfront cash payment of $125 million.
•In October 2020, we acquired the residual royalty interest in Vertex’s cystic fibrosis franchise owned by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. The agreement includes an upfront payment of $575 million and a potential milestone payment of $75 million.
•In August 2020, we entered into an expanded agreement with Biohaven Pharmaceuticals for up to $450 million to fund the development of zavegepant and the commercialization of Nurtec ODT. Biohaven received an upfront payment of $150 million and will receive an additional $100 million payment upon the start of the oral zavegepant Phase III program. We will receive a royalty on Nurtec ODT and zavegepant and success-based milestone payments based on zavegepant regulatory approvals. We will also provide further support for the ongoing launch of Nurtec ODT through the purchase of committed, non-contingent Commercial Launch Preferred Equity for a total of $200 million payable between 2021 and 2024. In return, Biohaven will pay a series of equal fixed payments between 2025 and 2030.
•In July 2020, we acquired a royalty on risdiplam, a development-stage product for the treatment of Types 1, 2 and 3 spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) from PTC Therapeutics, Inc. in exchange for an upfront payment of $650 million. Evrysdi (risdiplam) was subsequently approved by the FDA in August 2020, representing the first, oral treatment approved for infants, children and adults with all SMA types.
•In the second quarter of 2020, we acquired a royalty on (1) Prevymis, an approved product to prevent cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection in stem cell transplants, from AiCuris Anti-infective Cures GmbH in exchange for an upfront payment of $220 million and (2) IDHIFA, an approved product for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with an isocitrate dehydrogenase-2 (IDH2) mutation, from Agios Pharmaceuticals, Inc. in exchange for an upfront payment of $255 million.
•In the first quarter of 2020, we acquired a royalty on Entyvio, an approved product for the treatment of ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease, from The General Hospital Corporation in exchange for an upfront payment of $86.6 million.
•In the fourth quarter of 2019, we agreed to pay $320 million to acquire from Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical, Inc. a royalty on the European sales of Crysvita, an approved product for the treatment of XLH, a rare genetic orphan disease that has a profound impact on bone development in adults and children, subject to certain caps.
•In the fourth quarter of 2019, we agreed to pay up to $330 million to purchase a royalty owned by Eisai Co., Ltd (“Eisai”), on future worldwide sales outside Japan of Tazerik (tazemetostat), a novel targeted therapy in late-stage clinical development with the potential to be approved in several cancer indications. We acquired a portion Eisai’s future worldwide royalties on net sales by Epizyme of Tazerik outside Japan, for an upfront payment of $110 million plus up to an additional $220 million for the remainder of the royalty upon FDA approval of Tazverik for certain indications. The FDA approved Tazverik in January 2020 for epithelioid sarcoma which triggered our obligation to fund the second $110 million tranche in November 2020. In June 2020, the FDA approval of additional indications triggered our recognition of a liability for the final tranche payment of $110.0 million in November 2021.
•In the fourth quarter of 2019, we made a $100 million investment in Epizyme. In exchange for an upfront payment of $100 million, we received (1) shares of Epizyme common stock, (2) a warrant to purchase an additional 2.5 million shares of Epizyme common stock at $20 per share over a three-year term and (3) Epizyme’s royalty on sales of Tazverik in Japan payable by Eisai. We also lowered Epizyme’s royalty on Tazverik above certain sales thresholds and granted Epizyme an 18-month put option to sell an additional $50 million of its common stock to RPIFT at then-prevailing prices, not to exceed $20 per share. Epizyme exercised its put option on December 30, 2019, which resulted in Epizyme issuing RPIFT 2.5 million shares on settlement in February 2020.
•In the first quarter of 2019, we entered into a preferred share purchase agreement with Biohaven through which we purchased $125 million in Series A Preferred Shares, providing us with a fixed return on redemption of two times our investment on FDA approval of Biohaven’s pipeline product, Nurtec ODT, for migraine treatment. The FDA approved Nurtec ODT for the acute treatment of migraine in adults in February 2020.
•In the first quarter of 2019, we acquired the following: (1) a royalty on Promacta, an approved product for the treatment of chronic immune thrombocytopenia and aplastic anemia, from Ligand Pharmaceuticals in exchange for an upfront payment of $827 million, (2) a royalty on Eli Lilly’s Emgality, an approved product for the treatment of migraine, from Atlas Ventures and Orbimed for $260 million and (3) a royalty on Johnson & Johnson’s Erleada, an approved product for the treatment of prostate cancer, from the Regents of the University of California for $105.4 million and potential future milestones.
•In 2018, we acquired (1) from Zealand Pharma, future royalty streams and $85 million of potential commercial milestones on Sanofi’s Lixisenatide franchise in exchange for $205 million up front, (2) from Biohaven, rights to future cash flows on Nurtec ODT and zavegepant, development-stage product candidates, in exchange for $100 million in up-front R&D funding and a payment of $50 million for Biohaven’s common stock and (3) from Immunomedics, a tiered, sales-based royalty on Trodelvy, which was at the time a development-stage product candidate, in exchange for an up-front payment of $175 million for R&D funding and a payment of $75 million for Immunomedics’ common stock, acquired at a premium.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary source of liquidity is cash provided by operations. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we generated $2.0 billion, $1.7 billion and $1.6 billion, respectively, in Net cash provided by operating activities. We believe that our existing capital resources, cash provided by operating activities and our Revolving Credit Facility will continue to allow us to meet our operating and working capital requirements, to fund planned strategic acquisitions, and contractually obligated equity and R&D funding arrangements, and to meet our debt service obligations for the foreseeable future. We have historically operated at a low level of fixed operating costs. Our primary cash operating expenses, other than R&D funding commitments, include interest expense, our Operating and Personnel Payments, and legal and professional fees.
We have access to substantial sources of funds in the capital markets and we may, from time to time, seek additional capital through a combination of additional debt or equity financings. In June 2020, we completed our IPO and received net proceeds of approximately $1.9 billion from the IPO after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $86.3 million. In September 2020, we refinanced our syndicated term loan facilities with $6.0 billion of Notes. Additionally, we entered into a $1.5 billion Revolving Credit Facility in September 2020. The Revolving Credit Facility remains undrawn and available to us as of December 31, 2020. Our ability to satisfy our working capital needs, debt service and other obligations, and to comply with the financial covenants under our financing agreements depends on our future operating performance and cash flow, which are in turn subject to prevailing economic conditions and other factors, many of which are beyond our control.
We have historically funded our acquisition program through free cash flow, equity contributions and debt. Our low operating costs coupled with a lack of capital expenditures and low taxes have contributed to our strong financial profile, resulting in high operating leverage and high conversion of our Adjusted Cash Receipts to Adjusted Cash Flow. We expect to continue funding our current and planned operating costs (excluding acquisitions) principally through our cash flow from operations and our acquisition program through cash flow and issuances of equity and debt. In the past, we have supplemented our available cash and cash equivalents on hand with attractive debt capital to fund certain strategic acquisitions.
As of December 31, 2020, we had total long-term debt outstanding of $5.8 billion. As of December 31, 2019, we had total long-term debt outstanding of $6.0 billion. In February 2020, in connection with the Exchange Offer Transactions, we repaid our outstanding debt held by RPIFT in full and issued new long-term debt at RPI Intermediate FT. In September 2020, we repaid in full our Senior Secured Credit facilities entered into in February 2020 using the proceeds of the Notes in addition to cash on hand.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our cash flow activities:
Analysis of Cash Flow Changes
Operating activities
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Cash provided by operating activities increased by $367.4 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The primary drivers were an increase in cash collections from financial royalty assets of $187.8 million and a decrease in interest paid of $151.8 million. The decrease in interest paid was driven by lower interest rates under the refinanced senior secured credit facilities and a semi-annual interest payment schedule on the Notes, which resulted in no interest payments made on the Notes in 2020. Further contributing to the increased cash from operations was a decline in ongoing development-stage funding payments of $62.6 million due to the completion of our co-funding arrangement with Pfizer in 2019. Partially offsetting these increases were increased payments for operating and professional costs of $91.2 million primarily due to the higher Operating and Personnel Payments under the New Management Agreement and increased costs for professional services in connection with the Reorganization Transactions.
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Cash provided by operating activities increased by $48.9 million in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily as a result of a smaller amount of upfront payments related to development stage funding. In 2018, we paid $284.4 million to acquire royalties on development-stage product candidates of Biohaven and Immunomedics. Partially offsetting the impact of these reduced payments in the current year was a reduction of $179.6 million on cash collections from royalty assets and other royalty cash collections primarily due to the expiration of royalties on Humira and Remicade. The declines in Mature Products were partially offset by increases in cash collections from royalties primarily on the cystic fibrosis franchise, Promacta, Imbruvica and the HIV franchise. We also posted collateral of $45.6 million in 2019 related to our interest rate swaps compared to $0.5 million in 2018 as a result of unfavorable movements in LIBOR.
Investing activities
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Cash used in investing activities increased by $605.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to using more cash to purchase marketable securities and to acquire financial royalty assets in 2020. The increase in cash used to purchase marketable securities and acquire financial royalty assets was partially offset by an increase of $90.4 million in proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities and $384.8 million in proceeds received from the full redemption of our investment in Immunomedics common stock upon its acquisition by Gilead in the fourth quarter of 2020. We also purchased available for sale debt securities of $125.1 million in 2019 and made the Tysabri milestone payment of $250.0 million in 2019, for which there was not comparable activity in 2020.
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Cash used in investing activities in 2019 was $2.2 billion, compared to cash provided by investing activities of $303.4 million in 2018. In 2019, we made several acquisitions of financial royalty assets, totaling $2.0 billion. We also spent $213.0 million on investments in securities and warrants in 2019, compared to $152.8 million in 2018. As our Tecfidera agreement came to an end with the last milestone earned in December 31, 2018, we collected cash receipts on Tecfidera of $150.0 million in 2019 compared to $750.0 million for 2018.
Financing activities
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was $1.5 billion compared to cash used in financing activities of $1.2 billion in 2019. The proceeds from the issuance of Class A ordinary shares upon our IPO in June 2020 provided cash of $1.9 billion, net of offering costs paid. The repayment of RPIFT’s outstanding debt in February 2020, including through amounts contributed by a non-controlling interest, and subsequent Note issuances yielded net proceeds of $727.9 million. The proceeds from these 2020 financing activities were partially offset by an increase of $571.0 million in cash distributions to non-controlling interest in 2020 due to the new contractual non-controlling interest held by the Legacy Investors Partnerships and dividends paid to shareholders of our Class A ordinary shares of $112.5 million.
Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Cash used in financing activities in 2019 declined by $187.5 million in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to decreases in distributions to non-controlling interest and to unitholders. Distributions to non-controlling interest declined as products held by the RPCT are maturing.
Sources of Capital
As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities totaled $1.0 billion and $983.3 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2019, our cash and cash equivalents and our marketable securities totaled $246.2 million and $94.5 million, respectively. We intend to fund short-term and long-term financial obligations as they mature through cash and cash equivalents, sales of short-term marketable securities, future cash flows from operations or the issuance of additional debt. Our ability to generate cash flows from operations, issue debt or enter into financing arrangements on acceptable terms could be adversely affected if there is a material decline in the sales of the underlying pharmaceutical products in which we hold royalties, deterioration in our key financial ratios or credit ratings, or other material unfavorable changes in business conditions. Currently, we believe that we have sufficient financial flexibility to issue debt, enter into other financing arrangements and attract long-term capital on acceptable terms to support our growth objectives.
Borrowings
Senior Unsecured Notes
On September 2, 2020, we issued $6.0 billion of Notes with a weighted average coupon rate of 2.125% and requiring interest payments of approximately $127.5 million on an annual basis, paid semi-annually. The Notes consist of the following:
•$1.0 billion principal amount of 0.750% senior notes due 2023, issued at 99.322% of par;
•$1.0 billion principal amount of 1.200% senior notes due 2025, issued at 98.875% of par;
•$1.0 billion principal amount of 1.750% senior notes due 2027, issued at 98.284% of par;
•$1.0 billion principal amount of 2.200% senior notes due 2030, issued at 97.760% of par;
•$1.0 billion principal amount of 3.300% senior notes due 2040, issued at 95.556% of par; and
•$1.0 billion principal amount of 3.550% senior notes due 2050, issued at 95.306% of par.
The indenture governing the Notes contains certain covenants which we were in compliance with as of December 31, 2020. We used the net proceeds from the Notes offering, together with available cash on hand, to repay in full the Senior Secured Credit Facilities.
Revolving Credit Facility
On September 18, 2020, RP Holdings, as borrower, entered into a five-year Revolving Credit Facility which provides for borrowing capacity up to $1.5 billion for general corporate purposes. Our revolving credit agreement includes certain customary financial covenants with which we were in compliance as of December 31, 2020. The Revolving Credit Facility remains undrawn and available to us as of December 31, 2020.
Senior Secured Credit Facilities
On February 11, 2020, in connection with the Exchange Offer Transactions and using funds contributed by RPI Intermediate FT and the Legacy Investors Partnerships, RPIFT repaid its outstanding debt and accrued interest, and terminated all outstanding interest rate swaps. RPI Intermediate FT, as borrower, entered into a term loan credit agreement (the “Senior Secured Credit Agreement”) with Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent, the lenders party thereto from time to time and the other parties thereto. In September 2020, we repaid in whole the outstanding principal amounts of term loans under Senior Secured Credit Facilities governed by the Senior Secured Credit Agreement with net proceeds from the Notes.
We had the following indebtedness outstanding at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1) In February 2020, the outstanding principal amounts of RPIFT’s prior term loan facilities were repaid in full with net proceeds from our Senior Secured Credit Facilities which we subsequently repaid in full in September 2020 with net proceeds from the Notes and available cash on hand.
RPIFT Senior Secured Credit Facilities
The RPIFT Senior Secured Credit Facilities (the “Prior Credit Facility”) was issued by our wholly-owned subsidiary, RPIFT and was investment grade rated. RPIFT used interest rate swap agreements to fix a portion of its floating rate debt. In February 2020, in connection with the Exchange Offer Transactions, the Prior Credit Facility was repaid in full and new long-term debt was issued by RPI Intermediate FT.
Guarantor Financial Information
Our obligations under the Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by RP Holdings, a non-wholly owned subsidiary (the “Guarantor Subsidiary”). Our remaining subsidiaries (the “Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries”) do not guarantee the Notes. Under the terms of the indenture governing the Notes, Royalty Pharma plc and the Guarantor Subsidiary each fully and unconditionally, jointly and severally, guarantee the payment of interest, principal and premium, if any, on the Notes. The par value and carrying value of the total outstanding and guaranteed Notes was $6.0 billion and $5.8 billion, respectively as of December 31, 2020.
The following tables present condensed combined summarized financial information for Royalty Pharma plc and RP Holdings. All intercompany balances and transactions between Royalty Pharma plc and RP Holdings are eliminated in the presentation of the combined financial statements. RP Holdings’ most significant asset is its investment in operating subsidiaries, which has been eliminated in the table below to exclude investments in Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries. As a result, our ability to make required payments on the Notes depends on the performance of our operating subsidiaries and their ability to distribute funds to us. There are no material restrictions on distributions from the operating subsidiaries. Amounts presented below do not represent our total consolidated amounts as of December 31, 2020 and for the year then ended.
Uses of Capital
Acquisitions of royalties
We acquire product royalties in a variety of ways that can be tailored to the needs of our partners. We classify our product royalty acquisitions by the following structures:
•Third-party Royalties - A royalty is the contractual right to a percentage of top-line sales from a licensee’s use of a product, technology or intellectual property. The majority of our current portfolio consists of third-party royalties.
•Synthetic / Hybrid Royalties - A synthetic royalty is the contractual right to a percentage of top-line sales created by the owner of a therapy in exchange for funding. In many of our synthetic royalties, we also make investments in the public equity of the company, where the main value driver of the company is the product for which we concurrently acquired a royalty.
•R&D Funding - We fund R&D, typically for large biopharmaceutical companies, in exchange for future royalties and/or milestones if the product or indication we are funding is approved.
•M&A - We acquire royalties in connection with M&A transactions, often from the buyers of biopharmaceutical companies when they dispose of the non-strategic assets of the target company following the closing of the acquisition. We also seek to partner with companies to acquire other biopharmaceutical companies that own significant royalties. We may also seek to acquire biopharmaceutical companies that have significant royalties or where we can create royalties in subsequent transactions.
Distributions to Shareholders/Unitholders
We made distributions of $285.4 million to shareholders prior to the IPO in June 2020. We paid dividends to holders of our Class A ordinary shares of $112.5 million in 2020 subsequent to the IPO. We do not have a legal obligation to pay a quarterly dividend or dividends at any specified rate or at all.
We made distributions of $739.3 million and $814.4 million to unitholders in 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Commercial Launch Preferred Equity and Other Funding Arrangements
On August 7, 2020, we entered into a Series B Biohaven Preferred Share Purchase Agreement (“Series B Biohaven Preferred Share Agreement”) with Biohaven to purchase up to 3,992 shares of Series B Biohaven Preferred Shares at a price of $50,100 per preferred share (the “Commercial Launch Preferred Equity”), for a total of $200.0 million payable on a quarterly basis between March 31, 2021 and December 31, 2024.
We have other funding arrangements where we are contractually obligated to fund R&D activities performed by our development partners and to provide additional capital related to our equity method investment in the Avillion entities. As our committed capital requirements are based on phases of development, the completion of which is highly uncertain, only the capital required to fund the current stage of development under such funding arrangements is considered committed capital requirements which approximate $68.2 million as of December 31, 2020.
Debt service
The future principal and interest payments under our Notes as of December 31, 2020, over the next five years and thereafter are as follows:
(1) Excludes unamortized discount and loan issuance costs on long-term debt of $183.4 million at December 31, 2020, which are amortized through interest expense over the remaining life of the underlying debt obligations.
Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees
We are involved in certain legal proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business and, as required, accrue an estimate of the probable costs for resolution of those claims for which the occurrence of loss is probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. In general, estimates are developed in consultation with counsel and are based upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies. It is possible, however, that future results of operations for any particular period could be materially affected by changes in our assumptions or the effectiveness of our strategies related to these proceedings.
Amounts related to contingent milestone payments are not considered contractual obligations and are excluded from the table below, as they are contingent on the successful achievement of certain development, regulatory approval or commercial milestones. Amounts we expect to fund based on contingent milestones in the next twelve months primarily relate to $100.0 million due to Biohaven upon the start of the oral zavegepant Phase III program. As of December 31, 2020, we recognized a current liability of $18.6 million related to a sales-based milestone for Erleada that was achieved in the three months ended December 31, 2020.
The table below summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 and the effect that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods.
(1) Under the terms of our funding agreement with Eisai, we are obligated to fund the third and final tranche of the Tazverik royalty for $110.0 million in November 2021, following the FDA approval of additional indications of Tazverik in June 2020. The purchase obligation is recorded within current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020.
(2) Funding commitments include amounts we are contractually obligated to fund in respect of R&D funding arrangements with our development partners and committed capital related to our equity method investment in the Avillion entities. As our committed capital requirements are based on phases of development, the completion of which is highly uncertain, only the capital required to fund the current stage of development is included in the above table.
(3) Under the Management Agreement that became effective in February 2020, RPI will pay quarterly operating and personnel payments in respect of operating and personnel expenses to the Manager or its affiliates (the “Operating and Personnel Payments”) equal to 6.5% of the Adjusted Cash Receipts for such quarter and 0.25% of the GAAP value of our security investments, including equity securities and derivative financial instruments, as of the end of such quarter. Because the fee is variable and based on projected cash receipts, no amounts are fixed.
(4) Excluded from the table are amounts related to various obligations with no specific contractual commitment or maturity.
Other off-balance sheet arrangements
We do not have relationships with structured finance or special purpose entities that were established to facilitate off-balance sheet arrangements. Therefore, we are not exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that may arise if we had engaged in such relationships. We consolidate variable interest entities when we are the primary beneficiary.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States requires the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses. Certain of these policies are considered critical as they have the most significant impact on our financial condition and results of operations and require the most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often because of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates that are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The result of these evaluations forms the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the reported amount of expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material.
Our most critical accounting policies relate to our royalties and the full descriptions can be found in Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements. Similarly, the most significant judgments and estimates applied by management are associated with the measurement of our financial royalty assets. The application of the prospective approach to measure income from our financial royalty assets requires management’s judgment in forecasting the expected future cash flows of the underlying royalties. These estimates and judgments arise because of the inherent uncertainty in predicting future events.
Income and provision recognition from financial royalty assets can be impacted by management’s assumptions around (1) product growth rates and sales trends in outer years, (2) the geographical allocation of annual sales data from sell-side equity research analysts’ models, (3) product and pricing mix for franchised products, (4) the strength of patent protection, including anticipated entry of generics and (5) estimates of the duration of the royalty. The amounts and duration of forecasted expected future cash flows are largely influenced by sell-side equity research analyst coverage, commercial performance of the product and the royalty duration.
For example, based on the level of detail in sell-side equity research analyst models, management may be required to apply assumptions to the sales forecasts to estimate the quarterly and geographical allocation from annual sales projections and, for franchised products, to estimate the product mix and pricing mix, or to exclude from projections sales forecasts for development-stage product candidates or indications. When royalty-bearing pharmaceutical products have no coverage, limited sell-side equity research analyst coverage or where sell-side equity research analyst estimates are not available for the full term of our royalty, particularly for the later years in a product’s life, management uses reasonable judgment to make assumptions about the growth or decline in the sales of these products based on historical data, publicly available information for the marketer, industry data and market trends, and management’s own expertise.
The royalty duration is important for purposes of accurately measuring interest income over the life of a financial royalty asset. In making assumptions around the royalty duration for terms that are not contractually fixed, management considers the strength of existing patent protection, expected entry of generics, geographical exclusivity periods and potential patent term extensions tied to the underlying product. It is common for royalty durations to expire earlier or later than anticipated due to unforeseen positive or negative developments over time, including with respect to the granting of patents and patent term extensions, the invalidation of patents, litigation between the party controlling the patents and third party challengers of the patents, the ability of third parties to design around or circumvent valid patents, the granting of regulatory exclusivity periods or extensions, timing for the arrival of generic or biosimilar competitor products, changes to legal or regulatory regimes affecting intellectual property rights or the regulation of pharmaceutical products, product life cycles and industry consolidations.
A shortened royalty term can result in a reduction in the effective interest rate, a decline in income from financial royalty assets, significant reductions in royalty payments compared to expectations, or a permanent impairment. Changes in sell-side equity research analyst consensus forecasts directly impact future interest income and recognition of any provision income or expense in the same manner.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements for additional information on recently issued accounting standards.