ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Impact of COVID-19
During 2020, our business was significantly negatively impacted by the global pandemic caused by a new strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”). All of our Las Vegas properties were temporarily closed on March 17, 2020 in compliance with a statewide emergency order mandating the closure of all nonessential businesses in Nevada, including casinos. On June 4, 2020, we reopened our Red Rock, Green Valley Ranch, Santa Fe Station, Boulder Station, Palace Station and Sunset Station properties, as well as our Wildfire properties, subject to state-mandated occupancy and other operational restrictions. At December 31, 2020, our Texas Station, Fiesta Henderson, Fiesta Rancho and Palms properties had not reopened. We will continue to assess the performance of the reopened properties, as well as the recovery of the Las Vegas market and the economy as a whole, before considering whether to reopen some or all of the remaining properties, and we have no plans to reopen any of these properties in 2021.
In addition, our managed property, Graton Resort, located in northern California, was temporarily closed from March 17, 2020 through June 17, 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The management agreement was originally expected to expire in November 2020 but was extended as a result of the pandemic through February 5, 2021, when the tribe terminated our management role at the facility.
Subsequent to the reopening of most of our properties in June 2020, we saw favorable customer trends which continued throughout the third and fourth quarters, including strong visitation from a younger demographic, increased spend per visit, more time spent on device, and increased return of our core customers. These positive trends, in combination with business optimization and cost reduction measures, drove strong operating results at our first-to-reopen properties for the second half of 2020. However, we cannot predict whether these trends will continue, nor can we predict the extent to which the impacts of COVID-19 on the United States and Las Vegas economies may affect our business in the future.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had and may continue to have a detrimental impact on the United States and Las Vegas economies, including widespread unemployment as well as reduced consumer confidence, discretionary spending and travel. We have taken steps to mitigate these and potential future effects of COVID-19 on our results of operations through a combination of streamlining our business, optimizing our marketing initiatives, and reducing expenses, including staffing reductions in May 2020 that affected approximately 39% of our full-time workforce. However, we continue to have significant fixed and variable expenses that will impact our cash position and profitability. We have implemented comprehensive health and cleanliness standards designed to provide the safest and most secure environment possible for our guests and employees, which include COVID-19 testing of our employees and vendors, personal protective equipment and temperature checks for employees and guests, enhanced cleaning procedures and other measures.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was signed into law. We have received certain benefits from the CARES Act, including payroll retention credits of up to $5,000 per employee for the wages and health insurance we continued to provide to team members who were not providing services during the temporary closures of our properties, a deferral of employer social security taxes through December 31, 2020, and certain additional federal income tax benefits. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $38.2 million in payroll retention credits. We will continue to review and consider other potential benefits, if any, that may become available to us under government programs.
Overview
Red Rock was formed as a Delaware corporation in 2015 to own an indirect equity interest in, and manage, Station Casinos LLC, a Nevada limited liability company (“Station LLC”). Station LLC is a gaming, development and management company established in 1976 that owns and operates ten major gaming and entertainment facilities and ten smaller casinos (three of which are 50% owned) in the Las Vegas regional market. Four of our major properties had not reopened as of December 31, 2020 as discussed above. Excluding the four closed properties, we currently offer approximately 13,769 slot machines, 273 table games and 3,081 hotel rooms in the Las Vegas market. A subsidiary of Station LLC also managed Graton Resort in northern California on behalf of a Native American tribe through February 5, 2021.
We own all of the outstanding voting interests in Station LLC and have an indirect equity interest in Station LLC through our ownership of limited liability company interests in Station Holdco (“LLC Units”), which owns all of the economic
interests in Station LLC. At December 31, 2020, we held 60.7% of the economic interests and 100% of the voting power in Station Holdco, subject to certain limited exceptions, and we are designated as the sole managing member of both Station Holdco and Station LLC. We control and operate all of the business and affairs of Station Holdco and Station LLC, and conduct all of our operations through these entities. Our only assets are our ownership interests in Station LLC and Station Holdco, other than cash and tax-related assets and liabilities. We have no operations outside of our management of Station Holdco and Station LLC.
Our Consolidated Financial Statements reflect the consolidation of Station LLC and its consolidated subsidiaries, and Station Holdco. The financial position and results of operations attributable to LLC Units we do not own are reported separately as noncontrolling interest.
Our principal source of revenue and operating income is gaming, and our non-gaming offerings include restaurants, hotels and other entertainment amenities. Approximately 80% to 85% of our casino revenue is generated from slot play. The majority of our revenue is cash-based and as a result, fluctuations in our revenues have a direct impact on our cash flows from operations. Because our business is capital intensive, we rely heavily on the ability of our properties to generate operating cash flow to repay debt financing and fund capital expenditures.
The United States economy and the economy in the Las Vegas metropolitan area have been negatively affected by the unprecedented impacts of COVID-19. A significant portion of our business is dependent upon customers who live and/or work in the Las Vegas metropolitan area. As of December 2020, the unemployment rate in the Las Vegas metropolitan area was 10.4%, down from a high of 34% in April 2020. Statewide, the unemployment rate for December 2020 declined to 9.0% in December 2020, as compared to 30% in April 2020. Despite the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the median price of an existing single-family home in Las Vegas was up 10.2% at December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. This continues a trend of significant improvement in home values in Las Vegas since 2012, with the median home price remaining at an all-time high of $314,000 in December 2020 according to the Las Vegas Realtors®. In addition, Las Vegas remains one of the fastest growing metropolitan areas in the United States, posting a 1.5% growth rate in 2020. Due to uncertainties surrounding the ongoing pandemic, we cannot predict whether the recovery in unemployment and the positive trends in housing prices and population growth in the Las Vegas area will continue.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the temporary closure of all of our properties, and the ongoing closure of four of our properties, our year-over-year operating results are not comparable. In addition, our operating results for 2019 were impacted by construction disruption and costs associated with the $690 million redevelopment project at Palms, which was completed in the third quarter of 2019.
Information about our results of operations is included herein and in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Our Key Performance Indicators
We use certain key indicators to measure our performance.
Gaming revenue measures:
•Slot handle, table game drop and race and sports write are measures of volume. Slot handle represents the dollar amount wagered in slot machines, and table game drop represents the total amount of cash and net markers issued that are deposited in table game drop boxes. Race and sports write represents the aggregate dollar amount wagered on race and sports events.
•Win represents the amount of wagers retained by us.
•Hold represents win as a percentage of slot handle or table game drop.
As our customers are primarily Las Vegas residents, our hold percentages are generally consistent from period to period. Fluctuations in our casino revenue are primarily due to the volume and spending levels of customers at our properties.
Food and beverage revenue measures:
•Average guest check is a measure of food sales volume and product offerings at our restaurants, and represents the average amount spent per customer visit.
•Number of guests served is an indicator of volume.
Room revenue measures:
•Occupancy is calculated by dividing occupied rooms, including complimentary rooms, by rooms available.
•Average daily rate (“ADR”) is calculated by dividing room revenue, which includes the retail value of complimentary rooms, by rooms occupied, including complimentary rooms.
•Revenue per available room is calculated by dividing room revenue by rooms available.
Results of Operations
The following table presents information about our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 (dollars in thousands). Information about our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to 2018 can be found under Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 21, 2020.
________________________________________________
n/m = not meaningful
We view each of our Las Vegas casino properties as an individual operating segment. We aggregate all of our Las Vegas operating segments into one reportable segment because all of our Las Vegas properties offer similar products, cater to the same customer base, have the same regulatory and tax structure, share the same marketing programs, are directed by a centralized management structure and have similar economic characteristics. We also aggregate our Native American management activities into one reportable segment. The results of operations for our Native American management segment are discussed under “Management Fee Revenue” below and the results of operations of our Las Vegas operations are discussed in the remaining sections below.
Net Revenues. Net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $674.1 million to $1.18 billion as compared to $1.86 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. The 36.3% decrease in net revenues was due to the mandated closure of all of our properties from March 17, 2020 through June 3, 2020 and the ongoing closures of Texas Station, Fiesta Rancho, Fiesta Henderson and Palms, as well as the state-mandated occupancy, social distancing and other restrictions in place at our reopened properties.
Operating Income. Operating income decreased by $97.4 million to $88.6 million for 2020 as compared to $186.0 million for 2019. The 52.4% decrease was primarily due to the mandated closure of all of our properties from March 17, 2020 through June 3, 2020 and the ongoing closure of four of our properties, partially offset by the impact of cost reduction measures we instituted in March 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Additional information about factors impacting our operating income are discussed below.
Casino. Casino revenues decreased by 22.4% and casino expenses decreased by 33.6% for year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019. The decreases were attributable to the mandated closure of all of our properties from March 17, 2020 through June 3, 2020 and the ongoing closure of four of our properties, as well as cost reduction measures at our reopened properties. Slot handle decreased by 32.8%, table games drop decreased by 35.5% and race and sports write decreased by 22.5% for 2020 as compared to 2019.
Food and Beverage. Food and beverage includes revenue and expenses from restaurants, bars and catering at all of our Las Vegas properties, as well as the revenue and expenses associated with the nightclub and dayclub at Palms, which operated from April 2019 to November 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, food and beverage revenue decreased by 59.9% and food and beverage expenses decreased by 57.9%, each as compared to 2019. The decreases were due to the impact of the four closed properties, primarily Palms, the closure of our buffets, the mandated closure of all of our properties from March 17, 2020 through June 3, 2020, and ongoing mandatory operational restrictions.
Room. Information about our hotel operations is presented below:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, room revenues decreased by 54.7% as compared to 2019. The year over year decline in revenues was due to decreased travel amid the COVID-19 pandemic, the temporary closure of all of our properties from March 17, 2020 through June 3, 2020 and the ongoing closure of the four properties, all of which negatively impacted our occupancy and average daily rate. For the year ended December 31, 2020, room expenses decreased by 39.1% as compared to 2019 due to the same factors, as well as our cost reduction measures. For year ended December 31, 2020, our ADR decreased by 8.2%, our revenue per available room decreased by 31.8%, and our occupancy rate decreased by 22.7 percentage points, each as compared to 2019.
Other. Other primarily includes revenues from tenant leases, retail outlets, bowling, spas, entertainment and other amenities and their corresponding expenses. Other revenues and other expenses decreased 47.3% and 56.0%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, due to the temporary closure of all of our properties from March 17, 2020 through June 3, 2020, the ongoing closure of the four properties, a reduction in non-gaming amenities offered at our reopened properties, such as movie theaters, and lower revenues from amenities that were operating.
Management Fee Revenue. Management fee revenue primarily represents fees earned from our agreement with a Native American tribe to manage Graton Resort. For 2020 as compared to 2019, management fee revenue decreased by 10.5% due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the temporary closure of Graton Resort from March 17, 2020 through
June 17, 2020 and the mandatory operational restrictions that have existed since Graton Resort reopened. The Graton Resort management agreement was originally expected to expire in November 2020 but was extended as a result of the pandemic through February 5, 2021, when the tribe terminated our management role at the facility. Whether the management agreement provides for an additional extension beyond that date is in dispute.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”). SG&A expenses decreased by 22.0% to $324.6 million for 2020 as compared to $416.4 million for 2019, primarily due to the property closures and various cost reduction initiatives, including employee costs.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense for 2020 increased to $231.4 million as compared to $222.2 million for 2019. The increase was primarily due to additional portions of the Palms redevelopment project being placed into service in April 2019 and September 2019.
Write-downs and Other Charges, net. For the year ended December 31, 2020, write-downs and other charges, net totaled $36.5 million, which included net losses on asset disposals, including the write-off of assets due to the closure of our buffets, severance, including insurance benefits through September 2020 for employees who were terminated in connection with the workforce reduction in May 2020, and asset write-offs related to various technology projects. For the year ended December 31, 2019, write-downs and other charges, net totaled $82.1 million, which included $39.8 million in artist performance agreement termination costs associated with the closure of the nightclub and dayclub at Palms and $25.9 million in Palms redevelopment and preopening expenses, comprising various costs associated with the brand repositioning campaign, as well as preopening related to new restaurants, nightclubs, bars and other amenities.
Interest Expense, net. The following table presents summarized information about our interest expense (amounts in thousands):
Interest expense, net, for 2020 was $128.5 million as compared to $156.7 million for 2019. The decrease in interest expense, net was due primarily to lower variable interest rates on our credit facility as a result of a decrease in the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”). Interest rates decreased in 2020 in response to economic and growth uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about our long-term debt.
Gain (Loss) on Extinguishment/Modification of Debt, net. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a net gain of $0.2 million on extinguishment/modification of debt comprising a gain of $12.7 million on repurchases of $96.6 million of our outstanding indebtedness, partially offset by a loss of $12.5 million on amendments to our credit facility in February 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a $19.9 million loss on extinguishment/modification of debt primarily arising from the purchase of our corporate office building.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Instruments. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a net loss of $21.6 million in the fair value of our interest rate swaps, as compared to a net loss of $19.5 million for 2019. The losses were primarily due to downward movements in the forward interest rate curve. Our interest rate swaps will expire in July 2021.
(Provision) Benefit for Income Tax. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized income tax expense of $114.1 million as compared to income tax benefit of $1.7 million for the prior year, primarily relating to the establishment of a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets due to the uncertainty of realizing the tax benefits. Our effective tax rate of (188.7)% for 2020 was less than the statutory rate with differences primarily related to the establishment of a full valuation allowance, as well as net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest, tax credits and permanent items. Station Holdco is treated as a partnership for income tax reporting and Station Holdco’s members are liable for federal, state and local income taxes based on their share of Station Holdco’s taxable income.
Net Loss Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests. Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 represented the portion of net loss attributable to the ownership interest in Station Holdco not held by us.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 for our two reportable segments and a reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA are presented below (amounts in thousands). The Las Vegas operations segment includes all of our Las Vegas area casino properties and the Native American management segment includes our Native American management arrangements.
The year-over-year decline in Adjusted EBITDA is primarily due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additional information about the factors impacting the year-over-year decline are described under Results of Operations above.
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure that is presented solely as a supplemental disclosure. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is a widely used measure of operating performance in our industry and is a principal basis for valuation of gaming companies. We believe that in addition to net income (loss), Adjusted EBITDA is a useful financial performance measurement for assessing our operating performance because it provides information about the performance of our ongoing core operations excluding non-cash expenses, financing costs, and other non-operational or non-recurring items. Adjusted EBITDA includes net income (loss) plus depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation, write-downs and other charges, net (including net losses on asset disposals, severance, redevelopment and preopening expenses, business innovation and technology enhancements), tax receivable agreement liability adjustment, interest expense, net, (gain) loss on extinguishment/modification of debt, net, change in fair value of derivative instruments, provision (benefit) for income tax and other.
To evaluate Adjusted EBITDA and the trends it depicts, the components should be considered. Each of these components can significantly affect our results of operations and should be considered in evaluating our operating performance, and the impact of these components cannot be determined from Adjusted EBITDA. Further, Adjusted EBITDA does not represent net income or cash flows from operating, investing or financing activities as defined by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and should not be considered as an alternative to net income as an indicator of our operating performance. Additionally, Adjusted EBITDA does not consider capital expenditures and other
investing activities and should not be considered as a measure of our liquidity. It should be noted that not all gaming companies that report EBITDA or adjustments to this measure may calculate EBITDA or such adjustments in the same manner as we do, and therefore, our measure of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other gaming companies.
Beginning in 2020, we changed our methodology for allocating certain corporate technology expenses to our reportable segments. Historically, all technology costs incurred at the corporate level were allocated to our operating properties on a pro rata basis. Under the new methodology, only technology costs that are directly related to operating properties are allocated to those properties, and expenses associated with corporate technology initiatives remain within corporate expense. Such corporate technology expenses were $14.5 million and $18.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The amount for the prior year period has been reclassified from the Las Vegas operations segment to Corporate and other within Adjusted EBITDA to conform with the current year presentation.
Holding Company Financial Information
The indenture governing the 5.00% Senior Notes and the indenture governing the 4.50% Senior Notes contain certain covenants that require Station LLC to furnish to the holders of the notes certain annual and quarterly financial information relating to Station LLC and its subsidiaries. The obligation to furnish such information may be satisfied by providing consolidated financial information of the Company along with additional disclosure explaining the differences between such information and the financial information of Station LLC and its subsidiaries on a standalone basis. The following financial information about the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries, exclusive of Station LLC and its subsidiaries (the “Holding Company”), is furnished to explain the differences between the financial information of the Holding Company and the financial information of Station LLC and its subsidiaries for the periods presented in this report. As discussed below, the primary differences between the financial information of the Holding Company and that of Station LLC relate to income taxes and the liability relating to the tax receivable agreement (“TRA”).
At December 31, 2020, the difference between the balance sheet for Station LLC and its consolidated subsidiaries and the balance sheet for the Holding Company is that the Holding Company had a $27.4 million noncurrent liability under the TRA and $0.6 million of other net current liabilities that are solely liabilities of the Holding Company. At December 31, 2019, the Holding Company had cash of $0.2 million and a net deferred tax asset of $113.2 million that are solely assets of the Holding Company, offset by a $25.1 million noncurrent liability under the TRA and $0.8 million of other net current liabilities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the difference between the statement of operations for Station LLC and its consolidated subsidiaries and the statement of operations for the Holding Company is that the Holding Company had a net loss of $114.2 million primarily representing provision for income tax to establish a full valuation allowance against its deferred tax assets. For 2019, the difference between the statement of operations for Station LLC and its consolidated subsidiaries and the statement of operations for the Holding Company is that the Holding Company had net income of $1.7 million which represented its income tax benefit.
Financial Condition, Capital Resources and Liquidity
The following financial condition, capital resources and liquidity discussion contains certain forward-looking statements with respect to our business, financial condition, results of operations, dispositions, acquisitions, expansion projects and issuances of debt and equity, which involve risks and uncertainties that cannot be predicted or quantified, and consequently, actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied herein. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, the risks described in Item 1A. Risk Factors.
At December 31, 2020, we had $121.2 million in cash and cash equivalents. We have taken steps to reduce our operating costs while our business continues to be negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, but we continue to have substantial payment obligations, including salaries, wages and employee benefits, payments with respect to our outstanding indebtedness, service contracts, property taxes, insurance and other obligations. On May 19, 2020, we announced that our board of directors had suspended the payment of dividends for the remainder of 2020, and the suspension of dividend payments will continue until further notice. In order to preserve financial flexibility in light of uncertainty in the global markets, Station LLC maintains its borrowing availability under its revolving credit facility, subject to continued compliance with the terms of the credit facility. On February 7, 2020, we amended Station LLC’s credit facility, increasing the outstanding borrowing availability under the revolving credit facility by $135.1 million to $1.03 billion, and at December 31, 2020, that borrowing availability was $1.0 billion, which was net of $29.4 million in outstanding letters of credit and similar obligations. See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information about our long-term debt.
Our primary capital requirements for the near term are expected to be related to the operation and maintenance of our properties and debt service payments. Our anticipated uses of cash for 2021 include required principal and interest payments on Station LLC’s indebtedness totaling $22.8 million and $115.3 million, respectively, and approximately $65.0 million to $75.0 million for maintenance and investment capital expenditures. In addition, we anticipate making cash distributions, which we refer to as “tax distributions” to the holders of LLC Units. We anticipate that these tax distributions will be made quarterly and in amounts that may vary from quarter to quarter. On February 22, 2021, we completed a partial redemption of $250 million in principal amount of 5.00% Senior Notes, which was funded using borrowings under the revolving credit facility and cash on hand.
We are obligated to make payments under the TRA, which is described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. At December 31, 2020, such obligations with respect to previously consummated transactions totaled $27.4 million. Future payments in respect of any subsequent exchanges of LLC Units for Class A common stock would be in addition to these amounts and are expected to be substantial. The timing of payments under the TRA may vary. The payments that we are required to make will generally reduce the amount of overall cash that might have otherwise been available to us, but we expect the cash tax savings we will realize from the utilization of the related deferred tax assets to fund the required payments.
In February 2019, our board of directors approved an equity repurchase program authorizing the repurchase of up to an aggregate of $150 million of our Class A common stock. In February 2021, our board of directors approved an extension of the equity repurchase program through December 31, 2022. We are not obligated to repurchase any shares under this program. Subject to applicable laws and the provisions of any agreements restricting our ability to do so, repurchases may be made at our discretion from time to time through open market purchases, negotiated transactions or tender offers, depending on market conditions and other factors. Through December 31, 2020, no equity repurchases were made under the program. From time to time, we may also seek to repurchase our outstanding indebtedness. Any such purchases may be funded by existing cash balances or the incurrence of debt, including borrowings under our credit facility. The amount and timing of any repurchase will be based on business and market conditions, capital availability, compliance with debt covenants and other considerations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased $96.6 million of our outstanding indebtedness.
We expect that cash on hand, cash generated from operations and, to the extent necessary, borrowings available under the credit facility, will be sufficient to fund our operations and capital requirements and service our outstanding indebtedness for the next twelve months. We regularly assess our projected capital requirements for capital expenditures, repayment of debt obligations, and payment of other general corporate and operational needs. In the long term, we expect that we will fund our capital requirements with a combination of cash generated from operations, borrowings under the credit facility and the issuance of debt or equity as market conditions may permit. However, our cash flow and ability to obtain debt or equity financing on terms that are satisfactory to us, or at all, may be affected by a variety of factors, including competition, general economic and business conditions and financial markets, all of which may be adversely impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, we cannot provide any assurance that we will generate sufficient income and liquidity to meet all of our liquidity requirements or other obligations.
Following is a summary of our cash flow information (amounts in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operations
Our operating cash flows primarily consist of operating income generated by our properties (excluding depreciation and other non-cash charges), interest paid and changes in working capital accounts such as inventories, prepaid expenses, receivables and payables. The majority of our revenue is generated from our slot machine and table game play, which is conducted primarily on a cash basis. Our food and beverage, room and other revenues are also primarily cash-based. As a result, fluctuations in our revenues have a direct impact on our cash flow from operations.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $212.8 million, compared to $316.6 million for 2019. For 2020, operating cash flows were negatively impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic,
including the temporary closure of all of our properties and the continued closure of four of our properties, the effects of state-mandated occupancy and social distancing restrictions, and reduced consumer confidence, discretionary spending and travel. For 2019, operating cash flows were negatively impacted by write-downs and other charges, net, including Palms redevelopment, preopening and artist performance agreement termination costs as well as an $18.7 million increase in cash paid for interest.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
During 2020 and 2019, we paid $58.5 million and $353.3 million, respectively, for capital expenditures. For 2019, capital expenditures were primarily related to the redevelopment project at Palms that was completed in the third quarter of 2019 and the purchase of slot machines and related gaming equipment. During 2019, we also paid $57.4 million for the purchase of land held for development in Las Vegas.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we reduced our outstanding indebtedness by $129.9 million. In February 2020, we issued $750.0 million in principal amount of 4.50% Senior Notes, the proceeds of which were used to repay a portion of the amounts outstanding under the credit facility, to pay fees and costs associated with the offering and for general corporate purposes. In March 2020, we drew $997.5 million under our revolving credit facility to secure our liquidity position and preserve financial flexibility amid the COVID-19 pandemic, all of which was repaid during 2020. In addition, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid $82.6 million to repurchase $96.6 million in principal amount of our outstanding indebtedness, primarily our senior notes. We also paid $7.3 million in dividends to Class A common stockholders and $4.6 million in cash distributions to the noncontrolling interest holders of Station Holdco, as well as $22.9 million in fees and costs related to the amendment of the credit facility and the new senior notes.
During 2019, we incurred net borrowings under the revolving credit facility of $195.0 million, which were primarily used to fund capital expenditures. We also paid $27.9 million in dividends to Class A common stockholders and $18.7 million in cash distributions to the noncontrolling interest holders of Station Holdco. In addition, we purchased our corporate building for $57.0 million, which was previously leased under a sale-leaseback transaction accounted for as a financing transaction, and settled the associated $37.4 million liability. The $19.6 million difference between the purchase price and the liability extinguished was recognized as a loss on early extinguishment of debt.
Restrictive Covenants
Certain customary covenants are included in both the credit agreement governing the credit facility and the indentures governing Station LLC’s senior notes that, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, restrict Station LLC’s ability and the ability of its restricted subsidiaries to incur or guarantee additional debt; create liens on collateral; engage in mergers, consolidations or asset dispositions; pay distributions; make investments, loans or advances; engage in certain transactions with affiliates or subsidiaries; engage in lines of business other than its core business and related businesses; or issue certain preferred units.
The credit facility also includes certain financial ratio covenants that Station LLC is required to maintain throughout the term of the credit facility, measured as of the end of each quarter. As most recently amended in February 2020, these financial ratio covenants include an interest coverage ratio of not less than 2.50 to 1.00 and a maximum consolidated total leverage ratio, with step-downs over the term of the credit facility, ranging from 6.50 to 1.00 at December 31, 2021 to 5.25 to 1.00 at December 31, 2023 and thereafter. A breach of the financial ratio covenants shall only become an event of default under the term loan B facility if the lenders providing the term loan A facility and the revolving credit facility take certain affirmative actions after the occurrence of a default of such financial ratio covenants. We believe Station LLC was in compliance with all applicable covenants at December 31, 2020. However, the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and results of operations may negatively impact our ability to remain in compliance with such covenants.
We may be unable to raise additional debt or equity financing to provide liquidity if the COVID-19 pandemic, measures implemented to curtail its spread, and changes in the economy, discretionary spending and consumer confidence have a protracted negative effect on our business. In addition, the aforementioned covenants and restrictions may limit our ability to compete effectively or to take advantage of new business opportunities. Further, our ability to comply with covenants and restrictions contained in the agreements governing our indebtedness may be adversely affected by general economic conditions and industry conditions resulting from COVID-19 and other factors.
Failure to satisfy the covenants contained in the credit agreements, indentures or other agreements governing our indebtedness would require us to seek waivers or amendments of such covenants. There can be no assurance that we will be
able to obtain required waivers or amendments, as such matters depend, in part, on factors outside of our control. If we fail to satisfy our covenants and are unable to obtain such waivers or amendments, our creditors could exercise remedies under the applicable documents governing such indebtedness, including acceleration of such indebtedness.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, we had no variable interests in unconsolidated entities that provide off-balance sheet financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support, or that engage in leasing, hedging or research and development arrangements with us, nor did we have retained or contingent interests in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity. Our derivative instruments comprise interest rate swaps as described in Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. At December 31, 2020, we had outstanding letters of credit and similar obligations totaling $29.4 million.
Native American Development
We have development and management agreements with the Mono, a federally recognized Native American tribe located near Fresno, California, pursuant to which we will assist the Mono in developing, financing and operating a gaming and entertainment facility to be located on Highway 99 north of the city of Madera, California. See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Regulation and Taxes
We are subject to extensive regulation by Nevada gaming authorities, as well as regulation by gaming authorities in the other jurisdictions in which we operate, including the NIGC, the California Gambling Control Commission and the Federated Indians of Graton Rancheria Gaming Commission. We will also be subject to regulation, which may or may not be similar to that in Nevada, by any other jurisdiction in which we may conduct gaming activities in the future. For a more complete description of our regulatory requirements, see Item 1. Business-Regulation and Licensing.
The gaming industry represents a significant source of tax revenue, particularly to the State of Nevada and its counties and municipalities. From time to time, various state and federal legislators and officials have proposed changes in tax law, or in the administration of such law, affecting the gaming industry. The Nevada legislature meets every two years for 120 days and when special sessions are called by the Governor. The current legislative session began on February 1, 2021. There are no assurances that an increase in taxes on gaming or other revenue will not be proposed and passed by the Nevada legislature in the future.
Description of Certain Indebtedness
Long-term Debt
A description of our indebtedness is included in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Derivative Instruments
A description of our derivative and hedging activities and the related accounting is included in Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and judgments that are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. Certain accounting estimates and assumptions may have a material impact on our financial statements due to the significant levels of subjectivity and judgment involved and the susceptibility of such estimates and assumptions to change. We base our estimates on historical experience, information that is currently available to us and various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from our estimates, and such differences could have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Following is a discussion of our accounting policies that involve critical estimates and assumptions.
Long-Lived Assets
Our business is capital intensive and a significant portion of our capital is invested in property and equipment, finite-lived intangible assets and other long-lived assets. We review long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. We evaluate the recoverability of our long-lived assets by estimating the future cash flows the asset is expected to generate, and comparing these estimated cash flows, on an undiscounted basis, to the carrying amount of the asset. If the carrying amount is greater, the asset is considered to be impaired, and we recognize an impairment charge equal to the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value. We test our long-lived assets for impairment at the reporting unit level, and each of our operating properties is considered a separate reporting unit.
Inherent in the calculation of fair values are various estimates and assumptions, including estimates of future cash flows expected to be generated by an asset or asset group. We base our cash flow estimates on the current regulatory, political and economic climates in the areas where we operate, recent operating information and projections for our properties. These estimates could be negatively impacted by changes in federal, state or local regulations, economic downturns, changes in consumer preferences, or events affecting various forms of travel and access to our properties. Future cash flow estimates are, by their nature, subjective and actual results may differ materially from our estimates. The most significant assumptions used in determining cash flow estimates include forecasts of future operating results, Adjusted EBITDA margins, tax rates, capital expenditures, working capital requirements, long-term growth rates and terminal year free cash flows. Cash flow estimates and their impact on fair value are highly sensitive to changes in many of these assumptions. If our estimates of future cash flows are not met, we may be required to record impairment charges in the future.
In the first quarter of 2020, the initial economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic had a significant adverse effect on our actual and projected operating results. We determined that those effects represented indicators of potential asset impairment and performed impairment assessments for all of our long-lived assets. No impairment losses were recognized as a result of the interim impairment testing.
As of December 31, 2020, our Texas Station, Fiesta Henderson, Fiesta Rancho and Palms properties had not reopened, and we have no plans to reopen any of these properties in 2021. We determined these ongoing closures to be an indicator of potential impairment at those reporting units. Accordingly, we tested the long-lived assets of those reporting units for impairment by comparing the estimated future undiscounted cash flows of those properties to the carrying amounts of the reporting units. Our cash flow projections were based on a number of assumptions that are highly judgmental due to the uncertainties surrounding the ongoing pandemic, including economic conditions, the projected timing of reopening, changes in regulations, such as operational and travel restrictions, and consumer preferences. Based on our undiscounted cash flow analysis, no impairment charges were recognized. However, we cannot predict the future impact or duration of the ongoing negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and as a result, cannot reasonably predict the probability or amount of impairment losses that may be incurred in future periods.
Property and Equipment. At December 31, 2020, the carrying amount of our property and equipment was approximately $2.9 billion, which represents 76.4% of our total assets. We make estimates and assumptions when accounting for property and equipment. We compute depreciation using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, and our depreciation expense is highly dependent on the assumptions we make about the estimated useful lives of our assets. We estimate the useful lives of our property and equipment based on our experience with similar assets and our estimate of the usage of the asset. Whenever events or circumstances occur that change the estimated useful life of an asset, we account for the change prospectively. We must also make judgments about the capitalization of costs. Costs of major improvements are capitalized, while costs of normal repairs and maintenance are charged to expense as incurred. If an asset or asset group is disposed or retired before the end of its previously estimated useful life, we may be required to accelerate our depreciation expense or recognize a loss on disposal.
Finite-Lived Intangible Assets. Our finite-lived intangibles assets primarily include assets related to our customer relationships, condominium rental contracts, certain trademarks and management contracts. We amortize our finite-lived intangible assets over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method. We periodically evaluate the remaining useful lives of our finite-lived intangible assets to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining period of amortization. Whenever events or circumstances occur that change the estimated remaining useful life of an asset, we account for the change prospectively.
Goodwill. We test our goodwill for impairment annually as of October 1, and whenever events or circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that impairment may have occurred. Impairment testing for goodwill is performed at the reporting unit level, and we consider each of our operating properties to be a separate reporting unit.
When performing the annual goodwill impairment testing, we either conduct a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired, or elect to bypass this qualitative assessment and perform a quantitative test for impairment. Under the qualitative assessment, we consider both positive and negative factors, including macroeconomic conditions, industry events, financial performance and other changes in facts and circumstances, and make a determination of whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the qualitative factors, we determine it is more likely than not the asset is impaired, we perform a quantitative test in which the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is compared with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the excess, limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
When performing the quantitative test, we estimate the fair value of each reporting unit using the expected present value of future cash flows along with value indications based on our current valuation multiple and multiples of comparable publicly traded companies. The estimation of fair value requires management to make critical estimates, judgments and assumptions, including estimating expected future cash flows and selecting appropriate discount rates, valuation multiples and market comparables. Application of alternative estimates and assumptions could produce significantly different results.
At December 31, 2020, our goodwill totaled $195.7 million. Approximately 86.8% of our goodwill is associated with one of our properties. As of our most recent annual goodwill testing date, the estimated fair value of each of our properties with goodwill exceeded its respective carrying value by a significant amount. If the fair value of any of these properties should decline in the future, we may be required to recognize a goodwill impairment charge, which could be material. A property’s fair value may decline as a result of a decrease in the property’s actual or projected operating results or changes in other significant assumptions and judgments used in the estimation process, including the discount rate and market multiple.
Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets. Our indefinite-lived intangible assets primarily represent the value of our brands. At December 31, 2020, the carrying amount of our indefinite-lived intangible assets totaled $77.5 million. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized unless management determines that their useful life is no longer indefinite. We test our indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually as of October 1, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an asset may be impaired, by comparing the carrying amount of the asset to its estimated fair value. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its estimated fair value, we recognize an impairment charge equal to the excess. We estimate the fair value of our brands using a derivation of the income approach to valuation based on the present value of estimated royalties avoided through ownership of the assets. The fair values of our indefinite-lived intangible assets are highly sensitive to changes in projected operating results. Accordingly, any decrease in the projected operating results of a property could require us to recognize an impairment charge, which could be material.
Native American Development Costs. We incur certain costs associated with our development and management agreements with Native American tribes which are reimbursable by the tribes, and we capitalize these costs as long-term assets. The assets are typically transferred to the tribe at such time as the tribe secures financing, or the gaming facility is completed. We earn a return on the costs incurred for the acquisition and development of Native American projects. Due to the uncertainty surrounding the timing and amount of the stated return, we recognize the return on a cash basis. Development costs and the related return are typically repaid by the tribe from a project’s financing or from operating cash flows of the casino after opening. Accordingly, the recoverability of our development costs is highly dependent upon the tribe’s success in obtaining financing and our ability to operate the project successfully upon its completion. Our evaluation of the recoverability of our Native American development costs requires us to apply a significant amount of judgment.
We evaluate our Native American development costs for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the project might not be recoverable, taking into consideration all available information. Among other things, we consider the status of the project, any contingencies, the achievement of milestones, any existing or potential litigation and regulatory matters when evaluating our Native American projects for impairment. If an indicator of impairment exists, we compare the estimated future cash flows of the asset, on an undiscounted basis, to the carrying amount of the asset. If the undiscounted expected future cash flows for a project do not exceed its carrying amount, the asset is written down to its estimated fair value. We estimate a project’s fair value using a discounted cash flow model and market comparables, when available. Our estimate of the undiscounted future cash flows of a Native American development project is based on consideration of all positive and negative evidence about the future cash flow potential of the project including, but not limited to, the likelihood that the project will be successfully completed, the status of required approvals, and the status and
timing of the construction of the project, as well as current and projected economic, political, regulatory and competitive conditions that may adversely impact the project’s operating results. In certain circumstances, we may discontinue funding of a project due to a revision of its expected potential, or otherwise determine that our advances are not recoverable and as a result, we may be required to write off the entire carrying amount of a project.
Litigation, Claims and Assessments
We are defendants in various lawsuits relating to routine matters incidental to our business and we assess the potential for any lawsuits or claims brought against us on an ongoing basis. For ongoing litigation and potential claims, we use judgment in determining the probability of loss and whether a reasonable estimate of loss, if any, can be made. We accrue a liability when we believe a loss is probable and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. As the outcome of litigation is inherently uncertain, it is possible that certain matters may be resolved for materially different amounts than previously accrued or disclosed.
Income Taxes
We are taxed as a corporation and pay corporate federal, state and local taxes on income allocated to us by Station Holdco. Station Holdco operates as a partnership for federal, state and local tax reporting and holds 100% of the economic interests in Station LLC. The members of Station Holdco are liable for any income taxes resulting from income allocated to them by Station Holdco as a pass-through entity.
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the differences between the book value of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and those amounts applicable for income tax purposes using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets represent future tax deductions or credits. Realization of the deferred tax assets ultimately depends on the existence of sufficient taxable income of the appropriate character in either the carryback or carryforward period.
Each reporting period, we analyze the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be realized. A valuation allowance is recorded if, based on the weight of all available positive and negative evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. On an annual basis, we perform a comprehensive analysis of all forms of positive and negative evidence based on year end results. During each interim period, we update our annual analysis for significant changes in the positive and negative evidence. We have determined that our deferred tax assets do not meet the “more likely than not” threshold required under the accounting standard for income taxes and as a result, have provided a full valuation allowance on our net deferred tax assets.
We record uncertain tax positions on the basis of a two-step process in which (1) we determine whether it is more likely than not the tax positions will be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position, and (2) for those tax positions meeting the more likely than not recognition threshold, we recognize the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax authority. We do not believe that we have any tax positions for which it is reasonably possible that we will be required to record a significant liability for unrecognized tax benefits within the next twelve months.