ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
We operate on a 52/53 week fiscal year ending on the Saturday closest to December 31. We refer to the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 as “fiscal 2020", the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 as “fiscal 2019" and the fiscal year ended December 29, 2018 as “fiscal 2018".
Overview
General
Regal Beloit Corporation (NYSE: RBC) (“we,” “us,” “our” or the “Company”), based in Beloit, Wisconsin (USA), is a leading manufacturer of electric motors, electrical motion controls, power generation and power transmission products serving markets throughout the world. As of the end of fiscal 2020, the Company, including its subsidiaries, employed approximately 23,000 people in its manufacturing, sales, and service facilities and corporate offices throughout the US, Canada, Mexico, Europe and Asia. In fiscal 2020, we reported annual net sales of $2.9 billion compared to $3.2 billion in fiscal 2019.
Our company is comprised of four operating segments: Commercial Systems, Industrial Systems, Climate Solutions and Power Transmission Solutions.
A description of the four operating segments is as follows:
•Commercial Systems segment produces fractional to approximately 5 horsepower AC and DC motors, electronic variable speed controls, fans, and blowers for commercial applications. These products serve markets including commercial building ventilation and HVAC, pool and spa, irrigation, dewatering, agriculture, and general commercial equipment.
•Industrial Systems segment produces integral motors, generators, alternators and switchgear for industrial applications, along with aftermarket parts and kits to support such products. These products serve markets including agriculture, marine, mining, oil and gas, food and beverage, data centers, healthcare, prime and standby power, and general industrial equipment.
•Climate Solutions segment produces small motors, electronic variable speed controls and air moving solutions serving markets including residential and light commercial HVAC, water heaters and commercial refrigeration.
•Power Transmission Solutions segment produces, sells and services belt and chain drives, helical and worm gearing, mounted and unmounted bearings, couplings, modular plastic belts, conveying chains and components, hydraulic pump drives, large open gearing and specialty mechanical products serving markets including e-commerce, alternative energy, beverage, bulk handling, metals, special machinery, energy, aerospace and general industrial.
Components of Profit and Loss
Net Sales. We sell our products to a variety of manufacturers, distributors and end users. Our customers consist of a large cross-section of businesses, ranging from Fortune 100 companies to small businesses. A number of our products are sold to OEMs, who incorporate our products, such as electric motors, into products they manufacture, and many of our products are built to the requirements of our customers. The majority of our sales are derived from direct sales to customers by sales personnel employed by the Company, however, a significant portion of our sales are derived from sales made by manufacturer’s representatives, who are paid exclusively on commission. Our product sales are made via purchase order, long-term contract, and, in some instances, one-time purchases. Many of our products have broad customer bases, with the levels of concentration of revenues varying from business unit to business unit.
Our level of net sales for any given period is dependent upon a number of factors, including (i) the demand for our products; (ii) the strength of the economy generally and the end markets in which we compete; (iii) our customers’ perceptions of our product quality at any given time; (iv) our ability to timely meet customer demands; (v) the selling price of our products; and (vi) the weather. As a result, our total revenue has tended to experience quarterly variations and our total revenue for any particular quarter may not be indicative of future results.
We use the term “organic sales" to refer to sales from existing operations excluding (i) sales from acquired businesses recorded prior to the first anniversary of the acquisition (“Acquisition Sales”), (ii) less the amount of sales attributable to any businesses divested/to be exited ("Business To Be Exited"), and (iii) the impact of foreign currency translation. The impact of foreign currency translation is determined by translating the respective period’s organic sales using the same currency exchange rates that were in effect during the prior year periods. We use the term “organic sales growth” to refer to the increase in our sales between periods that is attributable to organic sales. We use the term “acquisition growth” to refer to the increase in our sales between periods that is attributable to Acquisition Sales.
Gross Profit. Our gross profit is impacted by our levels of net sales and cost of sales. Our cost of sales consists of costs for, among other things (i) raw materials, including copper, steel and aluminum; (ii) components such as castings, bars, tools, bearings and electronics; (iii) wages and related personnel expenses for fabrication, assembly and logistics personnel; (iv) manufacturing facilities, including depreciation on our manufacturing facilities and equipment, insurance and utilities; and (v) shipping. The majority of our cost of sales consists of raw materials and components. The price we pay for commodities and components can be subject to commodity price fluctuations. We attempt to mitigate portions of the commodity price fluctuations through fixed-price agreements with suppliers and our hedging strategies. When we experience commodity price increases, we have tended to announce price increases to our customers who purchase via purchase order, with such increases generally taking effect a period of time after the public announcements. For those sales we make under long-term arrangements, we tend to include material price formulas that specify quarterly or semi-annual price adjustments based on a variety of factors, including commodity prices.
Outside of general economic cyclicality, our business units experience different levels of variation in sales from quarter to quarter based on factors specific to each business. For example, a portion of our Climate Solutions segment manufactures products that are used in air conditioning applications. As a result, our sales for that business tend to be lower in the first and fourth quarters and higher in the second and third quarters. In contrast, our Commercial Systems segment, Industrial Systems segment and Power Transmission Solutions segment have a broad customer base and a variety of applications, thereby helping to mitigate large quarter-to-quarter fluctuations outside of general economic conditions.
Operating Expenses. Our operating expenses consist primarily of (i) general and administrative expenses; (ii) sales and marketing expenses; (iii) general engineering and research and development expenses; and (iv) handling costs incurred in conjunction with distribution activities. Personnel related costs are our largest operating expense.
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of costs for (i) salaries, benefits and other personnel expenses related to our executive, finance, human resource, information technology, legal and operations functions; (ii) occupancy expenses; (iii) technology related costs; (iv) depreciation and amortization; and (v) corporate-related travel. The majority of our general and administrative costs are for salaries and related personnel expenses. These costs can vary by business given the location of our different manufacturing operations.
Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of costs for (i) salaries, benefits and other personnel expenses related to our sales and marketing function; (ii) internal and external sales commissions and bonuses; (iii) travel, lodging and other out-of-pocket expenses associated with our selling efforts; and (iv) other related overhead.
Our general engineering and research and development expenses consist primarily of costs for (i) salaries, benefits and other personnel expenses; (ii) the design and development of new energy efficiency products and enhancements; (iii) quality assurance and testing; and (iv) other related overhead. Our research and development efforts tend to be targeted toward developing new products that would allow us to maintain or gain additional market share, whether in new or existing applications. While these costs make up an insignificant portion of our operating expenses in the Power Transmission Solutions segment, they are more substantial in our Commercial Systems, Industrial Systems and Climate Solutions segments. In particular, a large driver of our research and development efforts in those three segments is energy efficiency, which generally means using less electrical power to produce more mechanical power.
Goodwill & Other Asset Impairments. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we recorded goodwill impairment of $10.5 million in our global industrial motors reporting unit. During fiscal 2020, we recognized $5.3 million of asset impairments related to the transfer of assets to held for sale.
In the first quarter of 2019, we transferred assets to held for sale which resulted in the recognition of $5.1 million of fixed asset impairments and $4.9 million of customer relationships intangible asset impairments.
On July 31, 2018, we received notification from a customer of our hermetic climate business that it would wind down operations. As a result of this notification, we accelerated our plans to exit the hermetic climate business. We recognized exit and exit related charges of $34.9 million during fiscal 2019. The charges included goodwill impairment of $9.5 million, customer relationship intangible asset impairment of $5.5 million, technology intangible asset impairment of $2.1 million and fixed asset impairment of $1.1 million. In addition to the asset impairments, the Company took charges on accounts receivable and inventory along with recognizing other expenses related to exiting the business.
The following table presents impairments by segment as of January 2, 2021, December 28, 2019 and December 29, 2018 (in millions):
Operating Profit. Our operating profit consists of the segment gross profit less the segment operating expenses. In addition, there are shared operating costs that cover corporate, engineering and IT expenses that are consistently allocated to the operating segments and are included in the segment operating expenses. Operating profit is a key metric used to measure year over year improvement of the segments.
COVID-19 Pandemic
COVID-19 evolved during the first quarter of 2020 into a global pandemic, resulting in a severe global health crisis that drove a dramatic slowdown in global economic and social activity. Impacts from COVID-19 on our business became more severe during the first half of the second quarter in terms of weakening demand in many of our end markets, which are weighted to North America, and its impact on our manufacturing operations, particularly in Mexico and India. As the second quarter progressed, pressure on our order rates started to abate, and previously disrupted manufacturing operations improved. Our order rates started to push back into positive territory in the third quarter. This trend continued throughout the fourth quarter of the year. Currently, our manufacturing operations are, on average, running closer to full capacity.
We believe that we are an essential business, and as such have worked to ensure that our global facilities have remained operational. Our products are essential components in a range of applications used in the food & beverage, pharmaceutical, medical, transportation, and data communications industries, among many others. Certain global manufacturing operations have been impacted with plant closures or plants running at reduced rates at various points during the fiscal year.
In the face of this global crisis, our first priority has been the health and safety of our associates. In response, we implemented a host of measures to help our associates stay safe, measures that have been enhanced and refined as impacts from COVID-19 grew, and as our knowledge about how to enhance their effectiveness improved.
Factors deriving from the COVID-19 response that have or may negatively impact sales and operating profit in the future include, but are not limited to: limitations on the ability of our suppliers to manufacture, or procure from manufacturers, components and raw materials used in our products, or to meet delivery requirements and commitments; limitations on the ability of our employees to perform their work due to illness caused by the pandemic or local, state, or federal orders requiring employees to remain at home; inconsistent criteria in certain international jurisdictions for establishing the essentiality of our business; limitations on the ability of carriers to deliver our products to customers; limitations on the ability of our customers to conduct their business and purchase our products and services; reductions in demands of our customers; and limitations on the ability of our customers to pay us on a timely basis.
We have taken actions to manage costs including an organization wide reduction in force and voluntary early retirement program. We will continue to assess the actual and expected impacts of COVID-19 and consider making further changes to our cost structure as the implications of COVID-19 continue to evolve.
Rexnord Transaction
On February 15, 2021, we entered into definitive agreements with Rexnord Corporation (“Rexnord”), Land Newco, Inc., a wholly owned indirect subsidiary of Rexnord (“Land”), and Phoenix 2021, Inc., our wholly owned subsidiary (“Merger Sub”), with respect to a Reverse Morris Trust transaction (the “Rexnord Transaction”) pursuant to which, and subject to the terms and conditions of those definitive agreements discussed below, (1) Rexnord will transfer (or cause to be transferred) to Land substantially all of the assets, and Land will assume substantially all of the liabilities, of Rexnord’s Process & Motion Control business (“PMC Business”) (the “Reorganization”), (2) after which, all of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock, $0.01 par value per share, of Land (“Land common stock”) held by a subsidiary of Rexnord will be distributed in a series of distributions to Rexnord’s stockholders (the “Distributions”, and the final distribution of Land common stock from Rexnord to Rexnord’s stockholders, which is to be made pro rata for no consideration, the “Spin-Off”) and (3) immediately after the Spin-Off, Merger Sub will merge with and into Land (the “Merger”) and all shares of Land common stock (other than those held by Rexnord, Land, the Company, Merger Sub or their respective subsidiaries) will be converted into the right to receive shares of our common stock, $0.01 par value per share (“Company common stock”), as calculated and subject to adjustment as set forth in the Merger Agreement (as defined below). When the Merger is completed, Land (which at that time will hold the PMC business) will be our wholly owned subsidiary.
The definitive agreements we entered into in connection with the Rexnord Transaction include an Agreement and Plan of Merger, by and among Rexnord, Land, Merger Sub and us (the “Merger Agreement”), a Separation and Distribution Agreement, by and among Rexnord, Land and us and certain ancillary agreements.
In connection with the Rexnord Transaction, the Merger Agreement provides that we shall, to the extent required by the Merger Agreement, in certain circumstances in which additional shares of Company common stock are issued at closing to holders of Land common stock, declare a special dividend to our stockholders immediately prior to the consummation of the Merger (the “Company Special Dividend”). The existence and magnitude of the dividend will depend on whether and to what extent we are able to count certain overlapping shareholders of us and Rexnord in satisfying the tax requirements applicable to a Reverse Morris Trust transaction. In the event that the Company Special Dividend is required to be paid, it could range in amount between zero and approximately $2.0 billion.
In connection with the Rexnord Transaction, we have entered into certain financing arrangements, which are described below under “Liquidity and Capital Resources”.
Closing of the Rexnord Transaction is subject to various closing conditions, including the receipt of the approval of our and Rexnord's shareholders, the receipt of regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions.
The Rexnord Transaction is described more fully in our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on February 19, 2021 and this description is qualified in its entirety by the description set forth therein.
Outlook. In the first quarter of fiscal 2021, we are forecasting a mid-single digit sales growth. We expect to see positive impact from our new products. In the first quarter of 2021, we expect diluted earnings per share to be $1.32 to $1.52. Our fiscal 2021 diluted earnings per share guidance is based on an effective tax rate of 21%.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth selected information for the years indicated:
Fiscal Year 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year 2019
Net sales for fiscal 2020 were $2.9 billion, a 10.2% decrease as compared to fiscal 2019 net sales of $3.2 billion. The decrease consisted of negative organic sales of 8.4%, negative foreign currency translation of 0.4% and a negative 1.4% impact from the businesses divested/to be exited. Gross profit decreased $52.0 million or 6.0% as compared to the prior year. The decrease from the prior year was driven primarily due to lower sales volumes, partially offset by productivity improvements and simplification programs. Operating expenses were $512.9 million which was a $31.4 million decrease from fiscal 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by lower variable selling costs and lower employee related wage and benefit costs. The Company recognized goodwill and other asset impairments of $15.8 million, a $5.8 million increase from the prior year.
Net sales for the Commercial Systems segment for fiscal 2020 were $820.2 million, a 9.4% decrease compared to fiscal 2019 net sales of $905.3 million. The decrease consisted of negative organic sales of 6.9% and a negative 2.6% impact from the businesses divested/to be exited partially offset by a positive 0.1% foreign currency translation. The organic sales decrease was primarily driven by decline in market demand as well as COVID related pressures on production along with ongoing intentional account pruning actions. Gross profit decreased $22.8 million or 9.6% primarily due to lower sales volumes partially offset by simplification programs and selective pricing on lower margin accounts. Operating expenses for fiscal 2020 decreased $17.5 million as compared to fiscal 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower variable selling costs on lower sales, lower employee related wage and benefit costs and lower facility costs.
Net sales for the Industrial Systems segment for fiscal 2020 were $528.8 million, a 8.1% decrease compared to fiscal 2019 net sales of $575.4 million. The decrease consisted of negative organic sales of 7.1% and negative foreign currency translation of 1.0%. The organic sales decrease was driven by COVID related pressures on production, the oil & gas downturn and the impact of 80/20 account pruning. Gross profit increased $1.1 million or 1.2% primarily due to sales mix with higher sales volumes related to power generation projects, simplification programs and selective pricing on lower margin accounts. Operating expenses for fiscal 2020 decreased $16.0 million as compared to fiscal 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower employee related wage and benefit costs and lower variable selling costs on lower sales.
Net sales for the Climate Solutions segment for fiscal 2020 were $846.8 million, a 12.6% decrease compared to fiscal 2019 net sales of $968.5 million. The decrease consisted of negative organic sales of 9.9%, negative foreign currency translation of 0.6% and a negative 2.1% impact from the businesses divested/to be exited. The organic sales decrease was driven by COVID related pressure in North America and Europe and 80/20 account pruning efforts. Gross profit decreased $23.0 million or 8.5% primarily due to sales mix and productivity gains. Operating expenses for fiscal 2020 increased $4.9 million as compared to the prior year primarily due to professional fees.
Net sales for the Power Transmission Solutions segment for fiscal 2020 were $711.2 million, a 9.8% decrease compared to fiscal 2019 net sales of $788.8 million. The decrease consisted of negative organic sales of 9.1%, negative foreign currency translation of 0.1% and a negative 0.6% impact from the businesses divested/to be exited. The organic sales decrease was driven by COVID related pressures on general industrial, upstream oil & gas end markets and 80/20 account pruning efforts. Gross profit for fiscal 2020 decreased $7.3 million or 2.8% primarily due to lower sales volumes partially offset by the change in sales mix and productivity gains. Operating expenses for fiscal 2020 decreased $2.8 million due to lower employee related wage and benefit costs and lower variable selling costs on the lower sales.
The effective tax rate for fiscal 2020 was 22.7% compared to 20.1% for fiscal 2019. The increase in the effective rate was due to the mix of earnings during the year.
Fiscal Year 2019 Compared to Fiscal Year 2018
Net sales for fiscal 2019 were $3.2 billion, a decrease of 11.2% compared to fiscal 2018 net sales of $3.6 billion. The decrease consisted of negative organic sales of 5.7%, negative foreign currency translation of 1.1% and a negative 5.3% impact from the businesses divested/to be exited partially offset by a positive 0.9% sales growth related to the acquisition of Nicotra Gebhardt S.p.A ("NG"). Gross profit decreased $103.9 million or 10.8% as compared to the prior year. The decrease from the prior year was driven primarily due to lower sales volumes, partially offset by productivity improvements and simplification programs. Operating expenses were $544.3 million which was a $55.1 million decrease from fiscal 2018 due primarily to businesses divested/to be exited.
Net sales for the Commercial Systems segment for fiscal 2019 were $905.3 million, a 18.5% decrease compared to fiscal 2018 net sales of $1.1 billion. The decrease consisted of negative organic sales of 8.1%, negative foreign currency translation of 1.2% and a negative 12.6% impact from businesses divested/to be exited partially offset by a positive 3.4% sales growth related to the acquisition of NG. The organic sales decrease was primarily driven by the continued inventory destocking in the North American pool pump market, weakness in North American general industry and the impact of 80/20 account pruning. Gross profit decreased $50.4 million or 17.6% primarily due to lower sales volumes partially offset by simplification programs and selective pricing on lower margin accounts. Operating expenses for fiscal 2019 decreased $22.4 million as compared to fiscal 2018. The decrease was primarily due to lower variable selling costs on lower sales and the removal of costs related to businesses divested/to be exited.
Net sales for the Industrial Systems segment for fiscal 2019 were $575.4 million, a 14.3% decrease compared to fiscal 2018 net sales of $671.1 million. The decrease consisted of negative organic sales of 11.4%, negative foreign currency translation of 2.1% and a negative 0.8% impact from the businesses divested/to be exited. The organic sales decrease was driven by delays in power generation projects due to end market overcapacity and the oil & gas downturn, weak North American and China industrial demand due to trade uncertainty and the impact of 80/20 account pruning. Gross profit decreased $40.8 million or 29.9% primarily due to lower sales volumes related to power generation projects, partially offset by simplification programs and selective pricing on lower margin accounts. Operating expenses for fiscal 2019 decreased $4.0 million as compared to fiscal 2018. The decrease was primarily due to lower variable selling costs on lower sales.
Net sales for the Climate Solutions segment for fiscal 2019 were $968.5 million, a 5.5% decrease compared to fiscal 2018 net sales of $1,024.8 million. The decrease consisted of negative organic sales of 1.2%, negative foreign currency translation of 0.6% and a negative 3.7% impact from the businesses divested/to be exited. The organic sales decrease was driven by inventory destocking by HVAC OEM customers and 80/20 account pruning efforts. Gross profit increased $7.1 million or 2.7% primarily due to sales mix and productivity gains. Operating expenses for fiscal 2019 decreased $18.3 million as compared to the prior year primarily due to the removal of costs related to businesses divested/to be exited.
Net sales for the Power Transmission Solutions segment for fiscal 2019 were $788.8 million, a 6.0% decrease compared to fiscal 2018 net sales of $838.8 million. The decrease consisted of negative organic sales of 3.5%, negative foreign currency translation of 0.9% and a negative 1.6% impact from the businesses divested/to be exited. The organic sales decrease was driven by continued weakness in the industrial distribution channel and 80/20 account pruning efforts. Gross profit for fiscal 2019 decreased $19.8 million or 7.1% primarily due to the change in sales mix and productivity gains partially offset by the lower sales volume. Operating expenses for fiscal 2019 decreased $10.4 million due to lower variable selling costs on the lower sales and the removal of costs related to the businesses divested/to be exited.
The effective tax rate for fiscal 2019 was 20.1% compared to 19.3% for fiscal 2018. The increase in the effective rate was due to the mix of earnings during the year. The lower effective tax rate in fiscal 2019 as compared to the 21% statutory US federal income tax rate is driven by the mix of earnings and lower foreign tax rates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
Our principal source of liquidity is cash flow provided by operating activities. In addition to operating income, other significant factors affecting our cash flows include working capital levels, capital expenditures, dividends, share repurchases, acquisitions, and divestitures, availability of debt financing, and the ability to attract long-term capital at acceptable terms.
Cash flow provided by operating activities was $435.4 million for fiscal 2020, a $26.9 million increase from fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily the result of a reduction in working capital.
Cash flow provided by operating activities was $408.5 million for fiscal 2019, a $45.8 million increase from fiscal 2018. The increase was primarily the result of a reduction in working capital and the higher net income year over year.
Our working capital was $1,029.3 million and $1,047.2 million as of January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively. As of January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, our current ratio (which is the ratio of our current assets to current liabilities) was 2.3:1 and 2.9:1, respectively. We intend to use operating cash flow to meet our current debt repayment obligations.
Cash flow used in investing activities was $37.0 million for fiscal 2020, compared to cash flows provided by $74.3 million in fiscal 2019. The change was driven primarily by the divestiture proceeds received in fiscal 2019 partially offset by lower capital expenditures. Capital expenditures were $47.5 million in fiscal 2020, compared to $92.4 million in fiscal 2019.
Cash flow provided by investing activities was $74.3 million for fiscal 2019, compared to $227.9 million used in fiscal 2018. The change was driven primarily by the divestiture proceeds received in fiscal 2019 versus the acquisition of NG in fiscal 2018. Capital expenditures were $92.4 million in fiscal 2019, compared to $77.6 million in fiscal 2018.
In fiscal 2021, we anticipate capital spending for property, plant and equipment to be approximately $57.0 million. We believe that our present manufacturing facilities will be sufficient to provide adequate capacity for our operations in fiscal 2021. We anticipate funding fiscal 2021 capital spending with operating cash flows.
Cash flow used in financing activities was $147.6 million for fiscal 2020, compared to $397.4 million in fiscal 2019. Net debt repayments totaled $67.7 million in fiscal 2020, compared to net debt repayments of $171.0 million in fiscal 2019. We also repurchased $25.0 million of our common stock during fiscal 2020 compared to $165.1 million in fiscal 2019. We paid $48.7 million in dividends to shareholders in fiscal 2020 compared to $48.9 million in fiscal 2019. In fiscal 2020, we paid distributions of $2.8 million to noncontrolling interests compared to $1.8 million in fiscal 2019.
Cash flow used in financing activities was $397.4 million for fiscal 2019, compared to $17.7 million for fiscal 2018. Net debt repayments totaled $171.0 million in fiscal 2019, compared to net debt borrowings of $166.7 million in fiscal 2018. We also repurchased $165.1 million of our common stock during fiscal 2019 compared to $127.8 million in fiscal 2018. We paid $48.9 million in dividends to shareholders in fiscal 2019 compared to $47.2 million in fiscal 2018. In fiscal 2019, we paid distributions of $1.8 million to noncontrolling interests compared to $1.6 million in fiscal 2018.
The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019 (in millions):
As of January 2, 2021, $603.5 million of our cash was held by foreign subsidiaries and could be used in our domestic operations if necessary. We anticipate being able to support our short-term liquidity and operating needs largely through cash generated from operations. We regularly assess our cash needs and the available sources to fund these needs which includes repatriation of foreign earnings which may be subject to withholding taxes. Under current law, we do not expect restrictions or taxes on repatriation of cash held outside of the United States to have a material effect on our overall liquidity, financial condition or the results of operations for the foreseeable future.
We will, from time to time, maintain excess cash balances which may be used to (i) fund operations, (ii) repay outstanding debt, (iii) fund acquisitions, (iv) pay dividends, (v) make investments in new product development programs, (vi) repurchase our common stock, or (vii) fund other corporate objectives.
Pension Liabilities and Other Post Retirement Benefits
Accrued pension and other post retirement benefits of $74.1 million and $85.3 million as of January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively.
Credit Agreement
On August 27, 2018, we entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent and the lenders named therein, providing for a (i) 5-year unsecured term loan facility in the principal amount of $900.0 million (the “Term Facility”) and (ii) a 5-year unsecured multicurrency revolving facility in the principal amount of $500.0 million (the “Multicurrency Revolving Facility”), including a $50.0 million letter of credit sub facility, available for general corporate purposes. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest at floating rates based upon indices determined by the currency of the borrowing, plus an applicable margin determined by reference to our consolidated funded debt to consolidated EBITDA ratio or at an alternative base rate.
The Term Facility was drawn in full on August 27, 2018 with the proceeds settling the amounts owed under the Prior Term Facility and Prior Multicurrency Revolving Facility. The Term Facility requires quarterly amortization at a rate starting at 5.0% per annum, increasing to 7.5% per annum after three years and further increasing to 10.0% per annum for the last years of the Term Facility, unless previously prepaid. The weighted average interest rate on the Term Facility was 2.0% and 3.6% for the fiscal years ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively. The Credit Agreement requires us to prepay the loans under the Term Facility with 100% of the net cash proceeds received from specified asset sales and borrowed money indebtedness, subject to certain exceptions. We repaid $50.0 million and $90.0 million under the Term Facility in fiscal 2020 and 2019, respectively. The amount outstanding for fiscal years ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019 was $670.0 million and $720.0 million, respectively.
As of January 2, 2021 we had no borrowings under the Multicurrency Revolving Facility, $0.2 million of standby letters of credit and $499.8 million of available borrowing capacity. The average daily balance in borrowings under the Multicurrency Revolving Facility was $150.4 million and $91.7 million, and the weighted average interest rate on the Multicurrency Revolving Facility was 1.9% and 3.6% for the fiscal years ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively. We pay a non-use fee on the aggregate unused amount of the Multicurrency Revolving Facility at a rate determined by reference to its consolidated funded debt to consolidated EBITDA ratio.
Senior Notes
As of January 2, 2021, we had $400.0 million of unsecured senior notes (the “Notes”) outstanding. The Notes consist of $400.0 million in senior notes in a private placement which were issued in five tranches with maturities from ten to twelve years and carry fixed interest rates. As of January 2, 2021, $230.0 million and $170.0 million of the Notes are included in Current Maturities of Long-Term Debt and Long-Term Debt, respectively, on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The Notes maturing in 2021 will be paid using capacity on our Multicurrency Revolving Facility and/or cash from operations.
Details on the Notes as of January 2, 2021 were (in millions):
Compliance with Financial Covenants
The Credit Agreement and the Notes contain covenants under which we agree to maintain a minimum EBITDA-to-interest coverage ratio and maximum Debt-to-EBITDA ratio. We were in compliance with all financial covenants contained in the Notes and the Credit Agreement as of January 2, 2021.
Other Notes Payable
As of January 2, 2021, other notes payable of $4.6 million were outstanding with a weighted average interest rate of 4.9%. As of December 28, 2019, other notes payable of $4.5 million were outstanding with a weighted average rate of 5.0%.
Financing Arrangements Related to Rexnord Transaction
In connection with the Rexnord Transaction, on February 15, 2021, we entered into a debt commitment letter (the “Bridge Commitment Letter”) and related fee letters with Barclays Bank PLC (“Barclays”), pursuant to which, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein, Barclays committed to provide approximately $2.1 billion in an aggregate principal amount of senior bridge loans under a 364-day senior bridge loan credit facility (“Bridge Facility”). The proceeds of the loans under the Bridge Facility may be used by us to (i) pay the Company Special Dividend, (ii) redeem the Notes due in 2023 and (iii) to pay fees and expenses in connection with the Rexnord Transaction.
Further, we entered into an additional debt commitment letter (the “Backstop Commitment Letter”) and related fee letters with Barclays, pursuant to which, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein. In the event, we do not obtain certain required consents from the lenders under the Credit Agreement, we may enter into a 364-day senior bridge loan credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to approximately $1.1 billion to prepay in full the aggregate principal amount of loans outstanding under the Credit Agreement and accrued and unpaid interest thereon.
In connection with the Rexnord Transaction, Land also entered into a debt commitment letter (the “Land Commitment Letter”) and related fee letters with Barclays, pursuant to which, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein, Barclays committed to provide approximately $487.0 million of bridge loans under a 364-day senior bridge loan facility to be used to pay a dividend to a subsidiary of Rexnord required prior to the Reorganization. If the Rexnord Transaction is consummated, the indebtedness contemplated by the Land Commitment Letter will become indebtedness of a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company.
We anticipate incurring significant fees and expenses in connection with the Rexnord Transaction, the amount of which is uncertain. In addition, the amount of the Company Special Dividend depends on the number of additional shares of our common stock that must be issued in connection with the Rexnord Transaction in order to satisfy tax requirements applicable to a Reverse Morris Trust transaction. The size of the dividend that will ultimately be declared is uncertain and will remain so until the closing.
Other Disclosures
Based on rates for instruments with comparable maturities and credit quality, the approximate fair value of our total debt was $1,085.8 million and $1,162.1 million as of January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively.
Litigation
See Part 1 - Item 3 - Legal Proceedings for additional details.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The following is a summary of our contractual obligations and payments due by period as of January 2, 2021 (in millions):
(1) The timing and future spot prices affect the settlement values of our hedge obligations related to commodities and currency exchange rates. Accordingly, these obligations are not included above in the table of contractual obligations (See also