ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. You should read the “Special note regarding forward-looking statements” and "Risk Factors" section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
OVERVIEW
We are a vertically integrated medical device company focused on developing and commercializing innovative medical devices to treat people with obesity. Our current product offering is the Obalon Balloon System, the first and only U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, approved swallowable, gas-filled intragastric balloon designed to provide progressive and sustained weight loss in patients with obesity. We believe the Obalon Balloon System offers patients and physicians benefits over prior weight loss devices including, but not limited to, clinically meaningful weight loss, a favorable safety profile, improved patient tolerability and comfort, progressive weight loss with durable results, simple and convenient placement, and potentially attractive economics.
The Obalon Balloon System is FDA approved for temporary use to facilitate weight loss in adults with obesity having a body mass index, or BMI, of 30 to 40, or approximately 30 to 100 pounds overweight, who have failed to lose weight through diet and exercise. The system is intended to be used as an adjunct to a moderate intensity diet and behavior modification program. All balloons must be removed six months after the first balloon is placed. We believe the Obalon Balloon System provides a cost-effective, non-surgical and reversible treatment for weight loss solution in an outpatient setting.
The Obalon Balloon System consists of a swallowable capsule that contains an inflatable balloon attached to a microcatheter; the Obalon Navigation System console, which is a combination of hardware and software used to track and display the location of the balloon during placement without x-ray; the Obalon Touch Inflation Dispenser, which is a semi-automated, hand-held inflation device used to inflate the balloon once it is placed; and a disposable canister filled with our proprietary mixture of gas. Placement of a balloon typically occurs in less than 15 minutes and can be accomplished in an outpatient setting without the need for anesthesia or sedation. Patients receive a total of three balloons over the course of eight to 12 weeks and all balloons are removed six months after the first balloon is placed.
In clinical studies, the Obalon Balloon System has demonstrated clinically meaningful weight loss with durable results. In our published pivotal SMART trial, patients in the Obalon treatment group lost, on average, approximately twice as much body weight as patients in the sham-control group, with an average of 15.1 pounds of weight loss, resulting in an average 6.9% reduction in total body weight and an average 2.4 point decrease in BMI. In the study, 66.7% of patients lost at least 5% of their total body weight and the study showed statistically significant improvements in cardiometabolic risk factors, including fasting glucose, systolic blood pressure, cholesterol and triglycerides. Patients in the treatment group were followed for 48 weeks and showed, on average, that 89.5% of the weight loss achieved during the initial 24-week balloon treatment period was maintained at 48 weeks, or 24 weeks after the balloons were removed.
In addition, data published and presented from our commercial registry demonstrates greater weight loss in the commercial setting as compared to our pivotal clinical study used to support FDA approval. In May 2019, we updated data from our commercial registry to include 1,411 total patients from 143 treatment sites in the United States. In this data set, for those patients receiving three balloons and at least 20 weeks of therapy, the average weight loss was 21.7 pounds, resulting in a 10.2% reduction in total body weight. Of note, 50.7% of patients lost 10% or more total body weight and 77.9% lost 5% or more total body weight.
We commenced U.S. commercialization of our prior generation Obalon balloon system in January 2017. In March 2020, we announced that the overall economic uncertainty, the restriction on elective procedures and the specific directives issued by the Governor of California as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact on our business. As a result, we halted sales to new patients in our Obalon-branded retail treatment centers, terminated expansion plans for additional retail centers, subsequently closed the two retail treatment centers we had opened and halted manufacturing. Additionally, since August 2020, we have only had two full-time employees: Andy Rasdal, our President and Chief Executive Officer, and Nooshin Hussainy, our Chief Financial Officer. Although we scaled back operations, we continued to strive to execute on our corporate and strategic objectives. For example, we continue to pursue third-party reimbursement of the Obalon Balloon System, explore strategic alternatives, tend to our obligations to care for patients who had been treated at our Obalon-branded retail treatment centers, follow-up on and support product-related issues involving customers that have used Obalon products, and review and comply with our regulatory obligations, including FDA and SEC requirements.
Given those impacts and the significant concern about an economic recovery that would allow consumers to feel confident enough to spend on a cash-pay procedure like the Obalon Balloon System, we do not currently plan to re-open our retail treatment centers, re-initiate our retail treatment center expansion plans, or plan to ship orders to U.S. customers or our former international distributor. As a result, we would not expect to report any new revenue for the foreseeable future.
We generated total revenue of $1.6 million and $3.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our net loss was $12.3 million and $23.7 million, respectively. We have not been profitable since inception, and as of December 31, 2020, our accumulated deficit was $184.8 million. From inception through December 31, 2020, we have financed our operations primarily through private placements of our preferred stock, the sale of common stock in our IPO and in subsequent public and private placements, and, to a lesser extent, debt financing arrangements.
On April 22, 2020, we executed a promissory note in favor of Silicon Valley Bank evidencing an unsecured loan in the aggregate principal amount of $0.4 million, which was made pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program and which we refer to as the PPP Loan. The Paycheck Protection Program was established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, which was enacted on March 27, 2020 and is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. All the funds under the PPP Loan were disbursed to us on April 23, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $3.9 million.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we determined that the timeline for obtaining third-party reimbursement was longer than the cash runway available and we ceased our efforts related to reimbursement, including terminating its agreement with Blue Ox. We then focused its full efforts on consummating a strategic alternative transaction that would be in the best interest of our stockholders. On November 10, 2020, we signed a non-binding term sheet for merger with ReShape Lifesciences Inc. and, on January 20, 2021, announced that a definitive agreement had been signed on January 19, 2021 for a merger with ReShape Lifesciences Inc.
Landlord Dispute
On October 13, 2020, Gildred served the Company with an unlawful detainer action in the Superior Court of California, County of San Diego (Gildred Development Company v. Obalon Therapeutics, Inc., Case No. 37-2020-00035927-CU-UD-CTL). Gildred alleges that the Company owes more than $113,000 of unpaid rent and fees to Gildred and seeks damages for unpaid rent and continued occupancy of the premises. The Company believes Gildred’s claims are without merit and will defend vigorously against them. On November 18, 2020, Gildred filed an ex parte application for a writ of attachment or, in the alternative, a temporary protective order. The application was denied on November 24, 2020. On December 28, 2020, Gildred filed another application for a writ of attachment or, in the alternative, a temporary protective order. On January 22, 2021, the court granted Gildred’s application for a writ of attachment. Obalon has paid the amount of the writ in full, which was $338,000, and the parties are working toward a resolution of the action. The Company is current with its rent obligations under the lease with Gildred.
COMPONENTS OF OUR RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, revenue reflects sales of our Obalon Balloon System directly to physicians and institutions in the United States, sales of our Obalon Balloon System to our former Middle East distributors, and sales from patients treated at our Company-managed Obalon-branded retail center. We also generated revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 from reversing various reserves related to revenue from customer incentive programs, our swallow guarantee, and returns reserves as a result of terminating all our commercial operations and underlying programs.
We do not currently plan to re-open our retail treatment centers, re-initiate our retail treatment center expansion plans, restart manufacturing operations, or plan to ship orders to U.S. customers or our former international distributor. As a result, we would not expect to report any meaningful revenue for the foreseeable future.
To date we have experienced limited penetration of the U.S. market, and there are many factors that may impact our future results of operations, including: our ability to complete with the Merger with ReShape, establish insurance coverage and reimbursement for the Obalon Balloon System, our ability to successfully develop the intragastric balloon market (which is currently small and immature) and gain acceptance of our current Obalon Balloon System and its future iterations by doctors and patients, our ability to scale production in a cost effective manner or if at all should we restart manufacturing operations, the emergence of competing products, actions by regulatory bodies, and general economic trends. The amount of revenue and timing of revenue recognition may also be impacted by any future commercial model and customer incentive programs we decide to offer and the channels through which the revenue is derived.
Cost of revenue and gross margin
Cost of revenue consists primarily of costs related to the direct materials and direct labor that are used to manufacture our products and the overhead costs that directly support manufacturing. Currently, a significant portion of our cost of revenue consists of manufacturing overhead, which is mostly fixed in nature. These overhead costs include the costs of compensation for operations management, engineering support, material procurement and inventory control personnel, outside consultants, production related supplies, allocated quality assurance and facilities costs, and depreciation on production equipment. In the foreseeable future, our costs of revenue may be greater than our revenue as we focus on the Merger with ReShape and in the alternative, reimbursement activities rather than commercial sales.
We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by revenue. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, primarily production volumes, geographic mix, product mix, manufacturing costs, product yields, headcount and cost-reduction strategies. We expect gross margin to fluctuate from quarter to quarter due to variability of our recognized revenue, our adoption of new manufacturing processes and technologies, changes in our manufacturing capacity, and discontinuation of obsolete products. We have experienced challenges in our ability to produce finished goods, which may impact our ability to meet the demands for future commercial and clinical trials.
In March 2020, we suspended manufacturing of the Obalon Balloon System due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We restarted manufacturing on a limited basis in June 2020 to convert a small amount of work-in-progress inventory to finished goods, in order to have units available for clinical trials and unexpected physician sales, but did not continue manufacturing past July 30, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, our manufacturing operations have been suspended with no future plans for restarting.
Research and development expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses consist of the cost of engineering, clinical affairs, regulatory affairs and quality assurance associated with developing our Obalon Balloon System. R&D expenses consist primarily of:
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel expense and stock-based compensation expense;
● cost of outside consultants who assist with technology development, regulatory affairs, clinical affairs and quality assurance;
● cost of clinical trial activities performed by third-party medical partners; and
● cost of facilities, depreciation on R&D equipment and supplies used for internal research and development and clinical activities.
We expense R&D costs as incurred. We expect R&D expenses as a percentage of total revenue to vary over time depending on the level of revenue, the timing of our new product development efforts, as well as our clinical development, clinical trial, FDA required post approval studies and other related activities.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses consist of employee-related expenses, including salaries, commissions, benefits, travel expense and stock-based compensation expense. Other SG&A expenses include promotional and advertising activities, marketing, conferences and trade shows, professional services fees, including legal fees, accounting fees, insurance costs, general corporate expenses, and allocated facilities-related expenses. SG&A expenses decreased significantly starting in the second quarter of 2020 due to suspension of business operations and the reduction of employee personnel to only certain key employees. SG&A expenses are expected to remain significantly lower than historical averages until such time when business operations may resume.
Impairment Expense
In light of recent events associated with the global spread of COVID-19 and other factors, we recognized an impairment expense for impairment of inventory and long-lived assets pertaining our retail operations during the second quarter of 2020.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue, in accordance with ASC 606, when control of our products is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products. Our revenue recognition process involves identifying the contract with a customer, determining the performance obligations in the contract, determining the transaction price, allocating the transaction price to the distinct performance obligations in the contract, and recognizing revenue as performance obligations are satisfied. A performance obligation is considered distinct from other obligations in a contract when it provides a benefit to the customer either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and is separately identified in the contract. We consider a performance obligation satisfied once it has transferred control of a good or service to the customer, meaning the
customer has the ability to use and obtain the benefit of the good or service. We recognize revenue for satisfied performance obligations only when we determine there are no uncertainties regarding payment terms or transfer of control.
Revenue is primarily generated from sales of the Obalon Balloon System to physicians and institutions in the United States, patients treated at the Obalon branded retail center, and sales to distributors in the Middle East. In sales to these customers, we recognize revenue upon shipment of its product as our standard contract terms dictate that control transfers to the customer upon shipment of its product. Invoicing typically occurs upon shipment and the time period between invoicing and when payment is due is not significant. Sales taxes collected are excluded from revenues. Shipping charges billed to customers are included in revenue and related shipping cost is included in cost of revenue. Our revenue contracts do not provide for maintenance. Revenue generated from the treatment centers that began treating patients in October 2019 is recognized as the distinct service performance obligations are delivered to customers. Commissions are considered incremental costs to obtain a contract with a customer and paid to salespeople when contracts are executed. Commissions from both private practice and treatment center revenues are recognized as a selling expense when incurred as the amortization period is one year or less.
The components of the Obalon Balloon System, in sales to physicians and Middle East distributors, are typically packaged in a kit and shipped to the customer at the same time, satisfying the majority of performance obligations in the contract. Revenues from the treatment center are recognized as we deliver the distinct performance obligations. We record deferred revenue at the treatment center whenever we receive cash payments prior to the fulfillment of the distinct performance obligations. We recognize revenue for any unsatisfied, distinct performance obligations, such as undelivered components, as they are satisfied based on the estimated standalone selling price of each performance obligation. We estimate the standalone selling price of each performance obligation by estimating the expected cost of satisfying that performance obligation plus an appropriate margin and also third-party evidence from certain performance obligations from treatment center revenues.
When we enter into contracts with multiple performance obligations, such obligations are generally satisfied within a short time frame of approximately three to six months after the contract execution date. We do not disclose the value of the unsatisfied performance obligations within our contracts.
We offer a swallow guarantee program in the United States where it may provide replacement balloons to customers when their patients are unsuccessful in swallowing an Obalon balloon, subject to certain requirements and restrictions. We consider the replacement balloons provided under this program as an additional performance obligation in the contract and we defer revenue related to the replacement balloons based on an expected swallow failure rate and then recognizes revenue when replacement balloons are provided.
We recognize revenue at the net sales price, which reflects the consideration we believe we are most likely to receive. The net sales price includes estimates of variable consideration for customer incentives and returns. We reserve for product returns as a reduction to revenue in the period when the related revenue is recognized. We estimate our product returns based on historical return rates and specifically known events. Estimated costs of customer incentive programs are recorded at the time the incentives are offered, based on the specific terms and conditions of the program. Customer incentives that provide discounts to the customer on purchases of current or future product are recorded as a reduction of revenue in the period the related product revenue is recognized. Any consideration payable to a customer is presumed as a reduction to revenue unless we can demonstrate that the consideration provided to the customer is in exchange for a distinct good or service.
Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results vary from our estimates, we would adjust these estimates, which would impact net product revenue and results of operations in the period such variances become known.
Research and Development Costs
All research and development costs are charged to expense as incurred. Research and development expenses primarily include (i) payroll and related costs associated with research and development performed, (ii) costs related to clinical and preclinical testing of our technologies under development and (iii) other research and development expenses.
Leases
Effective January 1, 2019, we adopted ASC No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASU 2016-02” or “ASC 842”), which supersedes the current accounting for leases, using the modified retrospective transition method. We have elected to apply the practical expedients allowed by the standard for existing leases. The new standard, while retaining two distinct types of leases, finance and operating, (i) requires lessees to record a right-of-use (“ROU”) asset and a related liability for the rights and obligations associated with a lease, regardless of lease classification, and recognize lease expense in a manner similar to current accounting, (ii) eliminates current real estate specific lease provisions, (iii) modifies the lease classification criteria and (iv) aligns many of the underlying lessor model principles with those in the new revenue standard. We determine the initial classification and measurement of its ROU asset and lease liabilities at the lease commencement date and thereafter, if modified. We recognize a ROU asset for its operating leases with lease terms greater than 12 months. The lease term includes any renewal options and termination options that we are reasonably assured to exercise. The present value of lease payments is determined by using the incremental borrowing rate for operating leases determined by using the incremental borrowing rate of interest that we would pay to borrow on a collateralized basis an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment and term. We applied the new guidance to our existing facility lease at the time of adoption and recognized a ROU asset and lease liability of $0.0 million and $0.0 million, respectively, during the first quarter of 2020.
Rent expense for operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the reasonably assured lease term based on the total lease payments and is included in research and development and general and administrative expenses in the statements of operations.
Variable Interest Entities
We evaluate our ownership, contractual and other interests in entities that are not wholly-owned to determine if these entities are VIEs, and, if so, whether we are the primary beneficiary of the VIE. In determining whether we are the primary beneficiary of a VIE and therefore required to consolidate the VIE, we apply a qualitative approach that determines whether we have both (1) the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and (2) the obligation to absorb losses of, or the rights to receive benefits from, the VIE that could potentially be significant to that VIE. We continuously assesses whether we are the primary beneficiary of a VIE, as changes to existing relationships or future transactions may result in the consolidation or deconsolidation of such VIE.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue. Revenue decreased $1.7 million to $1.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. During the second quarter of 2020, we fundamentally changed our commercialization efforts and restructured operations, eliminating the field sales force and transitioned to a centralized customer support model to support our existing physician customers. We launched the first Obalon branded retail center during September 2019, as part of our strategy of shifting towards a retail treatment center business model, which we subsequently closed in the second quarter of 2020. As a result, revenue from U.S sales decreased $1.1 million stemming from selling fewer balloons in the U.S. Furthermore, sales to our Middle East distributors in 2020 declined $0.6 million over 2019 sales outside the U.S.
Cost of revenue and gross profit. Cost of revenue decreased $1.9 million to $1.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in production of products as we suspended operations and abandoned the retail treatment model in the second quarter of 2020. Gross margin decreased to 36.8% during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 10.1% during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and development expenses. R&D expenses decreased $4.4 million to $2.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $6.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was due primarily driven by a decrease of $3.9 million in payroll and R&D related project expenses and $0.5 million in stock-based compensation due to the significant reduction in operations and personnel related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. SG&A expenses decreased $7.9 million to $8.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $16.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease from the prior period was primarily driven by the significant reduction in operations and personnel related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The reduction in operations and personnel resulted in decreases of $3.2 million in spending on marketing due to the closures of the retail centers, $2.7 million in payroll and office related expenses, $1.5 million in stock-based compensation due to a reduction in headcount and $0.5 million in accounting and legal fees.
Asset impairment expenses and other charges. Asset impairment expenses and other charges increased $1.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to zero during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is due to the inventory and long-lived asset impairment charges recognized during the second quarter of 2020 as a result of our shift in business strategy away from the Obalon-branded retail center model to a reimbursement model strategy.
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net decreased $0.4 million to $0.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was attributable to paying off the Term Loan during the third quarter of 2019.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $3.9 million and an accumulated deficit of $184.8 million. Our primary sources of capital have been private placements of our preferred securities, the sale of common stock in our initial Public Offering or IPO, in October 2016, a subsequent private placement in August 2018, and various equity financings in 2019 including a follow-on offering in August 2019, and, to a lesser extent, debt financing arrangements. We are continuing to significantly reduce expenditures to extend our cash runway during the suspension of our business operations. From January 1, 2021 through March 2, 2021, the Company’s warrant holders covering 2.3 million shares exercised the warrants and common stock was issued in exchange for proceeds of $9.5 million. We believe our current cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 and cash received from exercise of warrants in the first quarter of 2021 are sufficient to fund our operations through the end of March 2022.
In late 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China. Since then, COVID-19 has spread globally. To date, COVID-19 has had, and will continue to have, an adverse impact on our operations and expenses as a result of the preventive and precautionary measures that we, our customers, other businesses, and governments are taking, including the deferral of elective medical procedures and diversion of capital and other resources. In March 2020, we suspended all new patient treatments at our Obalon-branded retail centers due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We have taken further steps to significantly reduce expenses in an effort to extend our cash runway while we evaluate potential business options, strategic alternatives and the potential for third-party payer reimbursement that may be available when and if the current COVID-19 crisis stabilizes and the economy rebounds. We have significantly reduced the organization to only essential personnel and since August 2020, only two full-time employees remain. All Obalon-branded retail centers have been shut down with no intention to reopen, and we have halted plans for future retail center expansion. We do not expect to restart shipments to U.S. customers and we have terminated the agreement with our international distributor, Al Danah Medical Company W.L.L. The decision to shift our strategy to focus on pursuing reimbursement, while also evaluating other strategic options, occurred after the end of the first quarter of 2020. Since reducing our personnel to two full time employees, we have continued to seek strategic alternatives that may be in the best interest of our stockholders, while we pursue third-party payor reimbursement and coverage for the Obalon Balloon System. If we are unsuccessful in those two endeavors over the next several months, there is a high likelihood we may need to liquidate all or some of our assets or seek bankruptcy protection which could result in significant decrease in value for all stakeholders.
Although we have scaled back operations, we continue our operations and strive to execute on our corporate and strategic objectives. For example, we tend to our obligations to care for patients treated at the Obalon Centers for Weight Loss, follow-up on and support product-related issues involving customers that have used Obalon products, review and comply with our regulatory obligations, including FDA and SEC requirements, and will continued to pursue third-party reimbursement of the Obalon Balloon System. We have also sought strategic alternatives and on January 19, 2020 entered into the Merger Agreement with ReShape and have suspended reimbursement activities to focus primarily on consummating the Merger.
On April 22, 2020, we executed a promissory note in favor of Silicon Valley Bank evidencing an unsecured loan in the aggregate principal amount of $0.4 million, which was made pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program and which we refer to as the PPP Loan. The Paycheck Protection Program was established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, which was enacted on March 27, 2020, and is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. All the funds under the PPP Loan were disbursed to us on April 23, 2020. The Note provides for a fixed interest rate of one percent per year with a maturity date of April 22, 2022 (the “Maturity Date”). Loan payments may be deferred until August 2021, which date is 10 months after the end of our 24-week covered period for the PPP Loan. If we apply for loan forgiveness, loan payments may be deferred until the SBA remits our loan forgiveness amount to the lender. As of December 31, 2020, we have not applied for loan forgiveness. The PPP Loan may be prepaid at any time prior to the Maturity Date with no prepayment penalties or premiums. The Note contains customary event of default provisions.
Under the terms of the CARES Act, PPP loan recipients can apply for and be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of the loans granted under the PPP. Such forgiveness will be subject to approval by the SBA and the Lender and determined, subject to limitations, based on factors set forth in the CARES Act, including verification of the use of loan proceeds for payment of payroll costs and payments of mortgage interest, rent and utilities. In the event the PPP Loan, or any portion thereof, is forgiven, the amount forgiven is applied to outstanding principal. The terms of any forgiveness may also be subject to further regulations and guidelines that the SBA may adopt. We will carefully monitor all qualifying expenses and other requirements necessary to attain loan forgiveness; however, no assurance is provided that we will obtain forgiveness of the PPP Loan in whole or in part. We have used all proceeds to date from the PPP Loan to retain employees, maintain payroll and make lease and utility payments. We have not filed for forgiveness and the loan will be repayable in full in the event of a change of control, such as the proposed Merger, unless the lender agrees to transfer the loan.
Public Offering
On August 1, 2019, we entered into an underwriting agreement with A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners, as underwriter, in connection with a public offering of our securities, pursuant to which we issued and sold (i) 2,427,500 shares of our common stock (including 412,500 shares of common stock pursuant to the partial exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option to purchase 562,500 additional shares), (ii) pre-funded warrants to purchase up to 1,735,000 shares of our common stock , (iii) accompanying warrants to purchase up to 3,234,375 shares of our common stock (including the exercise in full of the underwriters’ over-allotment option to purchase additional warrants to purchase 421,875 shares of common stock) and (iv) an additional warrant to the underwriters for the purchase of 37,500 shares of our common stock resulting in net proceeds from the offering of approximately $14.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us. Each share of common stock and each prefunded warrant was sold together with a purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase 0.75 of a share of common stock. The common stock and accompanying purchase warrants were sold together at a public offering price of $4.00, and the pre-funded warrant and accompanying purchase warrants were sold at a public offering price of $3.999. The purchase warrants were immediately exercisable upon issuance, will expire on August 6, 2024 and have an exercise price of $4.40 and the underwriter warrant has an exercise price of $5.00 per share, in each case subject to adjustment in the event of stock dividends, stock splits, stock combinations, reclassifications, reorganizations or similar events. The underwriter warrant became exercisable in February 2020 and expires on August 6, 2024. All of the pre-funded warrants were exercised during the third quarter of 2019. None of the purchase or underwriter warrants have been exercised as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, none of the purchase or underwriter warrants have been were exercised, however, since December 31, 2020, we received proceeds of approximately $9.5 million as a result of the exercise of 2.3 million purchase warrants as of December 31, 2020.
Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement
On February 5, 2020, we entered into a new purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) and registration rights agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”), pursuant to which Lincoln Park has committed to purchase up to $15.0 million of our common stock, $0.001 par value per share (the “Common Stock”). The new Purchase Agreement replaces an existing purchase agreement, dated December 27, 2018, by and between us and Lincoln Park, pursuant to which Lincoln Park committed to purchase up to $20.0 million of our Common Stock. In connection with entering into the new Purchase Agreement, we terminated the prior purchase agreement with Lincoln Park, effective February 5, 2020.
Under the terms and subject to the conditions of the Purchase Agreement, we have the right, but not the obligation, to sell to Lincoln Park, and Lincoln Park is obligated to purchase up to $15.0 million of our Common Stock. Such sales of common stock by us, if any, will be subject to certain limitations, and may occur from time to time, at our sole discretion, over the 36-month period commencing on February 28, 2020 date that a registration statement covering the resale of shares of Common Stock that have been and may be issued under the Purchase Agreement, which we agreed to file with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, was declared effective by the SEC and a final prospectus in connection therewith was filed and the other conditions set forth in the purchase agreement were satisfied (such date on which all of such conditions are satisfied, the “Commencement Date”).
We incurred approximately $0.3 million of legal, accounting, and other fees related to the offering. As of December 31, 2020 we have not sold any shares under the Purchase Agreement to Lincoln Park. As a result, we fully expensed the $0.3 million of fees in March 2020.
CASH FLOWS
The following table provides a summary of the net cash flow activity for each of the periods set forth below (in thousands):
Net cash used in operating activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $10.4 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $12.3 million, an increase in net operating assets of $1.4 million primarily related to a decrease in accrued compensation as a result of the reduction in full-time employees to two as of December 31, 2020. These items were further offset by non-cash charges of $3.3 million, consisting primarily of stock-based compensation expense, depreciation expense, impairment of long-lived assets and amortization expense of right-of-use assets.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was $22.9 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $23.7 million, partially offset by a decrease in net operating assets of $3.3 million primarily related to a decrease in accrued compensation as a result of the April 2019 internal restructuring. These items were further offset by non-cash charges of $4.1 million, consisting primarily of stock-based compensation expense, depreciation expense, and amortization expense of right-of-use assets.
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $0.2 million, consisting of monies used to purchase equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by investing activities was $2.4 million, consisting primarily of maturities of short-term investments, partially offset by purchases of short-term investments and capital expenditures.
Net cash provided by financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $0.4 million, consisting of proceeds from the Payment Protection Program loan.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $13.4 million, consisting primarily of proceeds from issuance of common stock (net of issuance costs) of $17.0 million, proceeds from the exercise of prefunded warrants of $6.4 million, and proceeds from the long-term loan of $10.0 million, offset by payments of the long-term loan of $20.0 million.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We currently have no off-balance sheet arrangements, such as structured finance, special purpose entities or variable interest entities.
EFFECTS OF INFLATION
We do not believe that inflation and changing prices had a significant impact on our results of operations for any periods presented herein.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 2-Recent Accounting Pronouncements” of our annual financial statements.
JOBS ACT ACCOUNTING ELECTION
In April 2012, the JOBS Act was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected not to avail ourselves of this extended transition period and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other public companies.