Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2019
During the year ended March 31, 2020, we generated revenue of $328,580. Our cost of goods sold was $307,280, resulting in gross margin of $21,300. We incurred total operating expenses of $968,540, consisting of consulting fees of $162,435, executive compensation of $101,000, general and administrative expenses of $345,157, legal and professional fees of $195,855, bad debt expense of $21,362, advertising and promotion costs of $66,838, asset impairment of $69,113 and depreciation and amortization of $6,780. In addition, we incurred interest expense of $906,177, default penalties of $301,980, financing costs of $496,784, a loss on the change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $821,961, a net loss on extinguishment of debt of $1,447 and other income of $112. Our net loss for the year ended March 31, 2020 was $3,475,477.
By comparison, during the year ended March 31, 2019, we generated revenue of $255,821. Our cost of goods sold was $168,918, resulting in gross margin of $86,903. We incurred total operating expenses of $5,103,370, consisting of consulting fees of $3,190,800, executive compensation of $1,102,858, general and administrative expenses of $446,894, legal and professional fees of $124,269, bad debt expense of $95,632, advertising and promotion costs of $86,963, and depreciation and amortization of $2,888. In addition, we incurred interest expense of $459,062, default penalties of $298,600, financing costs of $1,676,568, and a gain on the change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $1,365,539. Our net loss for the year ended March 31, 2019 was $6,085,157.
Our expenses decreased during the year ended March 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, largely as a result of decreased costs for legal, professional, and consulting fees as well as a significant decrease in financing costs incurred for debt funding received in the current year. As we continue with the development and marketing of our new health food and planned bottled water products, we expect that our expenses, as well as our revenues, will increase significantly over the current fiscal year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of March 31, 2020, we had current assets in the amount of $124,720, consisting of cash in the amount of $67,153, accounts receivable, net of allowance, of $7,169, prepaid expenses of $34,862 and inventory of $15,536.
As of March 31, 2020, we had current liabilities of $2,375,199, consisting of notes payable of $299,000, convertible debts, net of discounts, in the amount of $275,941, derivative liability of $1,574,097, accounts payable of $109,243, accrued interest of $71,318, and current portion of lease liability of $45,600.
We have funded our operations to date through the issuance of common stock in offerings exempt under Rule 506, as well as through the issuance of notes payable and convertible notes payable.
Our ability to successfully execute our business plan is contingent upon us obtaining additional financing and/or upon realizing sales revenue sufficient to fund our ongoing expenses. Until we are able to sustain our ongoing operations through sales revenue, we intend to fund operations through debt and/or equity financing arrangements, which may be insufficient to fund our capital expenditures, working capital, or other cash requirements. We do not have any formal commitments or arrangements for the sales of stock or the advancement or loan of funds at this time. There can be no assurance that such additional financing will be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of March 31, 2020, there were no off balance sheet arrangements.
Going Concern
We have experienced recurring losses from operations and had an accumulated deficit of $13,661,579 as of March 31, 2020. To date, we have not been able to produce sufficient sales to become cash flow positive and profitable on a consistent basis. The success of our business plan during the next 12 months and beyond will be contingent upon generating sufficient revenue to cover our costs of operations and/or upon obtaining additional financing. If the Company raises additional funds through the issuance of equity, the percentage ownership of current shareholders could be reduced, and such securities might have rights, preferences or privileges senior to the rights, preferences and privileges of the Company’s common stock. Additional financing may not be available upon acceptable terms, or at all. If adequate funds are not available or are not available on acceptable terms, the Company may not be able to take advantage of prospective business endeavors or opportunities, which could significantly and materially restrict its future plans for developing its business and achieving commercial revenues. If the Company is unable to obtain the necessary capital, the Company may have to cease operations.
Critical Accounting Policies
In December 2001, the SEC requested that all registrants list their most "critical accounting polices" in the Management Discussion and Analysis. The SEC indicated that a "critical accounting policy" is one which is both important to the portrayal of a company's financial condition and results, and requires management's most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. We do not believe that the following accounting policies currently fit this definition.
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements of the Company include the accounts of Right On Brands, Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries (Humbly Hemp, Inc., Endo Brands, Inc. and Humble Water Company). Intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated upon consolidation.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid debt instruments purchased with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost. Depreciation is provided by the straight-line method over the useful lives of the related assets, from three to five years.
The cost of building the Company's website has been capitalized and amortized over a period of three years. Expenditures for minor enhancements and maintenance are expensed as incurred.
Inventory
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (average cost) or market (net realizable value). Inventory consisted of raw materials and finished goods inventory of $3,921 and $11,615, respectively, as of March 31, 2020. Inventory consisted of raw materials, work in process inventory and finished goods inventory of $43,796, $30,611 and $139,550, respectively, as of March 31, 2019.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Long-lived Assets
The Company's long-lived assets and other assets (consisting of property and equipment) are reviewed for impairment in accordance with the guidance of the FASB Topic ASC 360," Property, Plant, and Equipment", and FASB ASC Topic 205 " Presentation of Financial Statements ". The Company tests for impairment losses on long-lived assets used in operations whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of an asset to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to the future undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such asset is considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value. Impairment evaluations involve management's estimates on asset useful lives and future cash flows. Actual useful lives and cash flows could be different from those estimated by management which could have a material effect on our reporting results and financial positions. Fair value is determined through various valuation techniques including discounted cash flow models, quoted market values and third-party independent appraisals, as considered necessary. Through March 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had not experienced impairment losses on its long-lived assets. However, there can be no assurances that demand for the Company's products or services will continue, which could result in an impairment of long-lived assets in the future.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for equity instruments issued in exchange for the receipt of goods or services from other than employees in accordance with FASB ASC 505-50. Costs are measured at the estimated fair market value of the consideration received or the estimated fair value of the equity instruments issued, whichever is more reliably measurable. The value of equity instruments issued for consideration other than employee services is determined on the earliest of a performance commitment or completion of performance by the provider of goods or services as defined by FASB ASC 505-50.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when our performance obligation is satisfied. Our primary performance obligation (the distribution and sales of hemp products) is satisfied upon the shipment or delivery of products to our customers, which is also when control is transferred. The transfer of control of products to our customers is typically based on written sales terms that do not allow for a right of return after 30 days from the date of purchase.
Our products are sold for cash or on credit terms. Our credit terms, which are established in accordance with local and industry practices, typically require payment within 30 days of delivery, and may allow discounts for early payment. We estimate and reserve for our bad debt exposure based on our experience with past due accounts and collectability, the aging of accounts receivable and our analysis of customer data.
On April 1, 2018 the Company adopted ASU 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606)” using the modified retrospective method. Adoption of the new revenue standard had no impact on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet, results of operations, equity (deficit) or cash flows as of the adoption date and the Company does not expect and further material impact to its consolidated financial statements on an ongoing basis as a result of adopting the revenue standard.
Income Taxes
The Company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes. In accordance with FASB ASC Topic 740, "Income Taxes," the Company provides for the recognition of deferred tax assets if realization of such assets is more likely than not. The Company accounts for income tax under the provisions of FASB ASC Topic 740, "Income Taxes", which requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of the events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Deferred income taxes are recognized for all significant temporary differences between tax and financial statements bases of assets and liabilities. Valuation allowances are established against net deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company applies the provisions of accounting guidance, FASB Topic ASC 825 that requires all entities to disclose the fair value of financial instruments, both assets and liabilities recognized and not recognized on the balance sheet, for which it is practicable to estimate fair value, and defines fair value of a financial instrument as the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties. As of March 31, 2020 and 2019 the fair value of cash and accounts payable, approximated carrying value due to the short maturity of the instruments, quoted market prices or interest rates which fluctuate with market rates.
Convertible Instruments
The Company evaluates and account for conversion options embedded in convertible instruments in accordance with ASC 815 " Derivatives and Hedging Activities".
Applicable GAAP requires companies to bifurcate conversion options from their host instruments and account for them as free standing derivative financial instruments according to certain criteria. The criteria include circumstances in which (a) the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative instrument are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract, (b) the hybrid instrument that embodies both the embedded derivative instrument and the host contract is not re-measured at fair value under other GAAP with changes in fair value reported in earnings as they occur and (c) a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative instrument would be considered a derivative instrument.
The Company accounts for convertible instruments (when it has been determined that the embedded conversion options should not be bifurcated from their host instruments) as follows: The Company records when necessary, discounts to convertible notes for the intrinsic value of conversion options embedded in debt instruments based upon the differences between the fair value of the underlying common stock at the commitment date of the note transaction and the effective conversion price embedded in the note. Debt discounts under these arrangements are amortized over the term of the related debt to their stated date of redemption.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Our management has considered all recent accounting pronouncements issued since the last audit of our financial statements. Our management believes that these recent pronouncements will not have a material effect on our financial statements.