Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company that is genetically engineering red blood cells to create an entirely new class of cellular medicines called Red Cell Therapeutics (RCTs). Based on the premise that human red blood cells are the foundation of the next significant innovation in medicine, we have designed a proprietary and highly versatile platform, called the RED PLATFORM, to genetically engineer and culture RCTs that are selective, potent and ready-to-use cellular therapies for the treatment of cancer and autoimmune diseases.
In 2020, we demonstrated strong execution across our pipeline of Red Cell Therapeutics. During the year, we received clearance of our Investigational New Drug (IND) applications for our two lead oncology programs, RTX-240 and our lead artificial antigen presenting cell, or aAPC, program, RTX-321. We are currently dosing patients in the Phase 1/2 clinical trial in relapsed/refractory or locally advanced solid tumors and expect to report clinical results in early 2021 and present the findings at an upcoming scientific conference. We are also enrolling patients in the Phase 1 clinical trial of RTX-240 for relapsed/refractory acute myeloid leukemia (AML). We believe that by demonstrating that RTX-240 is working as intended to induce anti-tumor innate and adaptive immunity, we can unlock the potential of the RED PLATFORM across our entire pipeline of cancer and autoimmune programs.
We are also screening patients in Phase 1 clinical trial for RTX-321 for the treatment of patients with human papillomavirus (HPV) 16-positive cancers. Additionally, we operationalized our manufacturing facility in Smithfield, Rhode Island, which is currently providing cGMP supply for these three ongoing clinical trials. Finally, we continue to advance our earlier-stage autoimmune program in Type I diabetes and explore ways in which to apply the RED PLATFORM across the remainder of our pipeline.
Highlights of our most advanced product candidates, RTX-240 and RTX-321, are described further below.
RTX-240
We are currently enrolling patients in a Phase 1/2 clinical trial evaluating RTX-240. The study contains two Phase 1 dose escalation arms: one in patients with relapsed/refractory or locally advanced solid tumors and another in patients with relapsed/refractory AML. RTX-240 is an allogeneic, off-the-shelf cellular therapy product candidate that is engineered to replicate human immune system function by stimulating adaptive and innate immunity to generate an anti-tumor immune response. As shown in preclinical studies, RTX-240 expresses hundreds of thousands of copies of the costimulatory molecule 4-1BB ligand (4-1BBL) and the cytokine IL-15TP (a fusion of IL-15 and IL-15 receptor alpha) on the cell surface in their native forms. By activating existing agonist pathways, RTX-240 has the potential to enhance potency and improve anti-tumor activity, overcome resistance to immunotherapy and have a reduced toxicity profile given its biodistribution in the vasculature and the spleen.
In January 2020, we announced initial clinical data from the solid tumor trial shows that RTX-240 stimulates innate and adaptive immunity, supporting proof of mechanism. Key takeaways from the initial data showed:
● no treatment-related Grade 3 or Grade 4 adverse events and no dose limiting toxicities observed (n=14);
● all patients showed activation of NK or T cells or both cell types (n=14); and
● in the majority of patients (n=8), activation and expansion of both NK cells and T cells were observed across dose levels.
As more patients are enrolled and data mature, we expect to disclose in early 2021, and submit for presentation at a scientific conference, additional clinical results, including:
● additional safety and tolerability data;
● biomarkers associated with the activation and expansion of NK and T cells in peripheral blood;
● immune cell trafficking into tumors assessed by optional tumor biopsies from participating patients; and
● potential responses as measured by objective response rate.
Additionally, we have escalated the dose and continue to enroll patients in a second Phase 1 arm of the ongoing Phase 1/2 RTX-240 clinical trial for the treatment of relapsed/refractory AML. NK cells can exhibit potent anti-tumor activity against AML, but tumor-associated mechanisms often suppress the proper function of NK cells leading to disease progression. When NK cells are restored to their full anti-tumor potential, their cytolytic activity predicts a better long-term outcome for patients with AML. RTX-240 is designed to induce NK and T cell activation and proliferation, leading to the killing of AML cells.
In November 2020, we presented preclinical data from our lead clinical oncology product candidate, RTX-240, at the Society for Immunotherapy of Cancer’s Annual Meeting, demonstrating the following:
● RTX-240 increased CD8 T cell and NK cell expansion and activation in vitro when compared to a 4-1BB agonist antibody and recombinant IL-15, which was directly correlated with the percentage of 4-1BBL and IL-15TP expressed on the cell surface;
● RTX-240 expanded CD56dim NK cells, a cell population with known cytotoxicity;
● RTX-240 promoted NK cell-killing of a myeloid leukemia cell line, K562, which was accompanied by increased NK cell degranulation and activation;
● a murine surrogate for RTX-240, mRBC-240, promoted significant expansion of CD8 T cells and NK cells in vivo in a murine model of CT26 colorectal cancer; and
● mRBC-240 demonstrated potent antitumor activity in a B16F10 melanoma model that was directly correlated with the expansion of terminally differentiated NK cells in the tumors.
RTX-321
We are screening patients in a Phase 1 clinical trial for RTX-321 for the treatment of patients with human papillomavirus (HPV) 16-positive cancers. RTX-321 is an allogeneic, off-the-shelf artificial antigen-presenting cell (aAPC) therapy product candidate that is engineered to induce a tumor-specific immune response by expanding antigen-specific T cells. RTX-321 expresses hundreds of thousands of copies of an HPV peptide antigen bound to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I proteins, the costimulatory molecule 4-1BBL and the cytokine IL-12 on the cell surface to
mimic human T cell-APC interactions. As part of our IND filing, we included frozen drug substance for the first time as part of the manufacturing process, allowing a truly off-the-shelf cellular therapy product candidate with a potential shelf life of several years based on preliminary stability data.
HPV 16 is associated with approximately 70% of cervical cancers, approximately 40% of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) arising in the oropharynx, approximately 25%-40% of HNSCC arising in other locations and approximately 80%-85% of anal cancers. A critical need remains for better treatment options for advanced HPV 16 associated cancers. The prognosis remains poor for patients with metastatic disease with few treatment options beyond the first-line setting.
In November 2020, we presented preclinical data at the Federation of Clinical Immunology Societies Annual Meeting and the American Association of Cancer Research Tumor Immunology and Immunotherapy Conference, from our lead aAPC program, RTX-321, for the treatment of HPV 16-positive tumors, and demonstrating the following:
● RTX-321 and its mouse surrogates demonstrated a dual mechanism of action in vivo and in vitro:
o functions as an aAPC to boost HPV 16 E7-specific CD8+ T-cell responses; and
o promotes HPV 16-independent stimulation of innate (NK cells) and adaptive immune (non-HPV antigen-specific CD8+ T cells) responses;
● mouse surrogates of RTX-321 promote tumor control, memory formation and epitope spreading in tumor models in vivo;
● treatment with the RTX-321 mouse surrogate results in minimal, reversible effects in vivo (body weight change, IFNγ and ALT levels);
● RTX-321 functions as an aAPC to boost HPV 16 antigen-specific T cells in vitro; and
● RTX-321 promotes HPV 16-independent adaptive and innate immune responses in vitro.
Taken together, we believe these findings support the potential of RTX-321 as an effective therapy for the treatment of HPV 16+ cancers.
Manufacturing
We have generated hundreds of RCTs using our RED PLATFORM and are utilizing our universal engineering and manufacturing processes to advance a broad pipeline of RCT product candidates into clinical trials in cancer and autoimmune diseases. Common design and manufacturing elements of our RCTs should enable us to achieve significant advantages in product development. Recognizing the importance of controlling our own manufacturing capabilities to produce consistent and reproducible product at greater scale, we acquired, renovated and operationalized a manufacturing facility in Smithfield, RI, that is are currently providing cGMP supply for our three ongoing Phase 1 clinical trials for RTX-240 in advanced solid tumors, RTX-240 in relapsed/refractory AML and RTX-321 in HPV-16-positive cancers. During 2020, the site achieved the following milestones:
● increased productivity in manufacturing of cGMP supply of RTX-240 in 50L bioreactors;
● increased RTX-240 liquid in-vial shelf life from 28 to 52 days;
● for RTX-240, continuously met red blood cell identity (CD233+, mean corpuscular hemoglobin, purity, enucleation cell population) and target product profile criteria (protein expression, cell viability) for clinical supply lots; and
● introduced frozen drug substance for the first time as part of the IND application for RTX-321, resulting in a truly off-the-shelf cellular therapy with a potential shelf life of up to several years. Following liquid reformulation, RTX-321 drug product has an in-vial shelf life of 52 days.
Since our inception, we have focused substantially all of our resources on building our proprietary RED PLATFORM, establishing and protecting our intellectual property portfolio, conducting research and development activities, developing our manufacturing process and manufacturing drug product material, organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital and providing general and administrative support for these operations. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. To date, we have funded our operations with proceeds from the sale of preferred stock and issuance of debt and with proceeds from our initial public offering, or IPO. On July 20, 2018, we completed our IPO pursuant to which we issued and sold 12,055,450 shares of common stock, inclusive of 1,572,450 shares pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares. We received proceeds of $254.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering costs. In August 2019, we entered into a Distribution Agreement with J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, Jefferies LLC and SVB Leerink LLC with respect to an at-the-market, or ATM, offering program under which we may offer and sell, from time to time at our sole discretion, shares of our common stock, having aggregate gross proceeds of up to $100.0 million. We have not yet sold any shares of our common stock under the ATM offering program.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our ability to generate any product revenue or product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. We reported net losses of $167.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $163.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $480.5 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for at least the next several years. We expect that our expenses and capital requirements will increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly if, and as, we:
● conduct clinical trials for our product candidates and to the extent we experience any delays, setbacks or disruptions to our preclinical studies, clinical trials or clinical supply chain due to the COVID-19 pandemic;
● further develop our RED PLATFORM;
● continue to discover and develop additional product candidates;
● maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
● hire additional clinical, scientific manufacturing and commercial personnel;
● expand in-house manufacturing capabilities, including through the operation and any future renovation or expansion of our manufacturing facility;
● establish a commercial manufacturing source and secure supply chain capacity sufficient to provide commercial quantities of any product candidates for which we may obtain regulatory approval;
● acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
● seek regulatory approvals for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
● establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any products for which we may obtain regulatory approval; and
● add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and planned future commercialization efforts, as well as to continue to support the requirements of a public company.
We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing and distribution. Further, we expect to continue to incur costs associated with operating as a public company.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of private or public equity financings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we are unable to obtain funding, we plan to implement an operating plan that scales back our operations and focuses our available capital on a reduced number of activities and programs, which we believe will enable the continued advancement of certain of our research and development programs and the preservation of our technology platform. These actions could adversely affect our business prospects.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with pharmaceutical product development, we are unable to accurately predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when, or if, we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $176.3 million. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments will enable us to fund our operating expenses, capital expenditure requirements and debt service payments into the first quarter of 2022. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Recent Developments
In March 2020, we began precautionary measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, partners and prospective clinical trial participants during the novel coronavirus, or COVID-19, pandemic. Because COVID-19 infections have been reported throughout the United States and worldwide, numerous national, state and local governmental authorities have issued orders, proclamations and/or directives aimed at minimizing the spread of COVID-19. Additional, more restrictive orders, proclamations and/or directives may be issued in the future. As a result, we have eliminated business travel and substantially reduced the number of employees working on-site at any one time at each of our facilities by shifting to remote work wherever possible and implementing rotating laboratory work schedules. In addition, the conduct of our clinical studies with our external partners has been adjusted to institute virtual clinical trial site training and site monitoring, along with partnering with sites to minimize patient visits and institute telemedicine to minimize patient exposure. These precautionary measures will remain in place until such time as the COVID-19 pandemic is contained.
While the COVID-19 pandemic did not significantly impact our results of operations during 2020, the ultimate impact on our operations is unknown and will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the COVID-19 outbreak, new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, and any additional preventative and protective actions that governments, or we, may direct, which may result in an extended period of continued business disruption, reduced patient traffic and reduced operations. In particular, the speed of the continued spread of COVID-19 globally, and the magnitude of interventions to contain the spread of the virus, such as government-imposed quarantines, including shelter-in-place mandates, sweeping restrictions on travel, mandatory shutdowns for non-essential businesses, requirements regarding social distancing, distribution of vaccines, and other public health safety measures, will determine the impact of the pandemic on our business. We are continuing to monitor the latest developments regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects. However, any resulting financial impact cannot be reasonably estimated at this time and may have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
During 2020, we strengthened our leadership team by hiring Christina Coughlin, M.D., Ph.D., as Chief Medical Officer, Laurence Turka, M.D., as Chief Scientific Officer, and Jose Carmona as Chief Financial Officer. Our leadership team has extensive experience in oncology, immunology, and cell therapy drug discovery and development.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the near future. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval or license or collaboration agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales, payments from collaboration or license agreements that we may enter into with third parties, or any combination thereof.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development and manufacturing of our product candidates, which include:
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions;
● expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates and research programs, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors and contract research organizations, or CROs;
● the cost of developing and scaling our manufacturing process and manufacturing drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors and any contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, that we may engage, as well as in our manufacturing facility;
● laboratory supplies and research materials;
● facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and insurance; and
● payments made under third-party licensing agreements.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Advance payments that we make for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. The prepaid amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
Our direct research, manufacturing and development expenses are tracked on a program-by-program basis for clinical candidates. These consist mostly of fees, reimbursed materials, testing and other costs paid to consultants, contractors, CMOs and CROs, as well as the cost of materials incurred for internal manufacturing. In addition, starting in the first quarter of 2020, we allocate the cost of operating our manufacturing facility to research and development program costs, consisting of associated personnel costs, other than stock-based compensation expense, and manufacturing facility costs, including depreciation. We do not allocate costs associated with our platform development, early stage research and shared research and development, including associated personnel costs, laboratory supplies, non-manufacturing facilities expenses and other indirect costs, to research and development programs, because these costs are deployed across multiple programs and our technology platform and, as such, are not separately classified.
Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase substantially in connection with our planned preclinical and clinical development activities in the future. At this time, we cannot accurately estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development of any of our product candidates. The successful development and commercialization of our product candidates is highly uncertain. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development and commercialization, including the following:
● the timing and progress of preclinical and clinical development activities;
● the number and scope of preclinical and clinical programs we decide to pursue;
● raising additional funds necessary to complete preclinical and clinical development of and commercialize our drug candidates;
● the progress of the development efforts of parties with whom we may enter into collaboration arrangements;
● our ability to maintain our current research and development programs and to establish new ones;
● our ability to establish new licensing or collaboration arrangements;
● the successful initiation and completion of clinical trials with safety, tolerability and efficacy profiles that are satisfactory to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, or any comparable foreign regulatory authority;
● the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations;
● the receipt and related terms of regulatory approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● the availability of specialty raw materials for use in production of our product candidates;
● our ability to consistently manufacture our product candidates for use in clinical trials;
● our ability to operate a manufacturing facility, or secure manufacturing supply through relationships with third parties;
● our ability to obtain and maintain patents, trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity, both in the United States and internationally;
● our ability to protect our rights in our intellectual property portfolio;
● the commercialization of our product candidates, if and when approved;
● obtaining and maintaining third-party insurance coverage and adequate reimbursement;
● the acceptance of our product candidates, if approved, by patients, the medical community and third-party payors;
● competition with other products; and
● a continued acceptable safety profile of our therapies following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include direct and allocated facility-related costs, as well as professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, investor and public relations, accounting and audit services. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses may increase in the future as we continue to build infrastructure to support the expansion of our research activities, development of our product candidates and any expanded compliance requirements.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our invested cash balances.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest expense on outstanding borrowings under our loan and security agreements, as well as amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs.
Change in Fair Value of Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
In connection with our 2015 loan and security agreement with Pacific Western Bank, we issued warrants to purchase Series A and Series B preferred stock. We classified these warrants as a liability on our consolidated balance sheet that we remeasured to fair value at each reporting date, and we recognized changes in the fair value of the warrant liability as a component of other income (expense) in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Upon the closing of our IPO in July 2018, the preferred stock warrants became exercisable for common stock instead of preferred stock and were concurrently exercised by the holders. As a result, the fair value of the warrants was reclassified to additional paid-in capital and we no longer have a warrant liability to remeasure.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists of income earned under a sublease agreement and miscellaneous income and expense unrelated to our core operations.
Income Taxes
Since our inception, we have not recorded any income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred in each year or for our research and development tax credits generated, as we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all of our net operating loss, or NOL, carryforwards and tax credits will not be realized. As of December 31, 2020, we had U.S. federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of $357.3 million and $360.1 million, respectively, which may be available to offset future taxable income. The federal NOLs include $37.2 million, which expire at various dates through 2037, and $320.1 million, which carryforward indefinitely. The state NOLs expire at various dates through 2040. As of December 31, 2020, we also had U.S. federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $15.3 million and $9.0 million, respectively, which may be available to offset future tax liabilities and begin to expire in 2034 and 2026, respectively. We have recorded a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets at each balance sheet date.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $116.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $112.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in direct costs related to our rare disease program of $19.0 million was due to costs incurred in connection with our Phase 1b clinical trial of RTX-134 in patients with phenylketonuria, which was discontinued in March 2020. The increase in direct costs of $36.6 million in our lead cancer programs, including RTX-240 and RTX-321, was principally related to costs incurred for our Phase 1/2 clinical trial of RTX-240 for the treatment of solid tumors, including clinical CRO and internal manufacturing costs, as well as to costs incurred for preclinical, IND-enabling activities and clinical startup costs for RTX-321. The decrease in contract research and development of $4.6 million was due to the advancement of discovery research to support IND-enabling activities. The decline in laboratory supplies and research materials of $4.2 million was primarily due to the shift in pilot-scale manufacturing activities to support the technical development of clinical candidates. The reduction in stock-compensation expense of $1.0 million was driven by a reduction in the market price of our common stock resulting in a lower valuation of options granted during 2020. The decrease in personnel-related costs and facility related and other costs of $4.2 million was principally due to the allocation of the costs to operate our manufacturing facility to research and development program costs starting in the first quarter of 2020, as well as a reduction in onsite activities in connection with our response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $50.3 million, compared to $57.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in general and administrative expenses of $6.8 million was primarily the result of a reduction in stock-based compensation expense of $6.6 million due principally to restricted stock awards that fully vested in January 2020. In addition, the decrease in professional and consultant fees of $0.9 million was driven by reduced spending on business support initiatives. The increase in personnel-related costs of $1.6 million was due to the timing of executive management hiring, as well as executive recruiting costs and compensation. The decrease in facility-related and other expenses of $0.9 million was largely driven by decreased spending for business support initiatives and a reduction in onsite activities in connection with our response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest Income
Interest income was $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest income decreased due to reduced invested balances as cash was used to fund operations, as well as reduced interest rates.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in interest expense was principally due to higher outstanding borrowings in connection with our 2018 Credit Facility (as defined below).
Other Income, Net
Other income, net was $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Other income, net primarily increased as a result of income earned from a sublease agreement that commenced February 2019.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018:
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $112.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $51.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in direct costs related to our rare disease program of $15.2 million was primarily due to costs incurred in connection with our Phase 1b clinical trial of RTX-134 in patients with phenylketonuria, which was discontinued in March 2020. The increase in direct costs of $8.4 million in our lead cancer programs, including RTX-240 and RTX-321, was related principally to preclinical and IND-enabling activities. The increases in personnel-related costs and stock-based compensation expense of $13.6 million and $5.2 million, respectively, were due to increased headcount in our research and development function. The increase in laboratory supplies and research materials of $5.9 million was due to increases in platform development, manufacturing process and scale-up and drug discovery activities. The increase in facility-related and other expenses of $9.3 million was mostly due to an increase in facilities costs resulting from the commencement of our lease of office and laboratory space in January and August 2019, as well as additional laboratory services to support increased headcount.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $57.2 million, compared to $39.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in general and administrative expenses of $17.3 million was primarily due to an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $8.5 million, personnel related costs of $3.7 million and facility related and other costs of $3.1 million, all of which were due to increased headcount in our general and administrative function, including additions to the executive management team. The increase in facility-related and other expenses was mostly due to an increase in facilities costs resulting from the commencement of our lease of office and laboratory space in January and August 2019, as well as additional insurance costs resulting from operating as a public company. Professional and consultant fees increased by $1.9 million principally due to increased patent costs and increases in accounting, audit, legal and consulting fees incurred to operate as a public company.
Interest Income
Interest income was $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Interest income increased as a result of higher invested balances due to cash proceeds received from our IPO in July 2018 and our 2018 Credit Facility (as defined below) in December 2018 and June 2019.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in interest expense was principally due to higher outstanding borrowings in connection with our 2018 Credit Facility (as defined below).
Change in Fair Value of Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
The change in the fair value of our preferred stock warrant liability was due to its derecognition upon exercise, which was effective upon the closing of our IPO.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net was $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to less than $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Other income (expense), net increased as a result of income earned from a sublease agreement that commenced February 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. We have not yet commercialized any of our product candidates and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any product candidates for several years, if at all. To date, we have funded our operations with proceeds from the sale of preferred stock and issuance of debt and, most recently, with proceeds from our IPO. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $176.3 million. In July 2018, we completed our IPO, pursuant to which we issued and sold 12,055,450 shares of common stock, inclusive of 1,572,450 shares pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares. We received proceeds of $254.3 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering costs. In December 2018, we entered into a loan and security agreement which provides for aggregate borrowings of up to $75.0 million, all of which were outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $127.6 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $167.7 million, partially offset by net non-cash charges of $40.0 million, predominantly consisting of stock-based compensation expense. Net cash used in our operating assets and liabilities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 consisted of a $6.5 million decrease in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities, other long-term liabilities and operating lease liabilities, offset by a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets, other assets and operating lease, right-of-use asset of $6.6 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, operating activities used $110.4 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $163.5 million, partially offset by net non-cash charges of $42.6 million, primarily consisting of stock-based compensation expense. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2019 provided cash of $10.4 million consisting primarily of a $5.5 million increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities, a $5.0 million increase in operating lease, right-of-use asset, and a $2.7 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, offset by a $2.7 million decrease in operating lease liabilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, operating activities used $58.3 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $89.2 million, partially offset by net non-cash charges of $30.7 million, primarily consisting of stock-based compensation expense. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2018 provided net cash of $0.1 million, which consisted primarily of a $9.2 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities, offset by a $9.1 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets and other assets.
Changes in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities and prepaid expenses and other current assets in all periods presented were generally due to growth in our business, the advancement of our research programs and the timing of vendor invoicing and payments.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $100.4 million, consisting of sales and maturities of investments of $228.6 million, offset by net purchases of investments of $122.7 million and purchases of property, plant and equipment of $5.5 million. Our cash purchases of property, plant and equipment consisted of $2.9 million for purchases related to our manufacturing facility in Smithfield, Rhode Island, largely driven by payments for manufacturing equipment purchases and construction costs incurred in 2019, and $2.6 million for the purchase of computer and laboratory equipment installed in our manufacturing facility and our laboratory space in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $132.6 million, consisting of purchases of investments of $319.1 million and purchases of property, plant and equipment of $40.7 million, offset by sales and maturities of investments of $227.2 million. Our purchases of property, plant and equipment primarily consisted of $29.8 million related to the renovation and customization of our manufacturing facility in Smithfield, Rhode
Island, and $8.5 million for the purchase of laboratory equipment as we expanded our discovery and technical development activities.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash used in investing activities was $111.6 million, consisting of purchases of investments of $161.0 million and purchases of property, plant and equipment of $15.0 million, offset by sales and maturities of investments of $64.3 million. Our purchases of property, plant and equipment primarily consisted of $8.0 million for the acquisition of and subsequent design and demolition activities associated with our manufacturing facility in Smithfield, Rhode Island and $4.4 million for the purchase of laboratory equipment as we expanded our discovery and manufacturing activities.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities of $26.5 million consisted of $25.0 million proceeds received from borrowings under a loan and security agreement and $1.5 million proceeds received from issuance of common stock upon exercise of stock options.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities of $27.3 million consisted of $25.0 million proceeds received from borrowings under a loan and security agreement and $2.4 million proceeds received from issuance of common stock upon exercise of stock options.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash provided by financing activities of $374.8 million consisted primarily of $257.9 million proceeds from our IPO in July 2018, $101.0 million of proceeds from issuance of preferred stock in February 2018, and $25.0 million of proceeds received from borrowings under a loan and security agreement entered in December 2018, net of financing costs paid in 2018. We used cash of $5.5 million to repay outstanding borrowings under our 2015 loan and security agreement.
Loan and Security Agreements
In December 2018, or the Closing Date, we entered into a loan and security agreement, or the Loan Agreement, with Solar Capital Ltd. as collateral agent for the lenders party thereto for an aggregate principal amount of $75.0 million, or the 2018 Credit Facility. The aggregate principal amount will be funded in three tranches of term loans of $25.0 million each. On the Closing Date, we made an initial borrowing of $25.0 million, in June 2019, we made a second borrowing of $25.0 million and in June 2020, we made a third and final borrowing of $25.0 million.
Interest on the outstanding loan balance accrues at a rate of the one-month U.S. LIBOR rate plus 5.50%. Monthly principal payments will commence 36 months after the Closing Date and will be amortized over the following 24 months. The term loans are subject to a prepayment fee of 1.00% in the first year, 0.50% in the second year and 0.25% in the third year. In conjunction with 2018 Credit Facility, we incurred issuance costs of $0.8 million.
The Loan Agreement contains financial covenants that require us to maintain either a certain minimum cash balance or a minimum market capitalization threshold. We were in compliance with all such financial covenants as of December 31, 2020. The Loan Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and covenants and also includes customary events of default, including payment defaults, breaches of covenants, change of control and a material adverse change default. Upon the occurrence of an event of default, a default interest rate of an additional 4.00% per annum may be applied to the outstanding loan balances, and the lenders may declare all outstanding obligations immediately due and payable. Borrowings under the Loan Agreement are collateralized by substantially all of our assets, other than our intellectual property.
Common Stock Sales Agreement
On August 1, 2019, we entered into a Distribution Agreement (the “Distribution Agreement”), with multiple sales agents, pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell to or through the agents, from time to time, shares of the Company's common stock, par value $0.001 per share, having an aggregate gross sales price of up to $100.0 million. Sales, if any, of the Company's shares of common stock will be made primarily in “at-the-market” offerings, as defined
in Rule 415 under the Securities Act. The shares of common stock will be offered and sold pursuant to our registration statement on Form S-3 and a related prospectus supplement, both filed with the SEC on August 1, 2019. We intend to use substantially all of the net proceeds from any sale of shares of the Company's common stock for working capital and other general corporate purposes. There have been no shares of the Company's common stock sold under the Distribution Agreement as of December 31, 2020.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in the future as we conduct the activities necessary to advance our product candidates through development. The timing and amount of our operating and capital expenditures will depend largely on:
● the timing and progress of preclinical and clinical development activities;
● the commencement, enrollment or results of the planned clinical trials of our product candidates or any future clinical trials we may conduct, or changes in the development status of our product candidates;
● the timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
● the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations;
● our decision to initiate a clinical trial, not to initiate a clinical trial or to terminate an existing clinical trial;
● changes in laws or regulations applicable to our product candidates, including but not limited to clinical trial requirements for approvals;
● developments concerning our key vendors;
● our ability to obtain materials to produce adequate product supply for any approved product or inability to do so at acceptable prices;
● the costs associated with the operation of our multi-suite manufacturing facility and the costs and timing of any future renovation or expansion of the facility;
● our ability to establish collaborations if needed;
● the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we obtain marketing approval;
● the legal patent costs involved in prosecuting patent applications and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property claims;
● additions or departures of key scientific or management personnel;
● unanticipated serious safety concerns related to the use of our product candidates; and
● the terms and timing of any collaboration, license or other arrangement, including the terms and timing of any milestone payments thereunder.
Before consideration of management’s plans described below, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments, will enable us to fund our operating expenses, capital expenditure requirements and debt service payments
into the first quarter of 2022. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of private or public equity financings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, investors’ ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect investors’ rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions or capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or drug candidates, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to obtain funding, we will implement an operating plan that scales back our operations and focuses our available capital on a reduced number of activities and programs, which we believe will enable the continued advancement of certain of our research and development programs and the preservation of our technology platform. These actions could adversely affect our business prospects. Based on our current cash and investments, and after considering management’s plans described above, we have the ability to fund our operating costs and working capital needs into the middle of 2022.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the effects that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods:
(1)Amounts in table reflect payments due for our leases of office and laboratory space in Cambridge, Massachusetts under three operating lease agreements that expire in September 2021, January 2027 and August 2028.
(2)Amounts in table reflect the contractually required principal and interest payments payable under the 2018 Credit Facility. For purposes of this table, the interest due under the 2018 Credit Facility was calculated using an assumed interest rate of 6.31% per annum, which was the interest rate in effect as of December 31, 2020.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs, CMOs and other third parties for preclinical research studies, assay development, clinical trials, manufacturing and testing services. These contracts do not contain minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable by us upon prior written notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including noncancelable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation. These payments are not included in the table above as the amount and timing of such payments are not known.
We have also entered into a license agreement with the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, or WIBR, as amended, under which we have been granted an exclusive, sublicensable, nontransferable license under certain patent families related to the development of our Red Cell Therapeutics, or the WIBR License. We are obligated to pay to WIBR low single-digit royalties based on annual net sales by us, our affiliates and our sublicensees of licensed products and licensed services that are covered by a valid claim of the licensed patent rights at the time and in the country of sale. Based on the progress we make in the advancement of products covered by the licensed patent rights, we are required to make aggregate milestone payments of up to $1.6 million upon the achievement of specified preclinical, clinical and regulatory milestones. In addition, we are required to pay to WIBR a percentage of the non-royalty payments that it
receives from sublicensees of the patent rights licensed by WIBR. This percentage varies from low single-digit to low double-digit percentages and will be based upon the clinical stage of the product that is the subject of the sublicense. Royalties shall be paid by us on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis, beginning on the first commercial sale of such licensed product in such country until expiration of the last valid patent claim covering such licensed product in such country.
We have the right to terminate the WIBR License in its entirety, on a patent-by-patent or country-by-country basis, at will upon three months’ notice to WIBR. WIBR may terminate the agreement upon breach of contract or in the event of bankruptcy, liquidation, insolvency or cessation of business related to the license. For additional information, see “Business-Licenses.”
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of the estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
● vendors in connection with preclinical and assay development activities;
● CMOs in connection with raw material acquisition; and
● CROs in connection with clinical trials.
We base the expense recorded related to contract research and manufacturing on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple CMOs and CROs that supply materials and conduct services. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services
performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-based Compensation
We measure stock-based awards with service-based and performance-based vesting conditions granted to employees, directors and non-employees based on their fair value on the date of the grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model for options or the difference between the purchase price per share of the award, if any, and the fair value of our common stock for restricted common stock awards. Compensation expense for those awards is recognized over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We use the straight-line method to record the expense of awards with service-based vesting conditions. We use the graded-vesting method to record the expense of awards with both service-based and performance-based vesting conditions, commencing when achievement of the performance condition becomes probable.
In addition, for restricted stock awards under which restricted common stock was purchased by the holder with a promissory note treated as a nonrecourse note for accounting purposes, we measured the fair value of the award using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model uses as inputs the fair value of our common stock and assumptions we make for the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our common stock options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our common stock options, and our expected dividend yield.
We measure the fair value of stock-based awards with market-based vesting conditions on the date of grant using a Monte Carlo simulation model. When service-based vesting conditions also exist, we recognize stock-based compensation expense using the graded-vesting method over the longer of the derived service period from the market condition or the required service period. In accordance with accounting guidance for awards with market conditions, the stock-based compensation expense will be recognized over the appropriate period regardless of whether the award achieves the market condition and will only be adjusted to the extent the service condition is not met. When an award contains a market-based vesting condition and a performance-based vesting condition where both must be achieved to earn the award, we recognize stock-based compensation expense over the longer of the derived service period from the market condition or the period estimated for the performance-based vesting condition to be achieved. We begin recording stock-based compensation expense for this type of award when the achievement of the performance-based vesting condition becomes probable regardless of whether the market condition has been achieved.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows are disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.
Emerging Growth Company Status
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected not to “opt out” of such extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we will adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard and will do so until such time that we either (i) irrevocably elect to “opt out” of such extended transition period or (ii) no longer qualify as an emerging growth company. While we have not made such an irrevocable election, we have not delayed the adoption of any applicable accounting standards.