Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes to the consolidated financial statements. We report our financial results on a 52/53-week fiscal year, which ends on the last Sunday in December. Fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018 all had 52 weeks of operations.
Overview
Ruth’s Hospitality Group, Inc. develops and operates fine dining restaurants under the trade name Ruth’s Chris Steak House. As of December 27, 2020, there were 149 Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants, including 74 Company-owned restaurants, three restaurants operating under contractual agreements and 72 franchisee-owned restaurants, including 21 international franchisee-owned restaurants.
On July 29, 2019, we completed the acquisition of substantially all the assets of three franchisee-owned Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants for a cash purchase price of $18.6 million. The results of operations, financial position and cash flows of the MBR Franchise Acquisition are included in our consolidated financial statements as of the date of the acquisition. For additional information, see Note 3 of the consolidated financial statements.
All Company-owned Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants are located in the United States. The franchisee-owned Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants include 21 international franchisee-owned restaurants in Aruba, Canada, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Singapore and Taiwan. In 2018, the Company opened two new Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants - one in Jersey City, NJ in August and one in Paramus, NJ in November. Franchisees opened two new restaurants during 2018, in Ft. Wayne, IN and Markham, Ontario, Canada. The franchisee-owned Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants in Ridgeland, MS and Dubai, United Arab Emirates were closed in March 2018 and April 2018, respectively. Due to the scheduled expiration of our lease we closed one of our Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants in Washington D.C. in December 2018. In 2019, the Company opened two new Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants - one in Columbus, OH in October and one in Somerville, MA in November. A franchisee opened a new restaurant in 2019 in Chongqing, China. In 2020, the Company relocated one of its Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants in Washington, D.C. due to the expiration of a lease. Franchisees did not open any new restaurants in 2020. During fiscal year 2020 nine Company-owned Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants were permanently closed and one franchisee-owned Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurant was permanently closed.
The Ruth’s Chris menu features a broad selection of high-quality USDA Prime and Choice grade steaks and other premium offerings served in Ruth’s Chris’ signature fashion-“sizzling” and topped with butter-complemented by other traditional menu items inspired by our New Orleans heritage. The Ruth’s Chris restaurants reflect the 55-year commitment to the core values instilled by our founder, Ruth Fertel, of caring for our guests by delivering the highest quality food, beverages and service in a warm and inviting atmosphere.
Our Ruth’s Chris restaurants cater to special occasion diners and frequent customers, in addition to the business clientele traditionally served by upscale steakhouses, by providing a dining experience designed to appeal to a wide range of guests. We believe our focus on creating this broad appeal provides us with opportunities to expand into a wide range of markets, including many markets not traditionally served by upscale steakhouses. We offer USDA Prime and other high-quality steaks that are aged and prepared to exact company standards and cooked in 1,800-degree broilers. We also offer veal, lamb, poultry and seafood dishes and a broad selection of appetizers. We complement our distinctive food offerings with an award-winning wine list. During the fiscal year 2020, the average check was $82 per person at Company-owned Ruth’s Chris Restaurants.
Recap of Fiscal Year 2020 and Fiscal Year 2019 Operating Results
Operating income for fiscal year 2020 decreased from fiscal year 2019 by $81.0 million to a loss of $28.5 million. Operating loss for fiscal year 2020 was impacted unfavorably by a $180.6 million decrease in restaurant sales, a loss on impairment of $16.5 million and decreases in franchise income and other operating income, which were partially offset by decreased food and beverage costs, restaurant operating expenses, marketing and advertising, and general and administrative expenses. Lower restaurant sales were attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic effect on Company-owned restaurant sales. After-tax net income (loss) from continuing operations during fiscal year 2020 decreased from fiscal year 2019 by $67.5 million to a loss of $25.3 million. For information on the impact of COVID-19 and actions taken by the Company in response to the pandemic, see Note 1 of the consolidated financial statements.
Operating income for fiscal year 2019 increased from fiscal year 2018 by $802 thousand to $52.5 million. Operating income for fiscal year 2019 was favorably impacted by a $13.9 million increase in restaurant sales and decreases in marketing and advertising and general and administrative expenses, which were partially offset by increased food and beverage costs, restaurant operating expenses and depreciation and amortization expenses. Higher restaurant sales were attributable to an increase in both new Company-owned restaurant sales and comparable Company-owned restaurants. After-tax income from continuing operations during fiscal year 2019
increased from fiscal year 2018 by $606 thousand to $42.2 million. Fiscal year 2019 net income increased from fiscal year 2018 by $526 thousand to $42.2 million.
Key Financial Terms and Metrics
We evaluate our business using a variety of key financial measures:
Restaurant Sales. Restaurant sales consist of food and beverage sales by Company-owned restaurants. Restaurant sales are primarily influenced by total operating weeks in the relevant period and comparable restaurant sales growth. Total operating weeks is the total number of Company-owned restaurants multiplied by the number of weeks each is in operation during the relevant period. Total operating weeks are impacted by restaurant openings and closings, as well as changes in the number of weeks included in the relevant period. Comparable restaurant sales growth reflects the change in year-over-year or quarter-over-quarter, as applicable, sales for the comparable restaurant base. We define the comparable restaurant base to be those Company-owned restaurants in operation for not less than eighteen months prior to the beginning of the fiscal year including the period being measured. Comparable restaurant sales growth is primarily influenced by customer traffic, which is measured by the number of entrées sold, and the average guest check. Customer traffic is influenced by the popularity of our menu items, our guest mix, our ability to deliver a high-quality dining experience and overall economic conditions. Average guest check, a measure of total restaurant sales divided by the number of entrées, is driven by menu mix and pricing.
Franchise Income. Franchise income includes (1) franchise and development fees charged to franchisees, (2) sales-based royalty income and (3) sales-based advertising fees. Franchise royalties consist of 5.0% of adjusted gross sales from each franchisee-owned restaurant. In addition, our more recent franchise agreements require an advertising fee of up to 1.0% of gross sales to be paid by the franchisee. Under our prior franchise agreements, the Company would pay 1.0% out of the 5.0% royalty toward national advertising. We evaluate the performance of our franchisees by measuring franchisee-owned restaurant operating weeks, which is impacted by franchisee-owned restaurant openings and closings, and comparable franchisee-owned restaurant sales growth, which together with operating weeks, drives royalty income.
Other Operating Income. Other operating income consists primarily of breakage income associated with gift cards, and includes fees earned from management agreements, banquet-related guarantee and services revenue and other incidental guest fees.
Food and Beverage Costs. Food and beverage costs include all restaurant-level food and beverage costs of Company-owned restaurants. We measure food and beverage costs by tracking cost of sales as a percentage of restaurant sales and cost per entrée. Food and beverage costs are generally influenced by the cost of food and beverage items, distribution costs and menu mix.
Restaurant Operating Expenses. We measure restaurant operating expenses for Company-owned restaurants as a percentage of restaurant sales. Restaurant operating expenses include the following:
•
Labor costs, consisting of restaurant management salaries, hourly staff payroll and other payroll-related items, including taxes and fringe benefits. We measure our labor cost efficiency by tracking hourly and total labor costs as a percentage of restaurant sales;
•
Operating costs, consisting of maintenance, utilities, bank and credit card charges, and any other restaurant-level expenses; and
•
Occupancy costs, consisting of both fixed and variable portions of rent, common area maintenance charges, insurance premiums and real property taxes.
Marketing and Advertising. Marketing and advertising includes all media, production and related costs for both local restaurant advertising and national marketing. We measure the efficiency of our marketing and advertising expenditures by tracking these costs as a percentage of total revenues. We have historically spent approximately 2.5% to 4.0% of total revenues on marketing and advertising. During fiscal year 2020 marketing and advertising was significantly reduced in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. It is anticipated that spending in this area will increase throughout fiscal year 2021 as the economy improves.
General and Administrative. General and administrative costs include costs relating to all corporate and administrative functions that support development and restaurant operations and provide an infrastructure to support future Company and franchisee growth. General and administrative costs are comprised of management, supervisory and staff salaries and employee benefits, travel, performance-based compensation, stock compensation, information systems, training, corporate rent, professional and consulting fees, technology and market research. We measure our general and administrative expense efficiency by tracking these costs as a percentage of total revenues.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization includes depreciation of fixed assets and certain definite life intangible assets. We depreciate capitalized leasehold improvements over the shorter of the total expected lease term or their estimated useful life.
Pre-Opening Costs. Pre-opening costs consist of costs incurred prior to opening a Company-owned restaurant, which are comprised principally of manager salaries and relocation costs, employee payroll and related training costs for new employees, including practice and rehearsal of service activities as well as lease costs incurred prior to opening.
Gain on Lease Modifications. Gain on lease modifications consist of gains and losses related to changes in the scope of a lease or the consideration for a lease that was not included in the original terms of the lease. Costs incurred related to the exit of a signed lease are also included.
Loss on Impairments. Loss on impairments consist of charges recognized by which the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its fair value (net realizable value for inventory). Impairment charges were taken on fixed assets, inventory, liquor licenses and operating lease right-of-use assets.
Results of Operations
The table below sets forth certain operating data expressed as a percentage of total revenues, unless otherwise marked as a percentage of restaurant sales, for the periods indicated. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the operating results that may be expected in the future. Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation of discontinued operations.
Fiscal Year 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year 2019
Restaurant Sales. Restaurant sales decreased $180.6 million, or 40.9%, to $260.8 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. Comparable Company-owned restaurant sales decreased 40.2%, which consisted of an average check decrease of 6.4%, and a 36.1% decrease in traffic counts as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Franchise Income. Franchise income decreased $6.1 million, or 34.4%, to $11.7 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in sales-based royalty income from a sales decrease as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other Operating Income. Other operating income decreased $3.5 million, or 40.3%, to $5.2 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. Other operating income includes our share of income from managed restaurants, gift card breakage revenue and miscellaneous restaurant income. The change in other operating income was primarily due to a decrease of $1.6 million in breakage revenue and $555 thousand in income from restaurants operating under contractual agreements.
Food and Beverage Costs. Food and beverage costs decreased $51.8 million, or 40.6%, to $75.8 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. Food and beverage costs, as a percentage of restaurant sales, increased 17 basis points to 29.1% compared to fiscal year 2019 largely due to an increase of 1.6% in total beef costs.
Restaurant Operating Expenses. Restaurant operating expenses decreased $64.3 million, or 29.9%, to $150.4 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. Restaurant operating expenses, as a percentage of restaurant sales, increased 9.1% to 57.7% compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to the impact of fixed costs on lower restaurant sales in 2020.
Marketing and Advertising. Marketing and advertising expenses decreased $8.6 million, or 55.6% to $6.9 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. Marketing and advertising, as a percent of total revenue, decreased 80 basis points to 2.5% compared to fiscal year 2019. The decrease in marketing and advertising expenses during fiscal year 2020 was attributable to the Company reducing expenses in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses decreased $1.4 million or 4.0% to $33.2 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. The decrease in general and administrative costs was attributable to a reduction of $1.5 million in compensation costs and a $1.2 million reduction in travel related expenses partially offset by an increase in professional fees of $1.3 million.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses. Depreciation and amortization expense increased $610 thousand to $22.0 million during fiscal year 2020, primarily due to property additions related to new restaurants and remodel projects placed in service within the last twelve months.
Pre-opening Costs. Pre-opening costs remained relatively unchanged at $1.6 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to $1.8 million in fiscal year 2019 and primarily relate to pre-opening rent expense on locations that the Company has taken possession of the property from the landlord.
Gain on Lease Modifications. Gain on lease modifications was $206 thousand in fiscal year 2020. The Company did not have any gains on lease modifications during fiscal year 2019. Gain on lease modifications consist of gains and losses related to changes in the scope of a lease or the consideration for a lease that was not included in the original terms of the lease. Costs incurred related to the exit of a signed lease are also included. The gain on lease modifications during fiscal year 2020 was attributable to the changes of lease terms in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Loss on Impairment. Loss on impairment was $16.5 million in fiscal year 2020. The Company did not have any loss on impairment expense during fiscal year 2019. Loss on impairments consist of charges recognized by which the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its fair value (net realizable value for inventory). Impairment charges were taken on fixed assets, inventory, liquor licenses and lease right-of-use assets triggered by the adverse economic impact of COVID-19.
Interest Expense. Interest expense increased $2.5 million to $4.7 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. The increase in expense was primarily due to higher average debt balances during fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019.
Other Income. During fiscal year 2020 we recognized $26 thousand of other income. During fiscal year 2019 we recognized $115 thousand of other expense.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit). The effective income tax rates for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 for continuing operations were 23.8% and 16.2%, respectively. The effective tax rate for fiscal year 2020 represents an income tax benefit of $7.9 million, whereas the effective tax rate for fiscal year 2019 represents income tax expense of $8.2 million. The significant change was driven primarily by
the Company’s generation of a pre-tax loss from continuing operations in fiscal year 2020, compared with the generation of pre-tax income in fiscal year 2019.
Net Income (Loss). Net loss was $25.3 million during fiscal year 2020 compared to $42.2 million net income during fiscal year 2019 due to the factors noted above.
Fiscal Year 2019 Compared to Fiscal Year 2018
Restaurant Sales. Restaurant sales increased $13.9 million, or 3.3%, to $441.4 million during fiscal year 2019 from fiscal year 2018. The increase was attributable to a $10.7 million increase in new restaurants and a $3.2 million increase from comparable Company-owned restaurants. Total operating weeks during fiscal year 2019 increased to 4,139 from 4,027 during fiscal year 2018. Comparable Company-owned restaurant sales increased 0.9%, which consisted of an average check increase of 1.7%, and 0.8% decrease in traffic counts. New restaurant sales primarily increased in fiscal year 2019 due to an increase in 66 operating weeks from the MBR Franchise Acquisition in July 2019 and new restaurants in Jersey City, Paramus and Columbus.
Franchise Income. Franchise income decreased $40 thousand, or 0.2%, to $17.9 million during fiscal year 2019 from fiscal year 2018. The decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in sales-based royalty income from the MBR Franchise Acquisition.
Other Operating Income. Other operating income increased $1.8 million, or 25.8%, to $8.8 million during fiscal year 2019 from fiscal year 2018. Other operating income includes our share of income from managed restaurants, gift card breakage revenue and miscellaneous restaurant income. The increase in other operating income was primarily due to an increase of $1.1 million in breakage revenue and $716 thousand in income from restaurants operating under contractual agreements, including a full year of operations of the new location in Reno, NV.
Food and Beverage Costs. Food and beverage costs increased $7.5 million, or 6.2%, to $127.6 million during fiscal year 2019 from fiscal year 2018. Food and beverage costs, as a percentage of restaurant sales, increased 80 basis points to 28.9% compared to fiscal year 2018 largely due to an increase of 8.4% in total beef costs.
Restaurant Operating Expenses. Restaurant operating expenses increased $8.5 million, or 4.1%, to $214.7 million during fiscal year 2019 from fiscal year 2018. Restaurant operating expenses, as a percentage of restaurant sales, increased 40 basis points to 48.6% compared to fiscal year 2018 primarily due to occupancy related increases.
Marketing and Advertising. Marketing and advertising expenses decreased $1.2 million, or 7.3% to $15.4 million during fiscal year 2019 from fiscal year 2018. Marketing and advertising, as a percent of total revenue, decreased 40 basis points to 3.3% compared to fiscal year 2018. The decrease in marketing and advertising expenses during fiscal year 2019 was attributable to a planned decrease in marketing research investments.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses decreased $2.6 million or 7.0% to $34.6 million during fiscal year 2019 from fiscal year 2018. The decrease in general and administrative costs was attributable to a reduction of $1.5 million in compensation costs and a $989 thousand reduction in franchisee acquisition and integration costs.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses. Depreciation and amortization expense increased $2.8 million to $21.4 million during fiscal year 2019, primarily due to property additions related to new restaurants and remodel projects placed in service within the last twelve months including $581 thousand of depreciation and amortization related to the MBR Franchise Acquisition.
Pre-opening Costs. Pre-opening costs remained relatively unchanged at $1.8 million in fiscal year 2019 compared to $1.9 million in fiscal year 2018.
Interest Expense. Interest expense increased $458 thousand to $2.2 million during fiscal year 2019 from fiscal year 2018. The increase in expense was primarily due to higher average debt balances during fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018.
Other Income. During fiscal year 2019 we recognized $115 thousand of other income. During fiscal year 2018 we recognized $73 thousand of other expense.
Income Tax Expense. During fiscal year 2019 we recognized $8.2 million in income tax expense. The effective tax rate, including the impact of discrete items, decreased to 16.2% during fiscal year 2019 compared to 16.5% during fiscal year 2018. The effective tax rate decreased during fiscal year 2019 primarily due to an increased impact from the FICA tip credit and a reduction in disallowed executive compensation which was partially offset by a higher state income tax rate.
Income from Continuing Operations. Income from continuing operations of $42.2 million during fiscal year 2019 increased by $606 thousand compared to fiscal year 2018 due to the factors noted above.
Income (Loss) from Discontinued Operations, net of income taxes. There was no income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes during fiscal year 2019 compared to income of $80 thousand during fiscal year 2018. Discontinued operations includes the recurring revenues and expenses of closed restaurants and related income taxes.
Net Income. Net income was $42.2 million during fiscal year 2019 compared to $41.7 million net income during fiscal year 2018 due to the factors noted above.
Segment Profitability
Segment profitability information for the Company’s two operating segments is presented in Note 17 of the consolidated financial statements.
Potential Fluctuations in Quarterly Results and Seasonality
Our quarterly operating results may fluctuate significantly as a result of a variety of factors. See “Risk Factors” and “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” for a discussion of certain material risks that could affect our quarterly operating results.
Our business is also subject to seasonal fluctuations. Historically, the percentages of our annual total revenues during the first and fourth fiscal quarters have generally been higher due, in part, to the year-end holiday season and the popularity of dining out in the fall and winter months. Accordingly, results for any one quarter are not necessarily indicative of results to be expected for any other quarter or for any year, and comparable restaurant sales for any particular period may decrease.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our principal sources of cash during fiscal year 2020 were net cash provided by operating activities, borrowings under our senior credit facility and the issuance of capital stock. Our principal uses of cash during fiscal year 2020 were for principal repayments under our senior credit facility, common stock repurchases, capital expenditures, and dividend payments. Cash flows from discontinued operations are combined with the cash flows from continuing operations within each of the categories on our statement of cash flows.
In October 2019, our Board of Directors approved a new share repurchase program authorizing the Company to repurchase up to $60 million of outstanding common stock from time to time. The new share repurchase program replaced the previous share repurchase program announced in October 2017, which has been terminated. During fiscal year 2020, prior to the World Health Organizations’ declaration of the COVID-19 pandemic, we repurchased 902,000 shares at an aggregate cost of $13.2 million or an average cost of $14.66 per share, under a Rule 10-b5-1 plan. All repurchased shares were retired and cancelled. As of December 27, 2020, $41.6 million remained available for future purchases under the share repurchase program.
During the second quarter of fiscal year 2013, we commenced paying quarterly cash dividends to holders of common and restricted stock. In the first quarter of fiscal year 2020, we paid a cash dividend of $0.15 per share, or $4.4 million in the aggregate. We paid a quarterly cash dividend of $0.13 per share, or $3.8 million to $4.0 million in the aggregate, during each of the quarters of fiscal year 2019. As a result of the impacts to our business arising from the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company has suspended its share repurchase program and dividend payments. Amendments to the Company’s revolving credit facility currently prohibit the payment of dividends and share repurchases until our Consolidated Leverage Ratio (as defined in the revolving credit facility) is less than 2.50:1.00.
We believe that our current cash position, $95.4 million as of December 27, 2020, coupled with our anticipated cash flow from operations should provide us with adequate liquidity in fiscal year 2021.
Senior Credit Facility
As of December 27, 2020, prior to the Sixth Amendment (as defined and described below), we had $115.0 million of outstanding indebtedness under our senior credit facility and approximately $4.8 million of outstanding letters of credit. As of December 27, 2020, the weighted average interest rate on our outstanding debt was 3.8% and the weighted average interest rate on our outstanding letters of credit was 2.9%. In addition, the commitment fee on the daily unused average portion of our senior credit facility was 0.4%.
On February 2, 2017, the Company’s senior credit facility is available pursuant to a credit agreement entered into with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association as administrative agent, and certain other lenders (as amended as of the end of fiscal year 2020, the “Credit Agreement”). The Credit Agreement provides for a revolving credit facility of $120.0 million with a $5.0 million subfacility of letters of credit and a $5.0 million subfacility for swingline loans. The Credit Agreement, as amended in January 2021, has a maturity date of February 2, 2023.
At the Company’s option, revolving loans may bear interest at (i) LIBOR, plus an applicable margin or (ii) the highest of (a) the rate publicly announced by Wells Fargo as its prime rate, (b) the average published federal funds rate in effect on such day plus 0.50% and (c) one month LIBOR plus 1.00%, plus an applicable margin (the rate described in this clause (ii) prior to adding the applicable margin, the “Base Rate”). The applicable margin is based on the Company’s actual leverage ratio as defined in the Credit Agreement (“Consolidated Leverage Ratio”), ranging (a) from 1.50% to 2.50% above the applicable LIBOR rate or (b) at the Company’s option, from 0.50% to 1.50% above the applicable Base Rate. From May 7, 2020, the date of the Third Amendment to the Credit Agreement (the “Third Amendment”), until the Calculation Date for the fiscal quarter ending March 28, 2021, interest rates on loans under the Credit Agreement are 2.75% and 1.75% above the LIBOR Rate and Base Rate, respectively, and the fee for the daily unused availability under the revolving credit facility is 0.40%. Thereafter, interest rate margins and the fee for the unused commitment will be calculated based on the Consolidated Leverage Ratio in accordance with the Credit Agreement. The term “Calculation Date” means the date five (5) business days after the day on which the Company provides a compliance certificate required for its most recently ended fiscal quarter.
The Credit Agreement contains customary representations and affirmative and negative covenants (including limitations on indebtedness and liens) as well as financial covenants, as described below, requiring a minimum fixed coverage charge ratio as defined in the Credit Agreement (“Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio”) limiting the Company’s Consolidated Leverage Ratio and requiring the Company to hold a certain specified amount of cash. The Credit Agreement also contains events of default customary for credit facilities of this type (with customary grace periods, as applicable), including nonpayment of principal or interest when due; material incorrectness of representations and warranties when made; breach of covenants; bankruptcy and insolvency; unsatisfied ERISA obligations; unstayed material judgment beyond specified periods; default under other material indebtedness; and certain changes of control of the Company. If any event of default occurs and is not cured within the applicable grace period or waived, the outstanding loans may be accelerated by lenders holding a majority of the commitments and the lenders’ commitments may be terminated. The obligations under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by certain of the Company’s subsidiaries and are secured by a lien on substantially all of the Company’s personal property assets other than any equity interest in current and future subsidiaries of the Company.
Among the covenant obligations with which the Company must comply, the Credit Agreement requires the Company to comply with the following:
•
Minimum aggregate cash holding requirements through March 2021 in an amount equal to the following amount for each month set forth below:
October 2020
$44,000,000
November 2020
$44,000,000
December 2020
$53,000,000
January 2021
$55,000,000
February 2021
$56,000,000
March 2021
$58,000,000
•
Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of at least 1.25 to 1.00. The Third Amendment waived the requirement to maintain any Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio for the remainder of fiscal year 2020 but, commencing with the fiscal quarter ending March 28, 2021, requires that the Company maintain a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of not less than 1.25 to 1.00 on an annualized basis, which will exclude the impact of fiscal year 2020. Under the Third Amendment, the Company is limited in its ability to complete acquisitions until it can demonstrate compliance with the minimum Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio following the end of the fiscal quarter ending March 28, 2021.
•
Consolidated Leverage Ratio of not more than 2.75 to 1.00. The Third Amendment waived any Consolidated Leverage Ratio requirement for the remainder of fiscal year 2020 but, commencing with the fiscal quarter ending March 28, 2021, requires a Consolidated Leverage Ratio based on annualized calculations, which will exclude the impact of fiscal year 2020, not to exceed the following thresholds for the periods indicated:
Period
Maximum Ratio
The last day of the first Fiscal Quarter of the 2021 Fiscal Year
5.00 to 1.00
The last day of the second Fiscal Quarter of the 2021 Fiscal Year
4.50 to 1.00
The last day of the third Fiscal Quarter of the 2021 Fiscal Year
4.00 to 1.00
The last day of the fourth Fiscal Quarter of the 2021 Fiscal Year and thereafter
3.00 to 1.00
Under the Credit Agreement, the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio and Consolidated Leverage Ratio requirements remain in effect through maturity of the loan on February 2, 2023 but the minimum cash holding requirement ends March 2021.
The Credit Agreement allows for non-maintenance capital expenditures when the Consolidated Leverage Ratio is 2.50 to 1.00 or greater in an amount not to exceed 75% of the amount by which Consolidated EBITDA earned during the immediately preceding fiscal quarter exceeds $7.5 million (“Excess EBITDA”). The Company and its subsidiaries may make non-maintenance capital expenditures with Excess EBITDA at any time after such Excess EBITDA is earned until the Consolidated Leverage Ratio has been reduced to less than 2.50 to 1.00. The Credit Agreement provides that the Company and its subsidiaries may make capital expenditures in any fiscal year in an amount equal to 75% of consolidated EBITDA for the immediately preceding fiscal year when the Consolidated Leverage Ratio is equal to or greater than 1.50 to 1.00 but less than 2.50 to 1.00. When the Consolidated Leverage Ratio is less than 1.50 to 1.00, the Company and its subsidiaries may make capital expenditures in an unlimited amount.
The Company currently is prohibited from paying any dividends or repurchasing any shares of its common stock if the Company cannot demonstrate that its Consolidated Leverage Ratio is less than 2.50 to 1.00 (both before and after giving effect to the proposed repurchase or dividend), as determined commencing with the second fiscal quarter of 2020.
During the second quarter of fiscal year 2020 the Company received and repaid $20.0 million in loans under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act).
Subsequent Amendment of the Credit Agreement
Subsequent to the end of fiscal year 2020, the Company entered into a Sixth Amendment to Credit Agreement (“Sixth Amendment” and the Credit Amendment as amended by the Sixth Amendment, the “Amended Credit Agreement”) which makes certain amendments to the Credit Agreement. The Sixth Amendment provides for a $10.0 million commitment reduction from the $120.0 million available under the Credit Agreement so that the Amended Credit Agreement will provide for a $110.0 revolving credit facility. The commitment reduction will be effective as of March 29, 2021, the first day of the Company’s second fiscal quarter for 2021, and if on such date, extensions of credit under the Amended Credit Agreement exceed $110 million, the Company will immediately repay the amount of such excess. Like the Credit Agreement, the Amended Credit Agreement has a $5.0 million subfacility of letters of credit and a $5.0 million subfacility for swingline loans.
From January 28, 2021 until the Calculation Date for the fiscal quarter ending December 26, 2021, interest rates on loans under the Amended Credit Agreement are 3.00% and 2.00% above the LIBOR Rate and Base Rate, respectively, and the fee for the daily unused availability under the revolving credit facility is 0.40%. Thereafter, interest rate margins and the fee for the unused commitment will be calculated based on the Consolidated Leverage Ratio (calculated on an actual rather than annualized basis).
Under the Credit Agreement, the Company had to have a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of at least 1.25 to 1.00 as of the Company’s fiscal quarter ending on March 28, 2021. The Sixth Amendment waives such requirement but provides that commencing with the fiscal quarter ending June 27, 2021, the Company must maintain a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of not less than 1.25 to 1.00. For purposes of required compliance with the 1.25 to 1.00 ratio, Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio will be calculated on an annualized basis, which will exclude the impact of fiscal year 2020 and first fiscal quarter of 2021, through the end of fiscal year 2021, and on an actual basis thereafter.
The Credit Agreement required the Company to have a Consolidated Leverage Ratio of not more than 5.00 to 1.00 as of the last day of the first fiscal quarter of 2021. The Sixth Amendment waives such requirement but provides that commencing with the fiscal quarter ending June 27, 2021, the Company must maintain a Consolidated Leverage Ratio not to exceed the following thresholds for the periods indicated:
Period
Maximum Ratio
The last day of the second Fiscal Quarter of the 2021 Fiscal Year
5.00 to 1.00
The last day of the third Fiscal Quarter of the 2021 Fiscal Year
4.50 to 1.00
The last day of the fourth Fiscal Quarter of the 2021 Fiscal Year
4.00 to 1.00
The last day of the first Fiscal Quarter of the 2022
Fiscal Year and thereafter
3.00 to 1.00
For purposes of calculating required compliance with the maximum ratio, Consolidated Leverage Ratio will be calculated on an annualized basis, which will exclude the impact of fiscal year 2020 and first fiscal quarter of 2021, through the end of fiscal year 2021, and on an actual basis thereafter.
The Sixth Amendment requires the Company and its subsidiaries to meet minimum aggregate cash holding requirements through June 2021 in an amount equal to the following amount for each month set forth below:
January 2021
$50,000,000
February 2021
$50,000,000
March 2021
$50,000,000
April 2021
$40,000,000
May 2021
$40,000,000
June 2021
$40,000,000
Pursuant to the Amended Credit Agreement, the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio and Consolidated Leverage Ratio requirements remain in effect through maturity of the loan on February 2, 2023 but the minimum cash holding requirement ends in June 2021.
The Sixth Amendment limits non-maintenance capital expenditures by the Company and its subsidiaries to no more than $5.0 million during fiscal year 2021. The Company and its subsidiaries may fund such non-maintenance capital expenditures during fiscal year 2021 with (i) 75% of consolidated EBITDA earned during a fiscal quarter in excess of $7.5 million (“Capital Expenditure Basket Amount”) and/or (ii) net cash proceeds from the sale-leaseback of a real property located in Florida. If the Company and its subsidiaries do not use the entire Capital Expenditure Basket Amount in any fiscal quarter, such unutilized amount may be carried forward to increase the aggregate amount of consolidated capital expenditures permitted to be made until the Company can demonstrate that the Consolidated Leverage Ratio is less than 2.50 to 1.00 for the period of four fiscal quarters most recently ended.
Beginning in fiscal year 2022, the Amended Credit Agreement provides that the Company and its subsidiaries may make capital expenditures in any fiscal year in an amount equal to 75% of consolidated EBITDA for the immediately preceding fiscal year when the Consolidated Leverage Ratio is equal to or greater than 1.50 to 1.00 but less than 2.50 to 1.00. When the Consolidated Leverage Ratio is less than 1.50 to 1.00, the Company and its subsidiaries may make capital expenditures in an unlimited amount.
For purposes of determining to what extent capital expenditures may be made, the Consolidated Leverage Ratio will be calculated on an actual rather than on an annualized basis.
Capital Expenditures and Acquisition of Restaurants
Capital expenditures in fiscal year 2020, which aggregated $10.6 million, pertained primarily to $6.7 million for new restaurants and $3.3 million for restaurant remodel and capital replacement projects. Capital expenditures in fiscal year 2019, which aggregated $50.3 million, pertained primarily to $14.4 million for restaurant remodel and capital replacement projects; $11.0 million for new restaurants and $18.6 million related to the acquisition of the MBR Franchise Acquisition from the owner franchisee. Capital expenditures in fiscal year 2018, which aggregated $31.9 million, pertained primarily to $13.1 million for new restaurants and $14.7 million for restaurant remodel projects. We anticipate capital expenditures in fiscal year 2021 will be approximately $8.0 to $10.0 million. We relocated one location in Washington, D.C. to a new leased location in January 2020 and currently expect to open one to two more Company-owned restaurants at leased locations in fiscal year 2021.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our primary sources and uses of cash (in thousands):
Operating Activities. Operating cash inflows pertain primarily to restaurant sales and franchise income. Operating cash outflows pertain primarily to expenditures for food and beverages, restaurant operating expenses, marketing and advertising and general and administrative costs. Operating activities provided cash flow all three fiscal years primarily because operating revenues have exceeded cash-based expenses.
Investing Activities. Fiscal year 2020 investing activities were primarily related to capital expenditure projects. Fiscal year 2019 pertained primarily to both the acquisition of franchisee owned restaurants and capital expenditure projects. Fiscal year 2018 investing activities were primarily related to capital expenditure projects.
Financing Activities. Financing activities provided cash in fiscal year 2020 and used cash in fiscal years 2019 and 2018. During fiscal year 2020 we: issued common stock for $49.6 million; increased the debt outstanding under our senior credit facility by $51.0 million; repurchased common stock of $13.2 million; paid dividends of $4.4 million; paid $1.6 million in employee taxes in connection with the vesting of restricted stock; and paid $962 thousand in deferred financing costs. During fiscal year 2019 we: repurchased common stock of $25.8 million; increased the debt outstanding under our senior credit facility by $23.0 million; paid dividends of $15.6 million; and paid $3.7 million in employee taxes in connection with the vesting of restricted stock and the exercise of stock options. We paid $3.7 million in taxes in connection with the vesting of restricted stock and the exercise of stock options because some recipients elected to satisfy their individual tax withholding obligations by having us withhold a number of vested shares of restricted stock and/or a number of shares otherwise issuable pursuant to stock options. During fiscal year 2018 we: repurchased common stock of $18.5 million; paid dividends of $13.5 million; decreased the debt outstanding under our senior credit facility by $9.0 million; and paid $4.3 million in employee taxes in connection with the vesting of restricted stock and the exercise of stock options.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 27, 2020:
Long-term debt obligations include principal maturities and expected interest payments. Expected interest payments were estimated using the interest and fee rates under our senior credit facility as of December 27, 2020. Operating lease obligations do not include contingent rent, common area maintenance, property taxes and other pass through charges from our landlords. The above table does not include recorded liabilities to vendors or employees nor does it include routine purchase commitments shorter than twelve months in duration for food and supplies.
Pursuant to the terms of the purchase agreement, upon closing of the sale of the Mitchell’s Restaurants in January 2015, Landry’s assumed the lease obligations of the Mitchell’s Restaurants. However, the Company has guaranteed Landry’s lease obligations aggregating $22.7 million under five of the leases. Separate from the purchase agreement Landry’s has agreed to indemnify the Company in the event of a default under any of the leases. The above table does not include potential lease obligations for the Mitchell’s Restaurants.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 27, 2020, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition is based upon our audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements is based, in part, on our critical accounting policies that require us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in those consolidated financial statements. Our significant accounting policies, which may be affected by our estimates and assumptions, are more fully described in Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. Critical accounting policies are those that we believe are most important to portraying our financial condition and results of operations and also require the greatest amount of subjective or complex judgments by management. Judgments or uncertainties regarding the application of these policies may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. We
consider the following policies to be the most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
Deferred Gift Card Revenue and Gift Card Breakage Revenue
Revenue from restaurant sales is recognized when food and beverage products are sold. Deferred revenue primarily represents the Company’s liability for gift cards that have been sold but not yet redeemed and is recorded at the expected redemption value. When the gift cards are redeemed, the Company recognizes restaurant sales and reduces the deferred revenue liability. Company issued gift cards redeemed at franchisee-owned restaurants reduce the deferred revenue liability but do not impact our restaurant sales. Gift card transactions involving franchisees are settled on a monthly basis through the Company’s third-party gift card provider. The expected redemption value of gift cards represents the full value of all gift cards issued less the amount the Company has recognized as other operating income for gift cards that are not expected to be redeemed.
The portion of gift cards sold to customers which are never redeemed is commonly referred to as gift card breakage. Gift card breakage produces a revenue stream which is a key element of the profitability of the Company’s gift card program and is classified as a component of other operating revenue.
The Company’s accounting method for recognizing breakage revenue is the redemption method. Under the redemption method, breakage revenue is recognized and the gift card liability is derecognized for unredeemed gift cards in proportion to actual gift card redemptions based on historical breakage rates, including breakage rates during previous economic recessions. The Company continues to review historical gift card redemption information and considers any changes in redemption patterns as a result of the current economic environment, to assess the reasonableness of projected gift card breakage rates and patterns of redemption. Future gift card usage may be different than our historical experience and as result our estimate of cards not expected to be redeemed is subject to inherent uncertainty. If actual redemption activity differs significantly from our historical experience our deferred revenue liability and results of operations could be materially impacted.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review property and equipment (which includes leasehold improvements), purchased intangibles subject to amortization, and operating lease right-of-use (ROU) assets for impairment when events or circumstances indicate these assets might be impaired. We test impairment using historical cash flows and other relevant facts and circumstances as the primary basis for our estimates of future cash flows. The analysis is performed at the restaurant level for indicators of permanent impairment. In determining future cash flows, we make significant estimates with respect to future operating results of each restaurant over the expected remaining life of the primary asset in the restaurant. If assets are determined to be impaired, the loss on impairment is measured by calculating the amount by which the asset-carrying amount exceeds its fair value. This process requires the use of estimates and assumptions, which are subject to a high degree of judgment. If these assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record additional losses on impairment on these assets. During fiscal year 2020, the Company recognized $16.5 million in impairment loss due to the decline in the estimated fair value of the long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment, inventory, liquor licenses, and lease right-of-use assets at thirteen locations. As a result of COVID-19, the Company closed nine locations and estimated significant declines in restaurant profitability in several locations which resulted in a decrease in estimated fair value attributable to these restaurants.
The judgments we make related to the expected useful lives of long-lived assets and our ability to realize undiscounted cash flows in excess of the carrying amounts of these assets are affected by factors such as the ongoing maintenance and improvements of the assets, changes in economic conditions, changes in usage or operating performance and desirability of the restaurant sites. As we assess the ongoing expected cash flows and carrying amounts of our long-lived assets, significant adverse changes in these factors could cause us to recognize a material loss on impairment.
Generally, costs for exit or disposal activities, including restaurant closures, are expensed as incurred. The costs include the cost of disposing of the assets as well as other facility-related expenses from previously closed restaurants. For restaurants operated under operating leases, on the date we commit to a plan to either abandon the related ROU asset or sublease the underlying asset, we evaluate the ROU asset for potential impairment and determine the go-forward accounting based on requirements in Topic 842.
Valuation and Recoverability of Goodwill and Franchise Rights
Goodwill and franchise rights arise primarily from our acquisition of franchisee-owned Ruth’s Chris restaurants. We recognized $7.1 million of franchise rights and $9.0 million of goodwill related to the MBR Franchise Acquisition completed on July 29, 2019. During fiscal year 2020 a territory rights impairment charge of $3.1 million was taken at two locations.
Prior to the MBR Franchise Acquisition, the most significant acquisitions were completed in 1996, 1999, 2006, 2007 and 2017. Goodwill is not subject to amortization and franchise rights acquired prior to 2008 are also not subject to amortization. Such assets
must be tested for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. The annual testing date for determining whether goodwill and other intangible assets are impaired is the last day of the Company’s 48th fiscal week, which in fiscal year 2020 was November 29, 2020. A variety of inherently uncertain estimates, judgments and projections are used in both assessing whether there has been an indicator that an impairment of an intangible asset may have occurred. We performed our annual impairment test of our goodwill and franchise rights using a qualitative assessment. In using the qualitative approach, we evaluated factors, including but not limited to, recent financial performance; forecasts for future cash flows; our stock price and market capitalization; recent impairment tests; legal factors; the business climate; and the competitive environment. Adverse changes in these factors, as occurred during fiscal year 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, had a significant impact on the recoverability of these assets resulting in an impairment loss of $3.1 million against acquired territory rights. If we determine that it is more likely than not that an intangible asset may be impaired, we are required to estimate its fair value. Because similar intangible assets are not bought and sold regularly in public markets, estimates of fair value of our intangible assets are inherently uncertain.
We evaluate the useful lives of our intangible assets to determine if they are definite or indefinite-lived. Reaching a determination on useful life requires significant judgments and assumptions regarding the future effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, other economic factors (such as the stability of the industry, legislative action that results in an uncertain or changing regulatory environment, and expected changes in distribution channels), the level of required capital expenditures, and the expected lives of other related groups of assets.
Insurance Liability
We maintain various insurance policies for workers’ compensation, health and welfare, general liability, professional liability and property damage. Pursuant to those policies, we are responsible for losses up to certain limits and are required to estimate a liability that represents our ultimate exposure for aggregate losses below those limits. The recorded liabilities are based on management’s estimates of the ultimate costs to be incurred to settle known claims and claims not reported as of the balance sheet date. We use independent actuaries to develop the estimated workers’ compensation, general and health and welfare liabilities. Our estimated liability is not discounted and is based on a number of assumptions and factors, including historical trends, actuarial assumptions and economic conditions. If actual trends differ from our estimates, our financial results could be impacted.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 740, Income Taxes (Topic 740). Topic 740 establishes financial accounting and reporting standards for the effects of income taxes that result from an enterprise’s activities during the current and preceding years. It requires an asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting of income taxes. We recognize deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements or tax returns. In the event the future consequences of differences between financial reporting bases and tax bases of our assets and liabilities resulted in a net deferred tax asset, an evaluation is made of the probability of our ability to realize the future benefits indicated by such asset. A valuation allowance related to a deferred tax asset is recorded when it is more likely than not that some portion or the entire deferred tax asset will not be realized. The realization of such net deferred tax will generally depend on whether we will have sufficient taxable income of an appropriate character within the carry-forward period permitted by the tax law. Without sufficient taxable income to utilize the deductible amounts and carry forwards, the related tax benefits will expire unused. We have evaluated both positive and negative evidence in making a determination as to whether it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. Measurement of deferred items is based on enacted tax laws.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASC Topic 842, Leases (Topic 842), which requires a lessee to recognize a liability for future lease obligations and a corresponding right-of-use (ROU) asset and replaces most existing lease guidance in GAAP. The Company adopted this new lease recognition standard on December 31, 2018. See Note 4 for further information about our transition to this new lease recognition standard.
In June 2016 the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses. This update requires immediate recognition of management’s estimates of current expected credit losses. This update was effective for the Company in the first quarter of fiscal year 2020. The adoption of ASU 2016-13 did not have a significant impact on the Company’s ongoing financial reporting.
In January 2017 the FASB issued ASU 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other: Simplifying the Impairment Test for Goodwill. This update eliminated the calculation of implied goodwill fair value. This update was effective for the Company in the first quarter of fiscal year 2020. The adoption of ASU 2017-04 did not have a significant impact on the Company’s ongoing financial reporting.
In August 2018 the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement - Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement. This update eliminated the calculation of implied goodwill fair value. This update was effective for the Company in the first quarter of fiscal year 2020. The adoption of ASU 2018-13 did not have a significant impact on the Company’s ongoing financial reporting.
In August 2018 the FASB issued ASU 2018-15, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Internal-Use Software (Subtopic 350-40). This update aligns the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred in a cloud computing arrangement that is a service contract with the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred to develop or obtain internal-use software. This update was effective for the Company in the first quarter of fiscal year 2020. The adoption of ASU 2018-15 did not have a significant impact on the Company’s ongoing financial reporting.
In August 2018 the FASB issued ASU 2018-19, Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses. This update clarifies that receivables arising from operating leases are not within the scope of Subtopic 326-20. Instead, impairment of receivables arising from operating leases should be accounted for in accordance with Topic 842. This update was effective for the Company in the first quarter of fiscal year 2020. The adoption of ASU 2018-19 did not have a significant impact on the Company’s ongoing financial reporting.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements for Future Application
In December 2019 the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. This update is effective for the Company in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021. This update simplifies the accounting for interim period tax law changes and loss limitations, ownership changes in equity investments, intraperiod tax allocations and the stepup of tax basis in goodwill that is not acquired during a business combination. The adoption of ASU 2019-12 is not expected to have a significant impact on the Company’s ongoing financial reporting.