ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes thereto included in this Report beginning on page. The results shown herein are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected in any future periods. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors. We use words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements.
Significant Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our results of operations, liquidity and capital resources are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Significant estimates made by management include, but are not limited to, the allowance for doubtful accounts, inventory valuations and classifications, the useful life of property and equipment, the valuation of lease liabilities and related right of use assets, the valuation of deferred tax assets, the value of stock-based compensation, and the fair value of non-cash common stock issuances. We base our estimates on historical and anticipated results and trends and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, including assumptions as to future events. These estimates form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. By their nature, estimates are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. Actual results that differ from our estimates could have a significant adverse effect on our operating results and financial position. We believe that the following significant accounting policies and assumptions may involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity than others.
Emerging Growth Company
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act. As a result, we are permitted to, and intend to, rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements. For so long as we are an emerging growth company, we will not be required to:
· have an auditor report on our internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
· comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (i.e., an auditor discussion and analysis);
· submit certain executive compensation matters to shareholder advisory votes, such as “say-on-pay” and “say-on-frequency;” and
· disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation.
In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Our financial statements may therefore not be comparable to those of companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.
We will remain an “emerging growth company” for up to five years, or until the earliest of (i) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our total annual gross revenues exceed $1 billion, (ii) the date that we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which would occur if the market value of our ordinary shares that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter or (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the preceding three year period.
Results of Operations
For the years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020
Our results of operations are summarized below.
Net sales increased by $620,898 or 61.3% for the year ended May 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended May 31, 2020, primarily due to the increase in our direct sales to consumer segment.
Cost of sales includes primarily the cost of products and freight-in costs. For the year ended May 31, 2021, the overall cost of sales increased by $118,923 or 24.7%, as compared to the comparable period in 2020. Cost of sales as a percentage of net revenues for the year ended May 31, 2021 was 36.7% as compared to 47.5% for the comparable period in 2020. The overall decrease in cost of sales, as a percentage of sales, is primarily attributable to the Company’s increased efficiencies in procurement and manufacturing systems, and reduction in product cost.
Gross profit, as a percentage of sales, for the years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020 was 63.3% and 52.5%, respectively. The increase in gross profit, as a percentage of sales, is primarily attributable to our continued increased focus on the direct sales to consumer channels, which have higher margins, during the year ended May 31, 2021 as compared to the same comparable period in 2020.
Operating expenses for the years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020 were $1,354,962 and $703,052, respectively. Operating expenses are costs related to marketing and selling expenses, compensation and related taxes, professional and consulting fees, and general and administrative costs. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenues for the year ended May 31, 2021 were 82.9% as compared to 69.4% for the comparable period in 2020. Operating expenses increased by $651,910 or 92.7% primarily due to an increase in advertising and marketing expenses by $542,235 for displaying our products through our advertising platforms, increased delivery charges and cost of independent marketing contractors; and an increase in professional and consulting services by $107,420 primarily due to an increase in stock-based fees in the year ended May 31, 2021 whereas there was no such cost in the year ended May 31, 2020. Other than an increase in advertising and consulting costs, which were aimed at procuring more customers, the other operating expenses were fairly consistent.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the Years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table provides detailed information about our net cash flows:
We are an emerging growth company and currently engaged in our product sales and development. We have an accumulated deficit and have incurred operating losses since our inception and expect losses to continue during fiscal year 2022. This raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to raise additional capital and implement its business plan. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
Operating Activities
For the Years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended May 31, 2021 was $48,407, attributable to a net loss of $297,755 offset by non-cash items such as depreciation expense of $9,969, bad debts of $1,061, inventory write-off of $19,156, stock-based compensation of $138,800, non-cash lease expense of $1,713 and increase in non-cash gain on debt settlement of $29,333. The net loss was offset by a net increase in operating assets and liabilities of $204,797 primarily due to increase in accounts payable and collection of receivables offset by an increase in inventory purchases and decrease in customer deposits.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended May 31, 2020 was $89,704, attributable to a net loss of $172,767 offset by depreciation expense of $10,456, bad debts recovery of $959, intangibles write-off of $474, non-cash lease expense of $1,713, and a net increase in operating assets and liabilities of $71,379 primarily due to increase in accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid expenses and other current assets, accounts payable and accrued expenses, and customer deposits.
Investing Activities
For the Years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended May 31, 2021 was $15,408 primarily due to the purchase of property and equipment of $15,408.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended May 31, 2020 was $9,230 primarily due to the purchase of property and equipment of $9,230.
Financing Activities
For the Years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended May 31, 2021 was $54,907 primarily attributable to the cash proceeds of $6,300 of loans received from US Small Business Administration pursuant to the Payroll Protection Program of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act”), advances received from a related party of $51,907, and repayment of equipment financing of $3,300.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended May 31, 2021 was $161,786 primarily attributable to the cash proceeds of $12,900 of loans received from US Small Business Administration pursuant to the Payroll Protection Program of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act”), a loan of $150,000 received from the US Small Business Administration pursuant to the Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program (the “EIDL”) of the CARES Act, advances received from a related party of $2,186, and repayment of equipment financing of $3,300.
We currently have no external sources of liquidity or credit arrangements with financial institutions that will have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition or immediate access to capital.
We are dependent on our product sales to fund our operations and may require the sale of additional common stock to maintain operations. Our officers and directors have made no written commitments with respect to providing a source of liquidity in the form of cash advances, loans, and/or financial guarantees.
If we are unable to raise the funds required to fund our operations, we will seek alternative financing through other means, such as borrowings from institutions or private individuals. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise the capital we need for our operations from the sale of our securities. We have not located any sources for these funds and may not be able to do so in the future. We expect that we will seek additional financing in the future. However, we may not be able to obtain additional capital or generate sufficient revenues to fund our operations. If we are unsuccessful at raising sufficient funds, for whatever reason, to fund our operations, we may be forced to cease operations. If we fail to raise funds, we expect that we will be required to seek protection from creditors under applicable bankruptcy laws.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results or operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Inflation
The amounts presented in the financial statements do not provide for the effect of inflation on our operations or financial position. The net operating losses shown would be greater than reported if the effects of inflation were reflected either by charging operations with amounts that represent replacement costs or by using other inflation adjustments.