ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The statements in the discussion and analysis regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding the performance of our business and the forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements. You should read the following discussion together with the sections entitled “Risk Factors,” “Business” and the audited consolidated financial statements, including the related notes, appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All references to years, unless otherwise noted, refer to our fiscal years, which end on December 31. As used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, unless the context suggests otherwise, “we,” “us,” “our,” “the Company” or “Osmotica” refer to Osmotica Pharmaceuticals plc. This discussion and analysis is based upon the historical financial statements of Osmotica Pharmaceuticals plc included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Prior to the Reorganization (as defined in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements), Osmotica Pharmaceuticals plc was a subsidiary of Osmotica Holdings S.C.Sp. and had no material assets and conducted no operations other than activities incidental to its formation, the Reorganization and its initial public offering.
We are a fully integrated biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of specialty products that target markets with underserved patient populations. In 2020, we continued to transition our business to a specialty pharmaceutical company focused on proprietary products primarily in the eye care and neuroscience areas.
We generated total revenues in 2020 across our existing portfolio of promoted women’s health products, specialty neurology, as well as our non-promoted products, which are primarily complex formulations of generic drugs. In 2018, we received regulatory approval from the FDA for Osmolex ER (amantadine extended-release tablets) for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease and drug-induced extrapyramidal reactions, which are involuntary muscle movements caused by certain medications, in adults. We completed the launch of Osmolex ER in January 2019. In January 2021, we concluded the sale of Osmolex ER. In July 2020, we received regulatory approval from the FDA for RVL-1201, or Upneeq, (oxymetazoline hydrocholoride ophthalmic solution, 0.1%), for the treatment of acquired blepharoptosis, or droopy eyelid, in adults. We launched Upneeq in September 2020 to a limited number of eyecare professionals.
Our core competencies span drug development, manufacturing and commercialization. Our sales representatives are fully engaged in the launch and in-person promotion of Upneeq, while we continue to maintain non-personal promotional efforts for certain other products in our portfolio, including M-72 in specialty neurology; OB Complete, our family of prescription prenatal dietary supplements, and Divigel (estradiol gel, 0.1%) in women’s health. As of December 31, 2020, our commercial portfolio of promoted and non-promoted products consists of approximately 35 products. Certain of our key products, particularly those that incorporate our proprietary Osmodex drug delivery system, are manufactured in our Marietta, Georgia facility. Some of our products benefit from intellectual property protection, formulation and manufacturing complexities, data exclusivity, as well as U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, or DEA, regulation and quotas for API.
Many of our generic products compete in generic markets where barriers to entry are lower than markets in which certain of our promoted products compete. Generic products generally contribute most significantly to revenues and gross margins at the time of launch or in periods where no other or a limited number of competing products have been approved and launched. In the U.S., the consolidation of buyers in recent years has increased competitive pressures on the industry as a whole. As such, the timing of new product launches can have a significant impact on a company’s financial results. The entrance into the market of additional competition can have a negative impact on the pricing and volume of the affected products which are outside the company’s control. In particular, methylphenidate ER tablets, venlafaxine ER tablets, or VERT, and Lorzone have experienced, and are expected to continue to experience, significant pricing and market erosion due to additional competition from other generic pharmaceutical companies. This generic pricing erosion has resulted in lower net sales, revenue and profitability from methylphenidate ER tablets, VERT and Lorzone in 2020, and this erosion is expected to continue in subsequent years.
On July 8, 2020, the FDA approved our NDA for Upneeq for the treatment of acquired blepharoptosis in adults. Upneeq was approved based on three Phase III clinical studies that supported Upneeq's efficacy and safety. Results from
Upneeq's first Phase III clinical trial showed that the formulation met its primary efficacy endpoint and was well-tolerated.
We believe Upneeq is the first non-surgical treatment option approved by the FDA for acquired blepharoptosis. We currently make Upneeq available exclusively through RVL Pharmacy, Inc. our wholly-owned pharmacy.
We acquired Upneeq as part of our asset acquisition of RevitaLid, Inc., now known as RVL Pharmaceuticals, Inc., in 2017. As part of the acquisition, we agreed to make future earn-out, milestone and royalty payments based on net sales and regulatory developments with respect to Upneeq.
Upneeq is manufactured and supplied to us by Nephron Pharmaceuticals Corporation under an exclusive supply agreement that has a term of five years from the production of the initial commercial batches, and automatically renews for additional one-year periods unless either party provides at least 90 days’ advance written notice of non-renewal.
On July 28, 2020, we entered into a license agreement with Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, or Santen, granting Santen the exclusive development, registration, and commercialization rights to RVL-1201 in Japan, China, and other Asian countries as well as EMEA countries. Under the license agreement with Santen, we received an upfront license milestone payment of $25.0 million and may receive additional milestone payments up to $64.0 million based on regulatory and sales achievements in Santen’s territories. We are also entitled to royalty payments on net sales of RVL-1201 in Santen commercialization territories.
In addition, we are developing our late-stage product candidate arbaclofen extended-release, or ER, tablets designed for the alleviation of signs and symptoms of spasticity resulting from multiple sclerosis, or MS, for which we have completed Phase III clinical trials. In June 2020, we resubmitted our NDA for arbaclofen ER tablets for the alleviation of spasticity in MS to the FDA. On July 17, 2020 we received notice from the FDA that it considered the resubmission a complete response to the July 9, 2016 action letter and set a goal date for a FDA decision on the NDA of December 29, 2020. On December 28, 2020 we received a complete response letter, or CRL indicating the FDA could not approve the NDA in its then current form. The CRL stated that we did not provide adequate justification (including in our most recent NDA amendment) for the statistical analysis of the change from baseline to Day 84 in TNmAS-MAL scores comparing arbaclofen 40 mg to placebo, one of the co-primary endpoints. On January 23, 2021, we submitted a Type A meeting request to the FDA to discuss the CRL’s recommendations and obtain advice on a path forward for the NDA. The meeting took place on March 4, 2021, during which we explored selective review of the currently available data and options for a path forward for FDA approval, including conducting another clinical study.
On November 10, 2020, we and our board of directors announced that it is undertaking a comprehensive review of strategic options to maximize shareholder value. The options under consideration include divestitures of non-strategic assets, re-financings, commercialization or collaboration agreements.
Business Update Regarding COVID-19
The current COVID-19 pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world and is affecting our employees, patients, communities and business operations, as well as the U.S. economy and financial markets. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets.
To date, we have been able to continue to supply our products to our patients without significant disruptions. We do not currently anticipate significant interruptions in supply in the near term. However, we are continuing to monitor the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations, including our sales, expenses, manufacturing and clinical trials.
We and our third-party contract manufacturing partners have been able to operate our manufacturing facilities at or near normal levels. While we currently do not anticipate significant interruptions in our manufacturing supply chain, the
COVID-19 pandemic and related mitigation efforts may have a negative impact in the future on our third party suppliers’ and contract manufacturing partners’ ability to manufacture our products or to have our products reach all markets.
We are monitoring the demand for our products, including the duration and degree to which we may see declines in customer orders or new prescriptions for our products, as health care providers are dedicating more resources for the treatment of COVID-19 patients. During the first quarter of 2020, we took action to reduce the size of our field sales force with the remaining sales personnel, in many cases, engaging with physicians remotely as we seek to continue to support healthcare professionals and patient care.
In the U.S. and in most other key markets, our office-based employees have been encouraged to work from home since mid-March 2020. During this time, we are ensuring essential staffing levels in our operations remain in place, including maintaining key personnel in our laboratories and manufacturing facilities.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please read Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financial Operations Overview
Segment Information
We currently operate in one business segment focused on the development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products that target markets with underserved patient populations. We are not organized by market and are managed and operated as one business. We also do not operate any separate lines of business or separate business entities with respect to our products. A single management team reports to our chief operating decision maker who comprehensively manages our entire business. Accordingly, we do not accumulate discrete financial information with respect to separate product lines and do not have separately reportable segments. See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
Our revenues consist of product sales, royalty revenues and licensing and contract revenue.
Net product sales-Our revenues consist primarily of product sales of our promoted products, principally Divigel and the OB Complete family of prescription prenatal dietary supplements, M-72, Lorzone, and our non-promoted products. We ship our products to our customers pursuant to purchase orders, which in certain cases are pursuant to a master agreement with that customer, and we invoice the customer upon shipment. For these sales we recognize revenue when control has transferred to the customer, which is typically on delivery to the customer. The amount of revenue we recognize is equal to the selling price, adjusted for any variable consideration, which includes estimated chargebacks, commercial rebates, discounts and allowances at the time revenues are recognized.
Royalty revenue-For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (a) when the related sales occur, or (b) when the performance obligation to which some or all the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied).
Licensing and contract revenue-We have arrangements with commercial partners that allow for the purchase of product from the Company by the commercial partners for purpose of sub-distribution. Licensing revenue is recognized when the performance obligation identified in the arrangement is completed. Variable considerations, such as returns on product sales, government program rebates, price adjustments and prompt pay discounts associated with licensing revenue, are generally the responsibility of our commercial partners.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel expenses, including salaries and benefits for employees in executive, sales, marketing, finance, accounting, business development, legal and human resource functions. General and administrative expenses also include corporate facility costs, including rent, utilities, insurance, legal fees related to corporate matters and fees for accounting and other consulting services. We expect to continue to incur additional general and administrative expenses as a public company, including costs associated with the preparation of our SEC filings, increased legal and accounting costs, investor relations costs, incremental director and officer liability insurance costs, as well as costs related to compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.
Research and Development
Costs for research and development are charged as incurred and include employee-related expenses (including salaries and benefits, travel and expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs, contract manufacturing organizations and service providers that assist in conducting clinical and preclinical studies), costs associated with preclinical activities and development activities and costs associated with regulatory operations.
Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical studies, are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by our vendors on their actual costs incurred. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual arrangements, which may differ from the patterns of costs incurred, and are reflected in our consolidated financial statements as prepaid expenses or accrued expenses as applicable.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Financial Operations Overview
The following table presents revenues and expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Revenue
The following table presents total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Total revenues decreased by $62.1 million to $177.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $240.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a decrease in net product sales, partially offset by higher licensing and contract revenue.
Net Product Sales. Net product sales decreased by $89.6 million to $145.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $235.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Approximately $52.2 million of this decrease was attributable to lower realized prices, and approximately $37.4 million was due to lower volumes of products sold. Net product sales of methylphenidate ER (including M-72), decreased 57% due to price erosion from generic competitors resulting in significantly lower net selling prices and lower volumes. Product sales from VERT decreased by 66% for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to additional generic competition resulting in lower volumes and net realized selling prices. During the first quarter of 2020 two competitors launched competing dosage strengths of VERT which negatively affected selling prices and volumes. We expect that the additional competition for both methylphenidate ER and VERT from these competitors, as well as additional generic product approvals and launches in the future, if any, will continue to negatively affect our sales of these products in 2021 and future years. VERT sales were favorably impacted by $6.4 million, in the aggregate related to product returns during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 based on actual experience. There can be no assurance that actual product returns experience and other adjustments will continue to favorably impact net sales in 2021 and in future years.
Product sales from Lorzone declined 73% for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting lower volume due to the launch of generic competitors in late 2019 and 2020, and transition of sales to the Company’s authorized generic product during the period. We expect that additional competition for Lorzone from current competitors, as well as additional generic product approvals and launches in the future, if any, will continue to negatively affect our sales of Lorzone during 2021 and in future years. Product sales from Divigel increased by 18%, driven primarily by the launch of a new dosage strength in 2020 together with targeted promotional activities and strong patient access. Product sales from the OB Complete family of prescription prenatal dietary supplements decreased by $2.9 million or 29% during 2020 due to lower volumes sold reflecting a shift of promotional resources to another product. Sales of Nitrofurantoin increased 82% as the 2020 represented the first full year of sales following the product’s launch during 2019. Other product sales increased by 21%, largely due to other non-promoted products during the year.
Royalty Revenue. Royalty revenue increased by $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year period, primarily due to higher product sales by license partners during the year.
Licensing and Contract Revenue. Licensing and contract revenue increased by $27.0 million in 2020 primarily reflecting license agreement with Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, granting the exclusive development, registration, and commercialization rights to RVL-1201 in Japan, China, and other Asian countries as well as EMEA countries. Under the agreement, the Company received an upfront milestone payment of $25.0 million.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit Percentage
The following table presents a breakdown of total cost of goods sold for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Total cost of goods sold decreased $37.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $74.5 million as compared to $111.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by a $36.6 million decrease in amortization of intangible assets, due to lower amortization for methylphenidate ER and VERT. Royalty expense decreased by $0.9 million due to decrease in net sales of certain royalty products. There was no material change in depreciation expense or other cost of goods sold.
Gross profit percentage increased to 58% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 53% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding amortization and depreciation, our gross profit percentage for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 68% as compared to 76% for the year ended December 31, 2019 largely due to higher unit production costs and sample costs associated with the launch of Upneeq, partially offset by lower inventory reserves and royalty expense.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $11.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $82.0 million as compared to $93.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in our selling, general and administrative expenses reflects salesforce reductions in the third quarter of 2019 and the first quarter of 2020, partially offset by higher marketing expenses associated with the launch of Upneeq and higher general and administrative expenses largely due to costs associated with the Santen license transaction and legal expenses during the year.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses decreased by $12.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $19.7 million as compared to $32.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease primarily reflects the completion of the Phase III clinical trials of both arbaclofen ER and RVL-1201 during the first and second quarters of 2019, respectively, and the NDA filing fees for RVL-1201 incurred in the third quarter of 2019.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Impairment of Intangible Assets and Goodwill
Impairments of intangible assets and goodwill for the year-ended December 31, 2020 was $72.2 million primarily consisting of write-downs to fair value for methylphenidate ER, VERT, arbaclofen ER and Oxybutynin of $19.5 million, $20.2 million, $28.9 million and $3.6 million, respectively, including an indefinite-lived In-Process R&D asset, arbaclofen ER, which resulted in an impairment charge of $28.9 million due to a delay in the anticipated launch of the product candidate, if approved. The impairments of methylphenidate ER, VERT and Oxybutynin reflect the competitive generic environment which has continued to erode net realized pricing and volumes of these products, while the impairment of Onitnua ER reflects a delay in its anticpated commericialization should the product be approved by the FDA. In the fourth quarter of 2020 we recognized an impairment of finite-lived development technology and product rights for VERT of $10.7 million and $9.5 million, respectively due to the approval of a competing product and the anticipated deterioration of pricing and volumes, and an impairment of indefinite-lived intangible assets for arbaclofen ER of $28.9 million.
Impairment of intangible assets was $283.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily consisting of write-downs to fair value of methylphenidate ER, VERT, Osmolex ER, and Corvite of $128.1 million, $137.7 million, $17.7 million, and $0.2 million, respectively. Methylphenidate ER tablets and VERT were impaired due to lower revenues reflecting an increasingly competitive environment which deteriorated pricing and volumes; Osmolex ER was impaired due to underperforming revenue expectations subsequent to the launch of the product; and Corvite was impaired due to the discontinuation of the product. In the third and fourth quarter of 2019, we also recognized an impairment of finite-lived development technology and product rights for VERT of $73.0 million and $64.7 million, respectively, due to approvals of competing products which deteriorated pricing and volumes.
The following table details the impairment charges for such periods (in thousands):
Impairment of Fixed Assets
Fixed asset impairments for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were less than $0.1 million and $0.1 million, respectively, due to the abandonment of information technology in both 2020 and 2019 and warehouse assets in 2019.
Interest Expense and Amortization of Debt Discount
Interest expense and amortization of debt discount decreased by $3.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $14.4 million as compared to $18.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in borrowing costs reflects lower levels of indebtedness following the prepayment of debt in the third quarter of 2020, and lower interest rates.
Other Non-operating (Income) Expenses, net
Other non-operating (income) expense was $(0.6) million and $(0.9) million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit decreased by $22.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $4.7 million as compared to $27.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The significant difference in the 2020 income tax benefit was the result of recording a valuation allowance in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash generated from operations and amounts available to be drawn under our Revolving Credit Facility, or Revolver. Our primary uses of cash are to fund operating expenses, product development costs, capital expenditures, debt service payments, as well as strategic business and product acquisitions.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $114.1 million and borrowing availability under the Revolver of $50.0 million. We also had $221.3 million aggregate principal amount borrowed under our term loans. During the year ended December 31, 2020 we generated $17.6 million of cash flows from operations, and during the year ended December 31, 2019, we generated cash flows from operations of $33.6 million. We expect to generate positive cash flow from operations in the future through sales of our existing products; however, we expect our levels of cash flow generated to be lower or negative in the near term due to price erosion on our generic products and new product launch expenses associated with the launch of Upneeq and possible future price erosion on our other products.
As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate was 4.75% and 5.25% for our Term A Loan and Term B Loan, respectively. As of December 31, 2019, the interest rate was 5.79% and 6.29% for our Term A Loan and Term B Loan, respectively.
At December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding borrowings or outstanding letters of credit under the Revolver. Availability under the Revolver as of December 31, 2020 was $50.0 million.
On January 13, 2020 we completed a follow-on equity offering and allotted 6,900,000 ordinary share at a public offering price of $5.00 per share. The number of shares issued in this offering reflected the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase 900,000 ordinary shares. The aggregate net proceeds from the follow-on offering were approximately $31.8 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. Proceeds from the offering were used for working capital and general corporate purposes.
On July 16, 2020 we completed a follow-on equity offering and allotted 5.0 million ordinary shares. The aggregate proceeds from the follow-on offering were approximately $30.4 million after deducting offering expenses. Proceeds from the offering will be used for working capital and general corporate purposes.
Our non-promoted products, including methylphenidate ER and VERT compete in generic markets for which competition has eroded, and will continue to erode, profitability over time. During the year ended December 31, 2020, there were two launches of generic VERT, and as of December 31, 2020 there were six approved AB rated generic forms of Lorzone. Additionally, there was an additional approval of competing dosage strengths of VERT during 2020 which launched in early 2021. As a result, we have experienced, and anticipate that we will continue to experience, price erosion negatively affecting profitability of these products and possibly others in 2021 and future years.
The Company’s future operating performance and adequacy of cash resources depends on many assumptions, including assumptions with respect to product sales and expenses, commercialization costs, research and development expenses as well as other factors. These assumptions may prove to be wrong or other factors may adversely affect the Company’s operating results. As a result, the Company’s operating results may fluctuate significantly quarter to quarter or year to year. The Company expects its near term levels of profitability and cash flow to be negatively affected by price competition on our generic products, and increased expenses associated with new product launches. As a result, it’s possible the Company would not be able to comply with financial covenants in its credit agreement or generate sufficient cash to service its debt obligations. This could, among other things, force us to raise additional funds or force us to reduce our expenses through cost cutting measures either of which could have a material adverse affect on our business.
The Company is currently undertaking a comprehensive review of strategic options to maximize shareholder value. The options under consideration include asset disposals, re-financings and commercialization or collaboration agreements. In the event the Company is unable to generate sufficient proceeds from these strategic options such that it can reduce, retire or refinance its existing debt, the Company believes it has sufficient plans to effectively manage its expenses and avail itself of cure provisions provided for in its credit agreement, in order to maintain compliance with its debt covenants therein. The use of the cure provisions will result in the utilization cash to prepay debt.
A significant portion of the Company’s expense base is discretionary and the Company has the ability to reduce or defer spending to reduce expenses and improve profitability and cash flow to maintain compliance with its debt covenants. This could include, among other things, significant reductions in its general and administrative expenses, research and development expenses, including deferral of clinical trial programs, and deferrals of certain promotional and capital spending programs which could negatively impact the Company’s revenue growth and plans. The Company has previously demonstrated an ability to implement various cost reduction initiatives. During the third quarter of 2019 and continuing into 2020, the Company reduced its field force by an aggregate of 90 positions, generating annualized savings of approximately $10 million, and took measures to realign its operating infrastructure to prepare for the launch of Upneeq and implemented other cost-savings measures to reduce its expenses.
Based on the current facts and circumstances, the use of the cure provisions provided for in the credit agreement, which will result in utilizing cash to prepay debt, and the Company’s ability to implement spending reductions and program deferrals, we believe it is probable that the Company can effectively manage its spending to improve profitability in order to maintain compliance with the debt covenants and other obligations in our credit agreement for at least the next 12 months, even if the strategic review does not generate sufficient proceeds to reduce, retire or refinance our existing debt. As a result, the Company has concluded that, after consideration of management’s plans our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with cash enerated from operations, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for the next 12 months.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our shareholders’ ownership interests will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our shareholders. Additionally, certain financings may require the consent of the lenders under our senior secured credit facilities. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our intellectual property, technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Net cash provided by operating activities
Cash flows from operating activities are primarily driven by earnings from operations (excluding the impact of non-cash items), the timing of cash receipts and disbursements related to accounts receivable and accounts payable and the timing of inventory transactions and changes in other working capital amounts. Net cash provided by operating activities was $17.6 million and $33.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily as a result of lower net income after considering non-cash adjustments, partially offset by higher cash provided from operating assets and liabilities, particularly accounts receivable and inventories as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net cash used in investing activities
Our uses of cash in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 reflected purchases of property, plant and equipment and were $3.1 million and $4.0 million, respectively.
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $3.7 million during 2020 largely reflecting net proceeds raised from equity offerings in January and July, 2020, offset by prepayments of term loans in the third quarter of 2020, and share repurchases.
Net cash used by financing activities of $4.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily related to the $1.8 million of net repayments of insurance premium financing and by $2.8 million repurchase of ordinary shares.
Contractual Obligations
The following table lists our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
(1) Represents the remaining principal amount under our senior secured credit facilities, which is due on December 21, 2022.
(2) These amounts represent future cash interest payments related to our existing debt obligations based on variable interest rates specified in the senior secured credit facilities. Payments related to variable debt are based on applicable rates at December 31, 2020 plus the specified margin in the senior secured credit facilities for each period presented. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate was 4.75% for Term A Loan and 5.25% for Term B Loan.
(3) Includes minimum cash payments related to certain fixed assets, primarily office equipment.
(4) Includes minimum cash payments related to our leased offices and warehouse facilities under non-cancelable leases in New Jersey, Florida, North Carolina, as well as in Argentina.
(5) Includes obligations to make minimum annual royalty payments.
Our liability for unrecognized tax benefits has been excluded from the above contractual obligations table as the nature and timing of future payments, if any, cannot be reasonably estimated. As of December 31, 2020, our liability for unrecognized tax benefits was $0.2 million (excluding interest and penalties). We do not anticipate that the amount of our liability for unrecognized tax benefits will significantly change in the next 12 months.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The significant accounting policies and basis of presentation are described in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses and the related disclosures in the notes thereto. Some of these estimates can be subjective and complex. Although we believe that our estimates and assumptions are reasonable, there may be other reasonable estimates or assumptions that differ significantly from ours. Further, our estimates and assumptions are based upon information available at the time they were made. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
In order to understand our consolidated financial statements, it is important to understand our critical accounting estimates. We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if: (i) the accounting estimate requires us to make assumptions about matters that were highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate was made and (ii) changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur from period to period, or use of different estimates that we reasonably could have used in the current period, would have a material impact on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. We believe the following accounting policies and estimates to be critical:
Revenue Recognition
Upon adoption of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC Topic 606) on January 1, 2018, we recognize revenue as described below. The implementation of the new revenue recognition standard did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Product Sales-Revenue is recognized at the point in time when our performance obligations with our customers have been satisfied. At contract inception, we determine if the contract is within the scope of ASC Topic 606 and then evaluate the contract using the following five steps: (1) identify the contract with the customer; (2) identify the performance obligations; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (5) recognize revenue at the point in time when the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
Revenue is recorded at the transaction price, which is the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring products to a customer. We consider the unit of account for each purchase order that contains more than one product. Because all products in a given purchase order are generally delivered at the same time and the method of
revenue recognition is the same for each, there is no need to separate an individual order into separate performance obligations. In the event that we fulfilled an order only partially because a requested item is on backorder, the portion of the purchase order covering the item is generally cancelled, and the customer has the option to submit a new one for the backordered item. We determine the transaction price based on fixed consideration in our contractual agreements, which includes estimates of variable consideration, and the transaction price is allocated entirely to the performance obligation to provide pharmaceutical products. In determining the transaction price, a significant financing component does not exist since the timing from when we deliver product to when the customers pay for the product is less than one year and the customers do not pay for product in advance of the transfer of the product.
We record product sales net of any variable consideration, which includes estimated chargebacks, commercial rebates, discounts and allowances and doubtful accounts. We utilize the expected value method to estimate all elements of variable consideration included in the transaction. The variable consideration is recorded as a reduction of revenue at the time revenues are recognized. We will only recognize revenue to the extent that it is probable that a significant revenue reversal will not occur in a future period. These estimates may differ from actual consideration amount received and we will re-assess these estimates each reporting period to reflect known changes in factors.
Royalty Revenue-For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (a) when the related sales occur, or (b) when the performance obligation to which some or all the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or substantially satisfied).
Licensing and Contract Revenue- We have arrangements with commercial partners that allow for the purchase of product from us by the commercial partner for purposes of sub-distribution. We recognize revenue from an arrangement when control of such product is transferred to the commercial partner, which is typically upon delivery. In these situations the performance obligation is satisfied when product is delivered to our commercial partner. Licensing revenue is recognized in the period in which the product subject to the sublicensing arrangement is sold. Sales deductions, such as returns on product sales, government program rebates, price adjustments, and prompt pay discounts in regard to licensing revenue is generally the responsibility of our commercial partners and not recorded by us.
Freight-We record amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling as revenue, and record shipping and handling expenses related to product sales as cost of goods sold. We account for shipping and handling activities related to contracts with customers as costs to fulfill the promise to transfer the associated products. When shipping and handling costs are incurred after a customer obtains control of the products, we also have elected to account for these as costs to fulfill the promise and not as a separate performance obligation.
Sales Deductions
Product sales are recorded net of estimated chargebacks, commercial and governmental rebates, discounts, allowances, copay discounts, advertising and promotions and estimated product returns, or collectively, “sales deductions.”
Provision for estimated chargebacks, certain commercial rebates, discounts and allowances and doubtful accounts settled in sales credits at the time of sales are analyzed and adjusted, if necessary, monthly and recorded against gross trade accounts receivable. Estimated product returns, certain commercial and governmental rebates and customer coupons settled in cash are analyzed and adjusted, if necessary, monthly and recorded as a component of accrued expenses.
Calculating certain of these items involves estimates and judgments based on sales or invoice data, contractual terms, historical utilization rates, new information regarding changes in applicable regulations and guidelines that would impact the amount of the actual rebates, our expectations regarding future utilization rates and estimated customer inventory levels. Amounts accrued for sales deductions are adjusted when trends or significant events indicate that adjustment is appropriate and to reflect actual experience. The most significant items deducted from gross product sales where we exercise judgment are chargebacks, commercial and governmental rebates, product returns, discounts and allowances and advertising and promotions.
Where available, we have relied on information received from our wholesaler customers about the quantities of inventory held, including the information received pursuant to days of sales outstanding, which we have not independently verified. For other customers, we have estimated inventory held based on buying patterns. In addition, we have evaluated market conditions for products primarily through the analysis of wholesaler and other third party sell-through, as well as internally-generated information, to assess factors that could impact expected product demand at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. We believe that the estimated level of inventory held by our customers is within a reasonable range as compared to both: (i) historical amounts and (ii) expected demand for the products that represent a majority of the volume at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
If the assumptions we use to calculate our allowances for sales deductions do not appropriately reflect future activity, our financial position, results of operations and cash flows could be materially impacted.
The following table presents the activity and ending balances for our product sales provisions for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Total items deducted from gross product sales were $173.1 million (excluding $2.5 million in provisions for advertising and promotion), or 53.8% as a percentage of gross product sales, during the year ended December 31, 2020. Total items deducted from gross product sales were $524.4 million (excluding $4.4 million in provisions for advertising and promotion), or 68.6% as a percentage of gross product sales, during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Chargebacks-We enter into contractual agreements with certain third parties such as retailers, hospitals and group-purchasing organizations, or GPOs, to sell certain products at predetermined prices. Most of the parties have elected to have these contracts administered through wholesalers that buy the product from us and subsequently sell it to these third parties. When a wholesaler sells products to one of these third parties that are subject to a contractual price agreement, the difference between the price paid to us by the wholesaler and the price under the specific contract is charged back to us by the wholesaler. Utilizing this information, we estimate a chargeback percentage for each product and record an allowance for chargebacks as a reduction to gross sales when we record our sale of the products. We reduce the chargeback allowance when a chargeback request from a wholesaler is processed. Our provision for chargebacks is fully reserved for at the time when sales revenues are recognized.
We obtain product inventory reports from major wholesalers to aid in analyzing the reasonableness of the chargeback allowance and to monitor whether wholesaler inventory levels do not significantly exceed customer demand. We assess the reasonableness of our chargeback allowance by applying a product chargeback percentage that is based on a combination of historical activity and current price and mix expectations to the quantities of inventory on hand at the wholesalers according to wholesaler inventory reports. In addition, we estimate the percentage of gross sales that were generated through direct and indirect sales channels and the percentage of contract compared to non-contract revenue in the period, as these each affect the estimated reserve calculation. In accordance with our accounting policy, we estimate the percentage amount of wholesaler inventory that will ultimately be sold to third parties that are subject to contractual price agreements based on a trend of such sales through wholesalers. We use this percentage estimate until historical trends indicate that a revision should be made. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our actual chargeback rate experience, and new trends are factored into our estimates each quarter as market conditions change.
Events that could materially alter chargebacks include: changes in product pricing as a result of competitive market dynamics or negotiations with customers, changes in demand for specific products due to external factors such as competitor supply position or consumer preferences, customer shifts in buying patterns from direct to indirect through wholesalers, which could either individually or in aggregate increase or decrease the chargebacks depending on the direction and trend of the change(s).
Chargebacks were $122.6 million and $345.4 million, or 38.1% and 45.2% as a percentage of gross product sales, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Chargebacks as a percentage of gross product sales decreased in 2020 as compared with 2019, primarily due to a change in product mix and pricing. We expect that chargebacks will continue to significantly impact our reported net product sales.
Commercial Rebates-We maintain an allowance for commercial rebates that we have in place with certain customers. Commercial rebates vary by product and by volume purchased by each eligible customer. We track sales by product number for each eligible customer and then apply the applicable commercial rebate percentage, using both historical trends and actual experience to estimate our commercial rebates. We reduce gross sales and increase the commercial rebates allowance by the estimated rebate amount when we sell our products to eligible customers. We reduce the commercial rebate allowance when we process a customer request for a rebate. At each month end, we analyze the allowance for commercial rebates against actual rebates processed and make necessary adjustments as appropriate. Our provision for commercial rebates is fully reserved for at the time sales revenues are recognized.
The allowance for commercial rebates takes into consideration price adjustments which are credits issued to reflect increases or decreases in the invoice or contract prices of our products. In the case of a price decrease, a shelf-stock adjustment credit is given for product remaining in customer’s inventories at the time of the price reduction. Contractual price protection results in a similar credit when the invoice or contract prices of our products increase, effectively allowing customers to purchase products at previous prices for a specified period of time. Amounts recorded for estimated shelf-stock adjustments and price protections are based upon specified terms with direct customers, estimated changes in market prices, and estimates of inventory held by customers. We regularly monitor these and other factors and evaluate the reserve as additional information becomes available.
We ensure that commercial rebates are reasonable through review of contractual obligations, review of historical trends and evaluation of recent activity. Furthermore, other events that could materially alter commercial rebates include: changes in product pricing as a result of competitive market dynamics or negotiations with customers, changes in demand for specific products due to external factors such as competitor supply position or consumer preferences, customer shifts in buying patterns from direct to indirect through wholesalers, which could either individually or in aggregate increase or decrease the commercial rebates depending on the direction and velocity of the change(s).
Commercial rebates were $22.5 million and $147.2 million, or 7.0% and 19.3% as a percentage of gross product sales, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Commercial rebates as a percentage of gross product sales decreased in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to the change in product mix and customer contracts. We expect that commercial rebates will continue to significantly impact our reported net sales.
Government Program Rebates-Federal law requires that a pharmaceutical distributor, as a condition of having federal funds being made available to the states for the manufacturer’s drugs under Medicaid and Medicare Part B, must enter into a rebate agreement to pay rebates to state Medicaid programs for the distributor’s covered outpatient drugs that are dispensed to Medicaid beneficiaries and paid for by a state Medicaid program under a fee-for-service arrangement. CMS is responsible for administering the Medicaid rebate agreements between the federal government and pharmaceutical manufacturers. Rebates are also due on the utilization of Medicaid managed care organizations, or MMCOs. We also pay rebates to MCOs for the reimbursement of a portion of the sales price of prescriptions filled that are covered by the respective plans. The liability for Medicaid, Medicare and other government program rebates is settled in cash and is estimated based on historical and current rebate redemption and utilization rates contractually submitted by each state’s program administrator and assumptions regarding future government program utilization for each product sold, and accordingly recorded as a reduction of product sales. Medicaid rebates are typically billed up to 180 days after the product is shipped, but can be as much as 270 days after the quarter in which the product is dispensed to the Medicaid participant. In addition to the estimates mentioned above, our calculation also requires other estimates, such as estimates
of sales mix, to determine which sales are subject to rebates and the amount of such rebates. Periodically, we adjust the Medicaid rebate provision based on actual claims paid. Due to the delay in billing, adjustments to actual claims paid may incorporate revisions of this provision for several periods. Because Medicaid pricing programs involve particularly difficult interpretations of complex statutes and regulatory guidance, our estimates could differ from actual experience.
Government program rebates were $18.2 million and $20.1 million, or 5.7% and 2.6% as a percentage of gross product sales, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Product Returns-Certain of our products are sold with the customer having the right to return the product within specified periods. Estimated return accruals are made at the time of sale based upon historical experience. Our return policy generally allows customers to receive credit for expired products within six months prior to expiration and within one year after expiration. Our provision for returns consists of our estimates for future product returns.
Historical factors such as one-time recall events as well as pending new developments such as comparable product approvals or significant pricing movement that may impact the expected level of returns are taken into account monthly to determine the appropriate accrued expense. As part of the evaluation of the liability required, we consider actual returns to date that are in process, the expected impact of any product recalls and the amount of wholesaler’s inventory to assess the magnitude of unconsumed product that may result in product returns to us in the future. The product returns level can be impacted by factors such as overall market demand and market competition and availability for substitute products which can increase or decrease the pull through for sales of our products and ultimately impact the level of product returns. In determining our estimates for returns and allowances, we are required to make certain assumptions regarding the timing of the introduction of new products. In addition, we make certain assumptions with respect to the extent and pattern of decline associated with generic competition. To make these assessments, we utilize market data for similar products as analogs for our estimations. We use our best judgment to formulate these assumptions based on past experience and information available to us at the time. We continually reassess and make the appropriate changes to our estimates and assumptions as new information becomes available to us. Product returns are fully reserved for at the time when sales revenues are recognized.
Our estimate for returns may be impacted by a number of factors, but the principal factor relates to the level of inventory in the distribution channel. When we are aware of an increase in the level of inventory of our products in the distribution channel, we consider the reasons for the increase to determine whether we believe the increase is temporary or other-than-temporary. Increases in inventory levels assessed as temporary will not result in an adjustment to our provision for returns. Some of the factors that may be an indication that an increase in inventory levels will be temporary include:
● recently implemented or announced price increases for our products; and
● new product launches or expanded indications for our existing products.
Conversely, other-than-temporary increases in inventory levels may be an indication that future product returns could be higher than originally anticipated and, accordingly, we may need to adjust our provision for returns. Some of the factors that may be an indication that an increase in inventory levels will be other-than-temporary include:
● declining sales trends based on prescription demand;
● recent regulatory approvals to shorten the shelf life of our products, which could result in a period of higher returns;
● slow moving or obsolete product still in the distribution channel;
● introduction of new product(s) or generic competition;
● increasing price competition from generic competitors; and
● changes to the National Drug Codes, or NDCs, of our products, which could result in a period of higher returns related to product with the old NDC, as our customers generally permit only one NDC per product for identification and tracking within their inventory systems.
We ensure that product returns are reasonable through inspection of historical trends and evaluation of recent activity. Furthermore, other events that could materially alter product returns include: acquisitions and integration activities that consolidate dissimilar contract terms and could impact the return rate as typically we purchase smaller entities with less contracting power and integrate those product sales to our contracts; and consumer demand shifts by products, which could either increase or decrease the product returns depending on the product or products specifically demanded and ultimately returned.
Product returns were $2.8 million and $(3.9) million, or 0.9% and (0.5)% as a percentage of gross product sales, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Product returns as a percentage of gross product sales decreased in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to lower than expected returns processed. Product returns as a percentage of gross product sales are not expected to change materially for 2021.
Promotions and Co-Pay Discount Cards-From time to time we authorize various retailers to run in-store promotional sales of our products. We accrue an estimate of the dollar amount expected to be owed back to the retailer. Additionally, we provide consumer co-pay discount cards, administered through outside agents to provide discounted products when redeemed. Upon release of the cards into the market, we record an estimate of the dollar value of co-pay discounts expected to be utilized taking into consideration historical experience.
Advertising and promotions as a percentage of gross product sales did not change materially during the periods presented. Promotions and co-pay discount cards are included in advertising and promotions, which were $2.5 million and $4.4 million, or 0.86% and 0.6% as a percentage of gross product sales, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Discounts and allowances were $7.0 million and $15.7 million, or 2.2% and 2.1% as a percentage of gross product sales, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Discounts and allowances as a percentage of gross product sales did not change materially during the periods presented and are not expected to change materially in 2021.
Valuation of long-lived assets
As of December 31, 2020, our combined long-lived assets balance, including property, plant and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets, is $58.7 million.
Long-lived assets, other than goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangibles, are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable through the estimated undiscounted future cash flows derived from such assets. Factors that we consider in deciding when to perform an impairment review include significant changes in our forecasted projections for the asset or asset group for reasons including, but not limited to, significant under-performance of a product in relation to expectations, significant changes or planned changes in our use of the assets, significant negative industry or economic trends, and new or competing products that enter the marketplace. The impairment test is based on a comparison of the undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated from the use of the asset group.
Our long-lived intangible assets, which consist of distribution rights, product rights, tradenames and developed technology, are initially recorded at fair value upon acquisition. To the extent they are deemed to have finite lives, they are then amortized over their estimated useful lives using either the straight-line method or based on the expected pattern of cash flows. Factors giving rise to our initial estimate of useful lives are subject to change. Significant changes to any of these factors may result in a reduction in the useful life of the asset and an acceleration of related amortization expense, which could cause our operating income, net income and net income per share to decrease.
Recoverability of an asset that will continue to be used in our operations is measured by comparing the carrying amount of the asset to the forecasted undiscounted future cash flows related to the asset. In the event the carrying amount of the
asset exceeds its undiscounted future cash flows and the carrying amount is not considered recoverable, impairment may exist. If impairment is indicated, the asset is written down by the amount by which the carrying value of the asset exceeds the related fair value of the asset with the related impairment charge recognized within the statements of operations. Our reviews of long-lived assets during the two years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 resulted in certain impairment charges. These charges relate to both finite and indefinite-lived intangible assets, which are described in Note 7, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, to our consolidated financial statements.
These impairment charges were generally based on fair value estimates determined using either discounted cash flow models or preliminary offers from prospective buyers. The discounted cash flow models include assumptions related to product revenue, growth rates and operating margin. These assumptions are based on management’s annual and ongoing budgeting, forecasting and planning processes and represent our best estimate of future product cash flows. These estimates are subject to the economic environment in which we operate, demand for the products and competitor actions. The use of different assumptions would have increased or decreased our estimated discounted future cash flows and the resulting estimated fair values of these assets, causing increases or decreases in the resulting asset impairment charges. Events giving rise to impairment are an inherent risk in the pharmaceutical industry and cannot be predicted.
We recorded impairment charges of $72.2 million and $283.7 million, regarding definite-lived and indefinite-lived intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are assessed for impairment on an annual basis as of October 1st of each year or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired.
Goodwill Impairment Assessment-We are organized in one reporting unit and evaluate goodwill for our company as a whole. Under the authoritative guidance issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, we have the option to first assess the qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then the goodwill impairment test is performed. As further described in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, effective January 1, 2017, we early adopted Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2017-04 “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Accounting for Goodwill Impairment” (ASU 2017-04). Subsequent to adoption, we perform our goodwill impairment tests by comparing the fair value and carrying amount of our reporting unit. Any goodwill impairment charges we recognize for our reporting unit are equal to the lesser of (i) the total goodwill allocated to that reporting unit and (ii) the amount by which that reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value.
The goodwill impairment test requires us to estimate the fair value of the reporting unit and to compare the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount. If the carrying value exceeds its fair value, an impairment charge is recorded for the difference. If the carrying value recorded is less than the fair value calculated then no impairment loss is recognized. The fair value of our reporting unit is determined using an income approach that utilizes a discounted cash flow model or, where appropriate, the market approach, or a combination thereof. The discounted cash flow models are dependent upon our estimates of future cash flows and other factors. Our estimates of future cash flows are based on a comprehensive product by product forecast over a ten-year period and involve assumptions concerning (i) future operating performance, including future sales, long-term growth rates, operating margins, variations in the amounts, allocation and timing of cash flows and the probability of achieving the estimated cash flows and (ii) future economic conditions, all which may differ from actual future cash flows.
Assumptions related to future operating performance are based on management’s annual and ongoing budgeting, forecasting and planning processes and represent our best estimate of the future results of our operations as of a point in time. These estimates are subject to many assumptions, such as the economic environments in which we operate, demand for the products and competitor actions. Estimated future cash flows are discounted to present value using a market participant, weighted average cost of capital. The financial and credit market volatility directly impacts certain
inputs and assumptions used to develop the weighted average cost of capital such as the risk-free interest rate, industry beta, debt interest rate and our market capital structure. These assumptions are based on significant inputs not observable in the market and thus represent Level 3 measurements within the fair value hierarchy. The use of different inputs and assumptions could increase or decrease our estimated discounted future cash flows, the resulting estimated fair values and the amounts of related goodwill impairments, if any. The discount rates applied to the estimated cash flows for our October 1, 2020 and 2019 annual goodwill impairment test were 19.5% and 16.5%, respectively, depending on the overall risk associated with the particular asset and other market factors. We believe the discount rates and other inputs and assumptions are consistent with those that a market participant would use.
Based on the quantitative goodwill impairment assessment performed, we determined that there was no impairment of goodwill as of October 1, 2020 and for the year ended December 31, 2020. An increase of 50 basis points to our assumed discount rate used in our goodwill assessment would not have materially changed the results of our analyses.
IPR&D Intangible Asset Impairment Assessment-IPR&D, which are indefinite-lived intangible assets representing the value assigned to acquired Research and Development, or R&D, projects that principally represent rights to develop and sell a product that we have acquired which has not yet been completed or approved. These assets are subject to impairment testing until completion or abandonment of each project. We have the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the asset is less than its carrying value. If we elect not to conduct the qualitative assessment or if indications of a potential impairment exist, the determination of whether an impairment has occurred requires the determination of the fair value of the asset being assessed. Under the qualitative assessment, we consider several qualitative factors, including the results from the last quantitative test, changes, if any, in the status of regulatory and commercial success risks, and competitive trends impacting each asset and changes in the related cash flow stream projections.
Under a qualitative assessment, the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets is determined using an income approach that utilizes a discounted cash flow model and requires the development of significant estimates and assumptions involving the determination of estimated net cash flows for each year for each project or product (including net revenues, cost of sales, R&D costs, selling and marketing costs and other costs which may be allocated), the appropriate discount rate to select in order to measure the risk inherent in each future cash flow stream, the assessment of each asset’s life cycle, the potential regulatory and commercial success risks, and competitive trends impacting each asset and related cash flow stream as well as other factors. Indefinite-lived intangible assets classified as in-process research and development, or IPRD, are subject to adjustments reducing their anticipated revenues and costs by a probability of success, or POS, factor based upon empirical research of probabilities a new drug candidate would be approved based on the candidate’s stage of clinical development. During the period ended, December 31, 2020, the POS factor applied to the IPRD asset was 69.6% and the discount rate was 9.5%. The major risks and uncertainties associated with the timely and successful completion of the IPR&D projects include legal risk, market risk and regulatory risk. If applicable, upon abandonment of the IPR&D product, the assets are reduced to zero. Upon approval of the products in development for sale and placement into service, the associated IPR&D intangible assets are transferred to Product Rights amortizing intangible assets. The useful life of an amortizing asset generally is determined by identifying the period in which substantially all of the cash flows are expected to be generated.
If the fair value of the IPR&D is less than its carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized for the difference. Based on results of the impairment assessment performed, we did recognized an impairment change to IPR&D of $28.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and we did not recognize an impairment charge of IPR&D for the year ended December 31, 2019. The 2020 impairment charge reflects the delay in our anticipated commercialization date if this product candidate is approved.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are recorded under the asset and liability method of accounting. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled.
Deferred income tax assets are reduced, as is necessary, by a valuation allowance when we determine it is more-likely-than-not that some or all of the tax benefits will not be realizable in the future. Realization of the deferred tax assets is dependent on a variety of factors, some of which are subjective in nature, including the generation of future taxable income, the amount and timing of which are uncertain. In evaluating the ability to recover the deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including cumulative income in recent fiscal years, the forecast of future taxable income exclusive of certain reversing temporary differences and significant risks and uncertainties related to our business. In determining future taxable income, management is responsible for assumptions utilized including, but not limited to, the amount of U.S. federal, state and international pre-tax operating income, the reversal of certain temporary differences, carryforward periods available to us for tax reporting purposes, the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies and other relevant factors. These assumptions require significant judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates that we are using to manage the underlying business. We assess the need for a valuation allowance each reporting period, and would record any material changes that may result from such assessment to income tax expense in that period.
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with ASC 740-10, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes. We assess all material positions taken in any income tax return, including all significant uncertain positions, in all tax years that are still subject to assessment or challenge by relevant taxing authorities. Assessing an uncertain tax position begins with the initial determination of the position’s sustainability and is measured at the largest amount of benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. The evaluation of unrecognized tax benefits is based on factors that include, but are not limited to, changes in tax law, the measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in tax returns, the effective settlement of matters subject to audit, new audit activity and changes in facts or circumstances related to a tax position. We evaluate unrecognized tax benefits and adjust the level of the liability to reflect any subsequent changes in the relevant facts surrounding the uncertain positions. The liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits can be relieved only if the contingency becomes legally extinguished through either payment to the taxing authority or the expiration of the statute of limitations, the recognition of the benefits associated with the position meet the more-likely-than-not threshold or the liability becomes effectively settled through the examination process. We consider matters to be effectively settled once the taxing authority has completed all of its required or expected examination procedures, including all appeals and administrative reviews. We also accrue for potential interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax benefit.
The most significant tax jurisdictions are Ireland, the United States, Argentina and Hungary. Significant estimates are required in determining the provision for income taxes. Some of these estimates are based on management’s interpretations of jurisdiction-specific tax laws or regulations and the likelihood of settlement related to tax audit issues. Various internal and external factors may have favorable or unfavorable effects on the future effective income tax rate. These factors include, but are not limited to, changes in tax laws, regulations or rates, changing interpretations of existing tax laws or regulations, changes in estimates of prior years’ items, changes in the international organization, likelihood of settlement, and changes in overall levels of income before taxes.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company has a federal net operating loss carryover of $29.1 million and $2.2 million, respectively and net operating loss carryovers in certain foreign tax jurisdictions of $3.8 million and $9.9 million, respectively which will begin to expire in 2022. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had total tax credit carryovers of approximately $6.7 million and $4.6 million, respectively, primarily consisting of Federal Orphan Drug Tax Credit carryovers. These credit carryovers are expected to be fully realized prior to their expiration, beginning in 2035.
We make an evaluation at the end of each reporting period as to whether or not some or all of the undistributed earnings of our subsidiaries are indefinitely reinvested. While we have concluded in the past that some of such undistributed earnings are indefinitely reinvested, facts and circumstances may change in the future. Changes in facts and circumstances may include a change in the estimated capital needs of our subsidiaries, or a change in our corporate liquidity requirements. Such changes could result in our management determining that some or all of such undistributed earnings are no longer indefinitely reinvested. In that event, we would be required to adjust our income tax provision in the period we determined that the earnings will no longer be indefinitely reinvested outside the relevant tax jurisdiction.
Share-based compensation
Prior to the consummation of the IPO, our employees were eligible to receive equity awards from the 2016 Plan (as defined below). Following the consummation of the IPO, employees are eligible to receive equity awards from the 2018 Equity Incentive Plan.
Effective February 3, 2016, Osmotica Holdings S.C.Sp. adopted the 2016 Equity Incentive Plan, or the 2016 Plan, under which, the Company’s officers and key employees were granted options to purchase common units. The options awards were made up of two components: 50% of options granted were Time Awards, or Time Based Options, and 50% were Performance Awards, or Performance Based Options. The Time Based Options vested 25% annually from original grant date. The Performance Based Options were to vest immediately upon the achievement by the majority investors in the Company having received (on a cumulative basis) aggregate net proceeds exceeding certain return on investment targets. The Time Awards and Performance Awards contained a sales restriction in the form of a liquidity event and subsequent disposal of common units by the Major Limited Partners (as defined in the 2016 Plan) before the employee was able to sell vested and exercised common units and were required to remain employed to avoid Company’s call option on such common units at a lower of cost or fair market value.
Prior to the Company’s IPO on October 22, 2018, the Company amended the 2016 Plan effective upon the IPO. Under the amended 2016 Plan at the IPO, the Time Based Options and the Performance Based Options converted to options to purchase our ordinary shares on the same basis as common units of Osmotica Holdings S.C.Sp. were converted to ordinary shares, with corresponding adjustments to the exercise price and the number of the options as well as the removal of existing sales restriction. In connection with this modification, the Time Based Options continued to vest in accordance with their original vesting schedule while the Performance Based Options were converted into options which vest with the passage of time, in equal annual installments on the first four anniversaries of the IPO, subject to the continued employment on each vesting date.
In addition, prior to the IPO the Company adopted the 2018 Equity Incentive Plan, or the 2018 Plan effective upon the IPO. During 2018, the Company granted Time Based Options vesting in a single installment on the fourth anniversary of the Company’s IPO, generally subject to the employee’s continued employment on the vesting date. During 2020, the Company granted performance stock units (“PSUs”) under its existing 2018 Incentive Plan (the “2018 Plan”) to certain key employees of the Company that gives holders the potential to receive a certain number of earned PSUs at the end of a pre-determined term. Unless earlier terminated, forfeited, relinquished or expired, the earned PSUs will vest in full on the vesting date, subject to the grantee remaining in continuous employment from the date of grant through the vesting date. The PSUs will vest on the third and fifth anniversary of the grant date. The number of PSUs that become earned PSUs as of the end of the performance period shall be equal to the number of PSUs multiplied by the applicable percentage based on Stock Price Hurdle attainment, as set forth in the PSU Award Agreement and 2018 Plan.
We account for share-based compensation awards in accordance with the FASB Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation, or ASC 718. ASC 718 requires service-based and equity settled share-based awards issued to employees to be recognized as expense based on their grant date fair values. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value our share option awards and the Monte Carlo model to value our performance stock options. We account for forfeitures of share option awards as they occur in accordance with ASU No. 2016-09. For option and performance awards issued to employees, we recognize compensation expense on a graded vesting basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award.
The conversion of the Performance Based Options to new Time Based Options upon IPO was accounted for as a modification under ASC 718 where the fair value of such awards determined on the modification date, or the IPO date will be recognized over their remaining vesting period.
Each award was approved by our directors at a per share exercise price not less than the per share fair value in effect as of that award date.
Estimating the fair value of options requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the estimated fair value of our ordinary shares, the exercise price, the expected option term, share price volatility, the risk-free interest rate and
expected dividends. The assumptions used in our Black-Scholes option-pricing model represent management's best estimates and involve a number of variables, uncertainties and assumptions and the application of management's judgment, as they are inherently subjective. If any assumptions change, our share-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions used in our Black-Scholes option-pricing model are estimated as follows:
● Expected Option Term. Due to the lack of sufficient company-specific historical exercise data, the expected term of employee options is determined using the "simplified" method, as prescribed in SEC's Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB), Topic 14.D.2, whereby the expected life equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option.
● Expected Volatility. Due to lack of a public market for the trading of our ordinary shares, the expected volatility is based on historical volatilities of similar entities within our industry which were commensurate with the expected term assumption as described in SAB 14.D.6.
● Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the interest rate payable on U.S. Treasury securities in effect at the time of grant for a period that is commensurate with the assumed expected option term.
● Expected Dividends. The expected dividend yield is 0% because we have not historically paid, and do not expect for the foreseeable future to pay, a dividend on our ordinary shares.
Historically for all periods prior to the IPO, our board of directors has determined the fair value of the common unit underlying our options with assistance from management and based upon information available at the time of grant. Given the absence of a public trading market for our common units, estimating the fair value of our common units has required complex and subjective judgments and assumptions, including the most recent valuations of our common units based on the actual operational and financial performance, current business conditions and discounted cash flow projections. The estimated fair value of our common unit was adjusted for lack of marketability and control existing at the grant date.
For valuations after the consummation of the IPO, the board of directors determines the fair value of each share of underlying ordinary shares based on the closing price of our ordinary shares as reported on the date of grant.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $4.9 million and $4.9 million, respectively, of stock compensation expense.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, please see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.