ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements and other disclosures included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to our historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors." Our audited consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and are presented in U.S. dollars.
Overview
Revance is a biotechnology company focused on innovative aesthetic and therapeutic offerings, including its next-generation neuromodulator product, DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection. DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection combines a proprietary stabilizing peptide excipient with a highly purified botulinum toxin that does not contain human or animal-based components. We have successfully completed a Phase 3 program for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection in glabellar (frown) lines and are pursuing U.S. regulatory approval. We are also evaluating DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection in the full upper face, including glabellar lines, forehead lines and crow’s feet, as well as in two therapeutic indications-cervical dystonia and adult upper limb spasticity. To accompany DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, we own a unique portfolio of premium products and services for U.S. aesthetics practices, including the exclusive U.S. distribution rights to Teoxane SA’s line of Resilient Hyaluronic Acid® Collection of dermal fillers, the first and only range of FDA-approved fillers for correction of dynamic facial wrinkles and folds, and the HintMD platform, which provides an integrated smart payment solution that supports aesthetic practice management, practice economics and practice loyalty. We have also partnered with Viatris to develop an onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar, which would compete in the existing short-acting neuromodulator marketplace. We are dedicated to making a difference by transforming patient experiences.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Operations
The COVID-19 pandemic caused general business disruption worldwide beginning in January 2020. The health and safety of our team, their families and our communities remains our top priority. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we curtailed employee travel and implemented a corporate work-from-home policy in March 2020. We have continued to monitor the situation and have gradually resumed essential on-site corporate operations in accordance with local and regional restrictions. We have adopted remote working tools to minimize the disruption to the achievement of our goals and objectives for employees whose job duties do not require physical presence to complete their work. Certain manufacturing, quality and laboratory-based employees have continued to work onsite, and certain employees with customer-facing roles are onsite for training and interfacing in-person with customers in connection with the product launch of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers. If the severity, duration or nature of the COVID-19 pandemic changes, it may have an impact on our ability to continue on-site operations, which could disrupt our clinical trials and sales activities.
The COVID-19 pandemic has and may continue to negatively affect our ability to obtain approval of product candidates from the FDA or other regulatory authorities, supply chain, end user demand for our products and commercialization activities. In November 2020, the FDA deferred a decision on the BLA for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of moderate to severe glabellar (frown) lines. The FDA reiterated that an inspection of our manufacturing facility is required as part of the BLA approval process, but the FDA was unable to conduct the required inspection of our manufacturing facility in Newark, California, due to the FDA’s travel restrictions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. The FDA did not indicate there were any other review issues at the time beyond the on-site inspection.
In addition, the product supply of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers was delayed by distribution partner Teoxane as they temporarily suspended production in Geneva, Switzerland as a precaution surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. Teoxane resumed manufacturing operations at the end of April 2020 and delivered the first shipment of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers to us in June 2020. As a result, our initial product launch of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers was delayed by one quarter to September 2020. In addition, port closures and other restrictions resulting from the
COVID-19 pandemic may disrupt our supply chain or limit our ability to obtain sufficient materials for the production of our products. We have taken steps to build sufficient levels of inventory to help mitigate potential future supply chain disruptions.
Our clinical trials have been and may continue to be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has and may further delay enrollment in and the progress of our current and future clinical trials. Patients may not be able to comply with clinical trial protocols if quarantines impede patient movement or interrupt healthcare services. Site initiation and patient enrollment may be delayed due to prioritization of hospital resources toward the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, enrollment in the JUNIPER Phase 2 adult upper limb spasticity trial was paused in March 2020 due to challenges related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The trial was originally designed to include 128 subjects. Due to the COVID-19 challenges related to continued subject enrollment and the scheduling of in-person study visits, in June 2020, we announced the decision to end screening and complete the JUNIPER trial with the 83 patients enrolled to date. We released topline results from the Phase 2 study in February 2021.
To ensure proper clinical trial coordination and completion, in line with the FDA-issued guidance of March 18, 2020 on the Conduct of Clinical Trials of Medical Products during the COVID-19 Pandemic, we are evaluating and implementing risk-based approaches for remote clinical trial monitoring and activities, including remote patient assessment, for those subjects who cannot physically visit clinic sites, to ensure the full completion of trials.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is highly uncertain and we do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our BLA, our manufacturing operations, supply chain, end user demand for our products and services, commercialization efforts, business operations, clinical trials and other aspects of our business, the healthcare systems or the global economy as a whole. As such, it is uncertain as to the full magnitude that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our financial condition, liquidity, and results of operations.
Financial Update
At-The-Market Offerings
In November 2020, we terminated our Controlled Equity Offering Sale Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (the "2018 ATM Agreement") and entered into a separate sales agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC ("Cowen") as sales agent (the “2020 ATM Agreement”). Under the 2020 ATM Agreement, we may offer and sell, from time to time, through Cowen, shares of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $125.0 million. As of February 17, 2021, we sold 3.3 million shares of common stock under the 2020 ATM Agreement resulting in net proceeds of $90.1 million after sales agent commissions.
Convertible Senior Notes
On February 14, 2020, we issued $287.5 million aggregate principal amount of the 2027 Notes, pursuant to the Indenture. The 2027 Notes are senior unsecured obligations and bear interest at a rate of 1.75% per year, payable semiannually in arrears on February 15 and August 15 of each year, beginning on August 15, 2020. The 2027 Notes will mature on February 15, 2027, unless earlier converted, redeemed or repurchased. In connection with issuing the 2027 Notes, we received $278.3 million in net proceeds, after deducting the initial purchasers’ discount, commissions, and other issuance costs.
Follow-On Public Offering
During December 2019 and January 2020, we completed a follow-on public offering of an aggregate of 7,475,000 shares of common stock at $17.00 per share, which included the exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option to purchase 975,000 additional shares of common stock, for net proceeds of $119.2 million, after underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering.
Neuromodulator Pipeline
To ensure proper clinical trial coordination and completion, in line with the FDA-issued guidance of March 18, 2020 on the Conduct of Clinical Trials of Medical Products during the COVID-19 Pandemic, we are evaluating and implementing
risk-based approaches for remote clinical trial monitoring and activities, including remote patient assessment, for those subjects who cannot physically visit clinic sites, to ensure the full completion of trials.
DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection Aesthetics
Glabellar lines. We submitted the BLA for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of moderate to severe glabellar lines in November 2019, which was accepted by the FDA on February 5, 2020, and the PDUFA target action date was initially set for November 25, 2020. On November 24, 2020, the FDA deferred its decision on the BLA. The FDA reiterated that an inspection of our manufacturing facility is required as part of the BLA approval process, but the FDA was unable to conduct the required inspection of our manufacturing facility in Newark, California due to the FDA’s travel restrictions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Though our BLA is still under review, the FDA did not indicate there were any other review issues at the time beyond the on-site inspection.
Upper Facial Lines. In December 2019, we initiated the UFL Trial to understand the safety and efficacy, including potential dosing and injection patterns, of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, covering the upper facial lines. Interim Week 4 data from the Phase 2a studies in forehead lines and lateral canthal lines, which are discussed below, were used in the final design of the UFL Trial to optimize dosing and injection patterns. We released topline results from the UFL Trial in December of 2020. In the UFL Trial, 48 subjects were enrolled to receive a single treatment of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection with a total study duration of 36 weeks. Subjects concurrently received 40, 32, and 48 units of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection respectively in the glabellar complex, forehead and lateral canthal areas. The key endpoints for efficacy were the proportion of subjects achieving a score of none or mild wrinkle severity at maximum contraction (maximum frown, eyebrow elevation, and smile effort) at Week 4, as assessed on the Investigator Global Assessment Frown Wrinkle Severity, Investigator Global Assessment Forehead Wrinkle Severity, and Investigator Global Assessment Lateral Canthal Wrinkle Severity, respectively. The proportion of subjects achieving a score of none or mild at Week 4 were 95.8%, 95.8% and 91.7% for glabellar lines, forehead lines and lateral canthal lines, respectively. The UFL Trial measured duration of effect in responders (those who achieved a score of none or mild at Week 4). These duration measures were defined as the median time to return to baseline wrinkle severity or the time to loss of none or mild wrinkle severity, both based on investigator and subject assessments. The median time to return to base line was 33.3, 35.3 and 35.2 weeks, and the median time to loss of none or mild was 25.0, 24.0 and 28.1 weeks for glabellar lines, forehead lines and lateral canthal lines, respectively. DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection was generally well tolerated, and there were no treatment-related serious adverse events. The most common adverse events were injection site erythema (6.3%), facial discomfort (4.2%) and headache (2.1%). No eyelid or brow ptosis was reported.
Forehead lines. In June 2020, we released top-line results of the Forehead Lines Trial. The objective was to understand the potential dosing and injection patterns of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection in other areas of the upper face in addition to the lead indication in glabellar lines. We released top-line results from the Forehead Lines Trial in June 2020. The primary endpoint for efficacy was the proportion of subjects achieving a score of none or mild in wrinkle or line severity at Week 4 at maximum eyebrow elevation for forehead lines. In the Forehead Lines Trial, 100% of subjects achieved a score of none or mild at Week 4 in at least one treatment group. DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection was well-tolerated at all dose levels. Adverse events were mild, localized and transient, and there were no treatment-related serious adverse events, as is common with other approved neuromodulators in the treatment of upper facial lines. One of the exploratory endpoints in the Forehead Lines Trial was duration of effect, defined as the median time to return to baseline wrinkle severity based on both investigator and patient assessment. At least one dose in the study demonstrated a median duration of effect of 27 weeks on forehead lines. Interim data from the Forehead Lines Trial was used in the final design of our Upper Facial Lines Trial to optimize dosing and injection patterns, which is discussed above.
Lateral canthal lines. In June 2020, we released top-line results of the LCL Trial. The primary endpoint for efficacy was the proportion of subjects achieving a score of none or mild in wrinkle or line severity at Week 4 at maximum smile for crow’s feet. In the LCL Trial, 88% of subjects achieved a score of none or mild at Week 4 in at least one treatment group. DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection was well-tolerated at all dose levels. Adverse events were mild, localized and transient as expected and there were no treatment-related serious adverse events, as is common with other approved neuromodulators in the treatment of upper facial lines. One of the exploratory endpoints in the LCL Trial was duration of effect, defined as the median time to return to baseline wrinkle severity based on both investigator and patient assessment. At least one dose in the study demonstrated a median duration of effect of 24 weeks on crow’s feet. Interim data from the LCL Trial was used in the final design of the Upper Facial Lines Trial to optimize dosing and injection patterns, which is discussed above.
DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection Therapeutics
Cervical dystonia (ASPEN). The ASPEN Phase 3 clinical program consists of two trials to evaluate the safety and efficacy of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of cervical dystonia in adults including a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel group trial (ASPEN-1), and an open-label, long-term safety trial (ASPEN-OLS).
In October 2020, we announced positive topline results from the ASPEN-1 trial. This pivotal study enrolled a total of 301 subjects at 60 sites in the U.S., Canada and Europe. Subjects were randomized 3:3:1 to receive a single treatment of either 125 Units or 250 Units of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, or placebo and were followed for up to 36 weeks. The drug appeared to be well-tolerated at both doses. The study met its primary efficacy endpoint at both doses, demonstrating a clinically meaningful improvement in the signs and symptoms of cervical dystonia at the average of Weeks 4 and 6. Compared to placebo, subjects treated with either 125 Units or 250 Units showed a statistically significant greater change from baseline as measured on the Toronto Western Spasmodic Torticollis Rating Scale Total Score. Median duration of effect was 24.0 and 20.3 weeks, for the 125 Unit and 250 Unit dose groups respectively, based on the median time to loss of 80% of the peak treatment effect. There were no serious treatment-related adverse events and no dose-dependent increase in adverse events was observed. Treatment-related adverse events were generally transient and mild to moderate in severity, with one case of neck pain reported as severe, which resolved two days after onset. The three most common treatment-related adverse events were (for 125 Units and 250 Units, respectively): injection site pain (7.9%, 4.7%), headache (4.7%, 4.7%), and injection site erythema (4.7%, 2.3%). The incidence of dysphagia (difficulty swallowing) and muscle weakness, which are considered adverse events of particular interest with neuromodulator treatments for cervical dystonia, was low (for 125 Units and 250 Units, respectively): dysphagia (1.6%, 3.9%) and muscular weakness (4.7%, 2.3%).
We completed the enrollment for ASPEN-OLS, a long-term safety study for cervical dystonia, with a total of 354 subjects and expect to release topline results in the second half of 2021. DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for cervical dystonia is expected to be our first therapeutic indication of which we are aiming for regulatory approval in 2023.
Adult upper limb spasticity. In December 2018, we initiated the JUNIPER Phase 2 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multi-center clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for adults with moderate to severe upper limb spasticity due to stroke or traumatic brain injury. In February 2021, we announced topline data from the JUNIPER Phase 2 trial. Subjects were assigned to one of three doses of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection (250 units, 375 units, or 500 units) or to placebo. The trial was originally designed to include 128 subjects. Due to the ongoing COVID-19 challenges related to continued subject enrollment and the scheduling of in-person study visits, the Company made the decision in June 2020 to curtail enrollment at 83 subjects.
The study’s co-primary endpoints were improvement from baseline in the Modified Ashworth Score (“MAS”) and the Physician Global Impression of Change (“PGIC”) score at Week 6. In the JUNIPER trial, proof of concept was demonstrated with all three doses being numerically higher than placebo for the improvement in the MAS score, with the 500-unit dose demonstrating a clinically meaningful and statistically significant reduction from baseline in muscle tone versus placebo (p=0.0488). Additionally, each of the three doses demonstrated a numerical improvement compared with placebo on the PGIC assessment but did not reach statistical significance.
The study was designed to run for up to 36 weeks, with the co-primary measures: mean change from baseline in muscle tone measured with the MAS in the suprahypertonic muscle group ("SMG" - the highest degree for muscle tone) of the elbow, wrist, or finger flexors at Week 6; and mean score of the PGIC at Week 6. The first 73 subjects, who were dosed before enrollment was paused in March due to the COVID-19 pandemic, were followed for up to 36 weeks, and the succeeding 10 subjects were followed up to Week 12.
On a key secondary endpoint, DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection delivered a median duration of at least 24 weeks across all three doses. Duration of effect was defined as the time from injection (in weeks) until the loss of improvement as measured by the MAS (for the SMG) and the PGIC, or a request for retreatment by the subject.
All three doses of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection were generally safe and well tolerated with no increase in the incidence of adverse events observed in the higher dose treatment groups. The majority of treatment-related adverse events were mild or moderate in severity.
The JUNIPER Phase 2 trial generated sufficient data to inform our dosing strategy for our Phase 3 program. In 2021, we plan to schedule an end-of-Phase 2 meeting with the FDA prior to finalizing a Phase 3 program.
Plantar fasciitis. In November 2020, we released topline results of a Phase 2 prospective, randomized, double-blind, multi-center, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of two doses of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection in reducing the signs and symptoms of plantar fasciitis, a painful affliction caused by inflammation of the ligament running along the bottom of the foot (the plantar fascia). The study’s primary efficacy endpoint was the change from baseline on the 10-point Numeric Pain Rating Scale ("NPRS") score averaged over five days at Week 8. In the trial, both doses of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection resulted in significant measurable pain relief after treatment that was numerically greater than placebo. However, neither dose met the primary efficacy endpoint of statistically significant improvement from baseline in the NPRS for foot pain at Week 8, compared to placebo. Subjects treated with DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection showed an average reduction from baseline of 3.29 on the NPRS (a 54.6% reduction) at 80U (p=0.2135 vs. placebo) and 3.25 on the NPRS (a 50.1% reduction) at 120U (p=0.2205 vs. placebo, p=0.9207 vs. 80U), compared to placebo subjects at 2.75 on the NPRS (a 45.1% reduction). DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection was found to be safe and well-tolerated at both doses through Week 24. There were no serious treatment-related adverse events and no dose dependent increase in adverse events was observed. Treatment-related adverse events were generally transient and mild to moderate in severity. Although the results of this study did demonstrate pain relief on the NPRS that was numerically greater from baseline than placebo, neither was statistically significant. As such, we are not currently pursuing the plantar fasciitis indication, and we will focus our efforts on indications for muscle movement and pain disorder indications where the use of neuromodulators is well-established.
HintMD Acquisition
On July 23, 2020, we completed the HintMD Acquisition, and HintMD became a wholly owned subsidiary of Revance. The total number of shares of our common stock issued as consideration for the HintMD Acquisition was 8,572,213, including (i) 683,200 shares of our common stock which are held in an escrow fund for purposes of satisfying any post-closing purchase price adjustments and indemnification claims under the HintMD Merger Agreement and (ii) assumed options to purchase an aggregate of 801,600 shares of our common stock.
The HintMD platform provides a seamless, simple and smart payment solution that enables medical aesthetic practices (the “practices”) to improve practice management and economics and foster loyalty with customers, which completes the value chain of our aesthetics portfolio and aligns with our goal to improve outcomes for patients and practices. The HintMD Acquisition leverages our existing and planned commercial infrastructure, and, we believe this financial technology service offering will enable us to grow our U.S. aesthetics business.
Upon the close of the HintMD Acquisition, we onboarded 75 employees into our workforce, and all HintMD operations began being conducted by Revance employees. Certain business integration projects remain ongoing. The next-generation HintMD platform, which is scheduled to launch in mid-2021, will operate as a fully integrated PayFac pursuant to the Payment Facilitator Agreement.
Teoxane’s RHA® Technology and Launch
In January 2020, we entered into the Teoxane Agreement with Teoxane, pursuant to which Teoxane granted us with an exclusive right to import, market, promote, sell and distribute the RHA® Pipeline Products in the U.S. and U.S. territories and possessions, in exchange for 2,500,000 shares of our common stock and certain other commitments by us. The Teoxane Agreement will be effective for a term of ten years upon product launch and may be extended for a two-year period upon the mutual agreement of the parties. In September 2020, we entered into the First Amendment to the Teoxane Agreement to memorialize a revised launch date from April to September as a result of delays related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
From June to August 2020, we completed the PrevU program, a pre-launch promotional program of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers, for select practices, including key opinion leaders. In August 2020, we established our field sales team of approximately 100 members, and, in September 2020, we launched the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $12.9 million in product revenue and $4.8 million for cost of product revenue (exclusive of amortization) from the launch of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers.
Viatris and OnabotulinumtoxinA Biosimilar
In June 2020, we announced that Viatris provided us its written notice of its Continuation Decision and paid us a $30 million milestone payment in connection with the Continuation Decision. We began the continuation phase of the onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar program and are moving forward with characterization and product development work, followed by an anticipated filing of an Investigational New Drug Application (“IND”) with the FDA in 2022.
Results of Operations
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 is presented below. For a discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018, see Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with the SEC on February 26, 2020.
As a result of the HintMD Acquisition in July 2020, we have two reportable segments: the Product Segment and the Service Segment. Our Product Segment refers to the business that includes the research and development of innovative aesthetic and therapeutic products, including DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for various indications, the U.S. distribution of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers, and the onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar program in partnership with Viatris. Both product and collaboration revenues and related expenses are included in Product Segment. Our Service Segment refers to the business of the HintMD platform, which is a registered PayFac and enables practices to process payments for their patients and provides subscription and pay-over-time solutions that support practices' aesthetic treatment plans.
Revenue
N/M - Percentage not meaningful
Product Revenue
We currently generate product revenue primarily from the sale of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers. We made initial sales of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers in June 2020 as a part of the PrevU program and the formal commercial launch took place in September 2020. For additional information on the PrevU program, please read Part I, Item 1. “Business - Sales and Marketing”.
Collaboration Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our collaboration revenue recognized increased compared to the same periods in 2019 due to the increased development activities in connection with the Viatris Collaboration. In June 2020, we announced that Viatris provided us its written notice of its Continuation Decision.
Service Revenue
Our service revenue is generated from the HintMD platform, which earns revenues through: (i) credit card processing revenues net of interchange and other fees and (ii) monthly per patient fees for practices that use the subscription capabilities. We completed the HintMD Acquisition in July 2020.
In our current platform service agreements, we generally recognize service revenue net of costs as an accounting agent. Revenue recognized in new or revised future service offerings and arrangements may be presented differently subject to the accounting evaluation of control. Please also read our revenue accounting policies in Part IV, Item 15. “Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules-Notes to consolidated financial statements-Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of costs of product revenue (exclusive of amortization) and cost of service revenue (exclusive of amortization), research and development expenses, selling, general and administrative expenses, and amortization. The largest component of our operating expenses is our personnel costs including stock-based compensation, which is a subset of our selling, general and administrative expenses. We expect our operating expenses to increase in the near term as we continue to commercialize the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers in the U.S. and the next-generation HintMD platform, account for the full year impact of an expanded organization related to the HintMD Acquisition and the hiring of our sales force, and other actions taken to prepare for the commercialization of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines if our BLA is approved in 2021. We also expect to decrease our operating expenses related to research and development as we complete existing clinical trials and associated programs related to DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of cervical dystonia, adult upper limb spasticity, plantar fasciitis, offset by future potential new indications, and an onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar, as well as the impact of capitalized inventory costs of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, if approved.
Cost of Product Revenue (exclusive of amortization)
The costs of product revenue (exclusive of amortization) primarily consists of the cost of inventory and distribution expenses related to the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers. We did not incur costs of product revenue until the first delivery of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers in the second quarter of 2020.
Cost of Service Revenue (exclusive of amortization)
The costs of service revenue (exclusive of amortization) consist of limited costs in fulfilling certain services provided by the HintMD platform. We did not incur cost of service revenue related to fulfillment of services until the completion of the HintMD Acquisition in July 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of the following:
•RHA® Collection of dermal fillers and HintMD platform service sales and marketing activities and compensation costs of our sales force;
•DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection pre-commercial activities such as market research and public relations;
•personnel and professional service costs in our finance, information technology, commercial, investor relations, legal, human resources, and other administrative functions, including related stock-based compensation costs; and
•depreciation and amortization of certain assets used in selling, general and administrative activities.
We expect that our selling, general and administrative expenses will increase as a result of the expenses associated with the operation and integration of HintMD and its full year impact and the potential commercial launch of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, if approved.
Our selling, general and administration expenses are summarized as follows:
Selling, general and administrative expenses before stock-based compensation and depreciation and amortization
For the year ended December 31, 2020, selling, general and administrative expenses before stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization increased by $73.8 million, or 143% compared to the same period in 2019. $54.6 million of the increase was from sales and marketing related expenses in the Product Segment primarily related to the promotional, professional education, and sales and marketing activities for the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers and pre-commercial activities for the commercialization of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection. The Service Segment contributed approximately $3.4 million to the increase in sales and marketing related expenses for year ended December 31, 2020. General and administrative expenses contributed to the remaining increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, which were primarily related to professional services and transaction costs associated with the HintMD Acquisition, increased compensation costs from onboarded HintMD team members and other personnel and costs related to investment in information technology infrastructure and administrative functions to support our continued growth as a commercial company with an expanding portfolio of products and services.
We expect selling, general and administrative expenses to increase as we continue to promote, market, and distribute the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers, prepare for the potential launch of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, if approved, conduct other promotion and marketing activities for service offerings, and compensation and infrastructure costs related to the HintMD Acquisition from July 2020.
Stock-based compensation
For the year ended December 31, 2020, stock-based compensation included in selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $14.8 million, or 157% compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to increased employee headcount including the onboarding of HintMD employees and our new sales force, increase in the fair value of our equity awards, and incremental expenses recognized from the performance stock awards, which were granted beginning in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Research and Development Expenses
In the Product Segment, we believe allocation of all costs by product candidate would not be meaningful; therefore, we generally do not track these costs by product candidates unless contractually required by our business partners. In the Service Segment, our Research and Development team is dedicated to introducing new functionalities and features for our existing and next-generation HintMD platform service offerings to improve the experience of our medical aesthetics practitioner customers.
Research and development expenses consist primarily of:
•salaries and related expenses for personnel in research and development functions, including stock-based compensation;
•expenses related to the initiation and completion of clinical trials and studies for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, future innovations related to Teoxane's RHA® Collection of dermal fillers and an onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar, including expenses related to the production of clinical supplies;
•fees paid to clinical consultants, CROs and other vendors, including all related fees for investigator grants, patient screening fees, laboratory work and statistical compilation and analysis;
•expenses related to medical affairs, medical information, publications and pharmacovigilance oversight;
•other consulting fees paid to third parties;
•expenses related to the establishment and maintenance of our manufacturing facilities;
•expenses related to the manufacturing of supplies for clinical activities, regulatory approvals, and pre-commercial inventory;
•expenses related to license fees, milestone payments, and development efforts under in-licensing agreements;
•expenses related to compliance with drug development regulatory requirements in the U.S., the European Union and other foreign jurisdictions;
•expenses related to product development not related to developing new features or functionalities of our proprietary HintMD platform and services;
•depreciation and other allocated expenses; and
•charges from the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers asset acquisition related to in-process research and development.
Our research and development expenses are subject to numerous uncertainties primarily related to the timing and cost needed to complete our respective projects. Further, in our Product Segment, the development timelines, probability of success and development expenses can differ materially from expectations, and the completion of clinical trials may take several years or more depending on the type, complexity, novelty and intended use of a product candidate. Accordingly, the cost of clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of a project as a result of differences arising during clinical development. We expect our research and development costs to decrease overall primarily due to the impact of capitalizing inventory costs of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, if approved. Other factors contributing to the decrease include the completion of our existing clinical development of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines, forehead lines, LCLs, and other therapeutic indications, such as cervical dystonia and adult upper limb spasticity, offset by the collaboration effort in developing an onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar, continued product development related to our HintMD platform not subjected to software capitalization, certain shared development costs to Teoxane related to future dermal filler innovations and indications, and pursuit of other clinical development opportunities of any future new indications for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection.
Our research and development expenses fluctuate as projects transition from one development phase to the next. Depending on the stage of development and level of activity related to each development phase undertaken, we may reflect variations in our research and development expenses. We expense both internal and external research and development expenses as they are incurred.
Our research and development expenses are summarized as follows:
N/M - Percentage not meaningful
Clinical and regulatory
Clinical and regulatory expenses include costs related to personnel, external clinical sites for clinical trials, clinical research organizations, central laboratories, data management, contractors and regulatory activities associated with the clinical development of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, clinical and regulatory costs totaled $51.1 million and $52.1 million, or 41% and 51%, respectively, of the total research and development expenses for the respective periods.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, clinical and regulatory expenses decreased by $0.9 million, or 2%, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily as a result of the completion of multiple clinical trials in the current year and the cost of professional services to support the DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection BLA submission in the prior year, offset by ongoing BLA regulatory support and other developmental efforts. We expect clinical and regulatory expenses to decrease as we continue and complete our existing clinical development of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines, forehead lines, LCLs and other therapeutic indications, such as cervical dystonia, adult upper limb spasticity, plantar fasciitis, any future potential new indications.
Manufacturing and quality
Manufacturing and quality expenses include personnel and occupancy expenses, external contract manufacturing costs and pre-approval manufacturing of drug products used in our research and development of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection. Manufacturing and quality expenses also include raw materials, lab supplies, and storage and shipment of our products to support quality control and assurance activities. These expenses do not include clinical expenses associated with the development of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, manufacturing and quality expenses totaled $36.1 million and $30.7 million, or 29% and 30%, respectively, of the total research and development expenses for the respective periods.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, manufacturing and quality expenses increased by $5.4 million, or 18% compared to the same periods in 2019, primarily due to increased activities related to pre-approval manufacturing and quality activities of inventory and increase personnel costs in anticipation and support of the potential FDA inspections and the approval process of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection. We expect that our manufacturing and quality expenses will continue to increase to prepare for an FDA site inspection and the potential launch of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection if approved. Certain amounts of the manufacturing and quality expenses, among other costs, are expected to be treated as inventory costs after the potential approval of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection is obtained.
In-process research and development
In January 2020, we entered into the Teoxane Agreement with Teoxane. In connection with the Teoxane Agreement, in the first quarter of 2020, $11.2 million of the aggregate purchase consideration was recognized as in-process research and development expense, which was related to certain products and indications not approved by the FDA. This is a one-time non-recurring charge.
Other research and development expenses
Other research and development expenses include expenses for personnel, contract research organizations, consultants, and supplies used to conduct preclinical research and development of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar, and development costs for new functionality or features of our HintMD platform. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, other research and development expenses were $13.1 million, or 10%, and $9.6 million, or 9%, respectively, of the total research and development expenses for the respective periods.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, other research and development expenses increased by $3.5 million, or 36% compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to the increased expense associated with development activities in the Service Segment.
Stock-based compensation
For the year ended December 31, 2020, stock-based compensation included in research and development expenses increased by $3.7 million, or 44%, compared to the same periods in 2019, primarily due to increased employee headcount related to manufacturing and quality activities, onboarding of HintMD employees, the increase in the fair value of our equity awards, and incremental expenses recognized from the performance stock awards, which were granted beginning in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Amortization
For the year ended December 31, 2020, amortization increased by $6.1 million compared to the same period in 2019, due to the amortization of distribution rights recognized from the Teoxane Agreement in January 2020 and the amortization of the developed technology recognized from the HintMD Acquisition in July 2020. We expect such expense to increase due to full year of amortization associated with intangible assets acquired from HintMD Acquisition.
Net Non-Operating Income and Expense
N/M - Percentage not meaningful
Interest Income
Interest income primarily consists of interest income earned on our deposit, money market fund, and investment balances. We expect interest income to vary each reporting period depending on our average deposit, money market fund, and investment balances during the period and market interest rates.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily includes cash and non-cash components from the 2027 Notes. The cash component of the interest expense represents the contractual interest charges. The non-cash component of the interest expense represents the amortization of the debt discount issuance costs. For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense of $15.1 million were from the 2027 Notes issued in February 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Liability
The derivative liability on our consolidated balance sheets is remeasured to fair value at each balance sheet date with the corresponding gain or loss recorded. We will continue to record adjustments to the fair value of derivative liability until paid.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net primarily consists of miscellaneous tax and other expense items.
Income Taxes
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we have only generated domestic pretax losses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we have a net tax benefit of $2.6 million, which consisted of a tax benefit of $2.7 million offset by a tax provision of $0.1 million. The tax benefit of $2.7 million was due to a change in our valuation allowance related to the post-combination effect from the net deferred tax liability assumed from the HintMD Acquisition, and the tax provision of $0.1 million was related to foreign withholding taxes. There was no provision or benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our financial condition is summarized as follows:
Sources and Uses of Cash
We hold our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments in a variety of non-interest bearing bank accounts and interest-bearing instruments subject to investment guidelines allowing for certain lower-risk holdings such as, but not limited to, money market accounts, U.S. treasury securities, U.S. government and agency securities, overnight purchase agreements, and commercial paper. Our investment portfolio is structured to provide for investment maturities and access to cash to fund our anticipated working capital needs.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $436.5 million and $290.1 million, respectively, which represented an increase of $146.4 million from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the proceeds from the issuance of convertible senior notes of $287.5 million, the issuance of shares of our common stock in connection with an at-the-market offering program, net of commissions, of $68.4 million, the issuance of shares of our common stock in January 2020 in connection with the exercise of the over-allotment option in the December 2019 follow-on public offering (described below), net of underwriting discounts and commissions, of $15.6 million, the $30.0 million cash milestone payment from Viatris, the proceeds from the exercise of stock options, common stock warrants and the purchase of shares of our common stock under the 2014 ESPP of $6.9 million. These increases were primarily offset by cash used in other operating activities of $206.0 million, payment of capped call
transactions of $28.9 million, payments of offering costs and convertible senior notes transaction costs of $9.6 million, payment of proceeds for the net settlement of restricted stock awards for employee taxes of $8.4 million, purchase of property and equipment of $4.1 million, and interest payment of convertible senior notes of $2.5 million.
We derived the following summary of our consolidated statement of cash flows for the periods indicated from our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash used in operating activities is primarily driven by personnel, manufacturing and facility costs, clinical development, and sales and marketing activities. The changes in net cash used in operating activities are primarily related to our net loss, working capital fluctuations and changes in our non-cash expenses, all of which are highly variable. Our cash flows from operating activities will continue to be affected principally by our working capital requirements and the extent to which we increase spending on personnel, commercial activities, and research and development activities as our business grows.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $178.5 million, which was primarily due to professional services and consulting fees of approximately $70.8 million; personnel and compensation costs of approximately $72.6 million; clinical trials expenses of approximately $37.4 million; rent, supplies and utilities expenses of approximately $28 million; legal and other administrative expense of approximately $9.7 million, and the 2027 Notes interest paid of $2.5 million; offset by a $30.0 million payment received from Viatris in connection with the Viatris Collaboration, $11.5 million from product and service revenue, and a $0.9 million milestone payment received from Fosun pursuant to the Fosun License Agreement.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $106.2 million, which was primarily due to clinical spend of approximately $35 million; personnel and talent retention of $43 million; professional services and consulting fees of approximately $39 million; and rent, supplies and utilities of approximately $18 million; offset by the upfront payment, net of withholding tax, received under the Fosun License Agreement of $27 million, and the incremental payment received from Viatris of $5 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, net cash provided by or used in investing activities were primarily related to fluctuations in the timing of purchases, sale and maturities of investments, purchases of property and equipment, and in 2020, the purchase of distribution rights under the Teoxane Agreement and the net cash paid for HintMD Acquisition.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was driven by proceeds from issuance of the 2027 Notes (as described below), net proceeds from the issuance of our common stock in connection with at-the-market offering program, proceeds from the issuance of shares of our common stock in January 2020 in connection with the exercise of the over-allotment option from the December 2019 follow-on public offering (described below), net of underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering expenses, and proceeds from the exercise of stock options, common stock warrants, and the purchase of shares of our common stock under the 2014 ESPP. The inflows were offset by payment of capped call transactions, offering costs and convertible senior notes transaction costs, and net settlement of restricted stock awards for employee taxes.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 are primarily driven by net proceeds from the issuance of our common stock in connection with follow-on offerings in January 2019 as well as in December 2019 (as described below), the ATM offering program (as described below), and proceeds from the exercise of stock options and the employee stock purchase plan, offset by net settlement of restricted stock awards for employee taxes and payment of offering costs.
Follow-On Public Offering
During December 2019 and January 2020, we completed a follow-on public offering of an aggregate of 7,475,000 shares of common stock at $17.00 per share, which included the exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option to purchase 975,000 additional shares of common stock, for net proceeds of $119.2 million, after underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering expenses, of which $103.6 million was received in December 2019 and $15.6 million was received in January 2020.
In January 2019, we completed a follow-on public offering, pursuant to which we issued 6,764,705 shares of common stock at $17.00 per share, including the exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option to purchase 882,352 additional shares of common stock, for net proceeds of $107.6 million, after underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering expenses.
Convertible Senior Notes
On February 14, 2020, we issued $287.5 million aggregate principal amount of the 2027 Notes, pursuant to the Indenture. The 2027 Notes are senior unsecured obligations and bear interest at a rate of 1.75% per year, payable semiannually in arrears on February 15 and August 15 of each year, beginning on August 15, 2020. The 2027 Notes will mature on February 15, 2027, unless earlier converted, redeemed or repurchased. In connection with issuing the 2027 Notes, we received $278.3 million in net proceeds, after deducting the initial purchasers’ discount, commissions, and other issuance costs.
The 2027 Notes may be converted by the holders at any time prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding November 15, 2026 only under the following circumstances: (1) during any fiscal quarter commencing after the fiscal quarter ending on June 30, 2020 (and only during such fiscal quarter), if the last reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the last trading day of the immediately preceding fiscal quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price on each applicable trading day; (2) during the five business day period after any ten consecutive trading day period (the “measurement period”) in which the trading price (as defined in the Indenture) per $1,000 principal amount of the 2027 Notes for each trading day of the measurement period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of our common stock and the conversion rate on each such trading day; (3) if we call any or all of the 2027 Notes for redemption, at any time prior to the close of business on the scheduled trading day immediately preceding the redemption date; or (4) upon the occurrence of specified corporate events. On or after November 15, 2026 until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date, holders may convert all or any portion of their 2027 Notes at any time, regardless of the foregoing circumstances. Upon conversion, we will pay or deliver, as the case may be, cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election.
The conversion rate will initially be 30.8804 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the 2027 Notes (equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $32.38 per share of our common stock). The conversion rate is subject to adjustment in some events but will not be adjusted for any accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, following certain corporate events that occur prior to the maturity date or if we deliver a notice of redemption, we will, in certain circumstances, increase the conversion rate for a holder who elects to convert its 2027 Notes in connection with such a corporate event or notice of redemption, as the case may be.
We may not redeem the 2027 Notes prior to February 20, 2024. We may redeem for cash all or any portion of the 2027 Notes, at our option, on or after February 20, 2024 if the last reported sale price of our common stock has been at least 130% of the conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during any 30 consecutive trading day period (including the last trading day of such period) ending on, and including, the trading day
immediately preceding the date on which we provide notice of redemption at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2027 Notes to be redeemed, plus any accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. No sinking fund is provided for the 2027 Notes.
If we undergo a fundamental change (as defined in the Indenture), holders may require us to repurchase for cash all or any portion of their 2027 Notes at a fundamental change repurchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2027 Notes to be repurchased, plus any accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the fundamental change repurchase date.
We used $28.9 million of the net proceeds from the 2027 Notes to pay the cost of the capped call transactions. The capped call transactions are expected generally to reduce the potential dilutive effect upon conversion of the 2027 Notes and/or offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of converted 2027 Notes, as the case may be, with such reduction and/or offset subject to a price cap of $48.88 of our common stock per share, which represents a premium of 100% over the last reported sale price of our common stock on February 10, 2020. The capped calls have an initial strike price of $32.38 per share, subject to certain adjustments, which corresponds to the conversion option strike price in the 2027 Notes. The capped call transactions cover, subject to anti-dilution adjustments, approximately 8.9 million shares of our common stock.
ATM Offering Programs
In March 2018, we entered into the 2018 ATM Agreement. Under the 2018 ATM Agreement, we had the ability to offer and sell common stock having aggregate proceeds of up to $125.0 million from time to time through Cantor Fitzgerald as our sales agent. Sales of common stock through Cantor Fitzgerald under the 2018 ATM Agreement was made by means of ordinary brokers’ transactions on the Nasdaq or otherwise at market prices prevailing at the time of sale, in block transactions, or as otherwise agreed upon by us and Cantor Fitzgerald. Cantor Fitzgerald sold the common stock from time to time, based upon instructions from us. We agreed to pay Cantor Fitzgerald a commission of up to 3.0% of the gross sales proceeds of any common stock sold through Cantor Fitzgerald under the 2018 ATM Agreement. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we sold 687,189 shares of common stock under the 2018 ATM Agreement at a weighted average price of $16.26 per share resulting in net proceeds of $10.9 million after underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering expenses.
In November 2020, we terminated the 2018 ATM Agreement and entered into the 2020 ATM Agreement. Under the 2020 ATM Agreement, we may offer and sell, from time to time, through Cowen, shares of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $125.0 million. We are not obligated to sell any shares under the 2020 ATM Agreement. Subject to the terms and conditions of the 2020 ATM Agreement, Cowen will use commercially reasonable efforts, consistent with its normal trading and sales practices, applicable state and federal law, rules and regulations and the rules of The Nasdaq Global Market, to sell shares from time to time based upon our instructions, including any price, time or size limits specified by us. We pay Cowen a commission of up to 3.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds from each sale of shares, reimburse legal fees and disbursements and provide Cowen with customary indemnification and contribution rights. The 2020 ATM Agreement may be terminated by Cowen or us at any time upon notice to the other party, or by Cowen at any time in certain circumstances, including the occurrence of a material and adverse change in our business or financial condition that makes it impractical or inadvisable to market the shares or to enforce contracts for the sale of the shares. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 2,585,628 shares of common stock under the 2020 ATM Agreement at a weighted average price of $27.18 per share resulting in net proceeds of $68.2 million after sales agent commissions and offering costs.
Common Stock and Common Stock Equivalents
As of February 12, 2021, outstanding shares of common stock were 71,377,818, outstanding stock options were 5,079,944, unvested restricted stock awards and performance stock awards were 4,444,211, and the number of underlying shares from the 2027 Notes at the initial conversion price is 8.9 million.
Operating and Capital Expenditure Requirements
We have not achieved profitability on a quarterly or annual basis since our inception and we expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. We expect to make additional outlays to increase operating expenditures over the next several years to support the completion of clinical trials and associated programs relating to DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for various indications, an onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar, our investment in future innovations in the RHA® Pipeline Products, the procurement of regulatory approval for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for various indications and onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar, preparation for and, if approved, commercialization for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, the sale of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers in the U.S. and the integration of HintMD and the development and commercialization of the HintMD platform. We have funded our operations primarily through the sale and issuance of common stock and, in February 2020, the 2027 Notes. We believe that our existing capital resources will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months following the filing of this Form 10-K. However, we may need to raise substantial additional financing in the future to fund our operations. Our operating plan may change as a result of many factors currently unknown to us, and we may need to seek additional capital sooner than planned. For example, if the FDA does not approve our BLA for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines on a timely basis or at all, it may take longer than anticipated to generate revenue sufficient to fund our operations. In order to meet additional cash requirements, we may seek to sell additional equity or debt, convertible debt or other securities that may result in dilution to our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of debt or convertible debt securities, these securities could have rights senior to those of our common stock and could contain covenants that restrict our operations. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional equity or debt financing on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Debt financing, if available, would result in increased fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions such as incurring debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic and uncertain market conditions may limit our ability to access capital. Our failure to obtain sufficient funds on acceptable terms when needed could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
If adequate funds are not available to us on a timely basis, or at all, we may be required to terminate or delay preclinical studies, clinical trials and research and development activities for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, the RHA® Pipeline Products, an onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar and any future product candidates and terminate or delay the integration of HintMD and the development and commercialization of the HintMD platform, or scale back the establishment of sales and marketing capabilities or other activities that may be necessary to commercialize our services and product candidates, if we obtain marketing approval. Further, if adequate funds are not available to us on a timely basis, or at all, we may be required to curtail integration of and execution of operation strategies related to the HintMD platform. We may elect to raise additional funds even before we need them if the conditions for raising capital are favorable.
Please read Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires our management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the applicable periods. We base our estimates, assumptions and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Different assumptions and judgments would change the estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, which, in turn, could change the results from those reported. We evaluate our estimates, assumptions and judgments on an ongoing basis.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Convertible Senior Notes
In accounting for the issuance of the 2027 Notes, we separated the 2027 Notes into liability and equity components. The carrying amount of the liability component was $175.4 million, which was calculated by using an implied interest rate of
9.5%, which was estimated to be our borrowing rate on the issuance date for a similar debt instrument without the conversion feature. The carrying amount of the equity component was $112.1 million, which represents the conversion option, and was determined by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the par value of the 2027 Notes. A 1% change to the estimated interest rate would have changed the allocation between the liability and equity components by approximately $10 million on initial recognition, which would then impact the subsequent recognition of non-cash interest expense from the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs until maturity date. Refer to Part IV, Item 15 “Consolidated Financial Statements-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 12-Convertible Senior Notes” for details of the 2027 Notes.
Business Combinations and Asset Acquisitions
Accounting for business combinations and asset acquisitions requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions as of acquisition date which are inherently uncertain. Assets we have recognized from such transactions include goodwill, development technology, in-process research and development, tradename, customer relationships, and distribution rights. Critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from product or service sales and acquired technologies, revenue growth rate, expected costs to develop in-process research and development into commercially viable products, technology migration curve, estimated cash flows from the projects when completed, and discount rates. The discount rates used to discount expected future cash flows to present value are typically derived from a weighted-average cost of capital analysis and adjusted to reflect inherent risks. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that could affect either the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
Goodwill Impairment
At the acquisition date, we measure goodwill as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition-date fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. Goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually at the reporting unit level in the fourth quarter of each calendar year, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the reporting unit might be impaired. In assessing goodwill for impairment, we first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than its carrying amount. Such qualitative factors generally include, but not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance, sustained decrease in our share price, and other relevant changes specific to our company. If we conclude it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, a quantitative impairment test is performed. If we conclude that goodwill is impaired, an impairment charge is recorded to the extent that the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value.
Collaboration Revenue
Upon adoption of ASC 606 in 2018, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within the contract and determine those that are performance obligations and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
At the inception of each arrangement that includes development, regulatory or commercial milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered more likely than not of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price. ASC 606 provides two alternatives to use when estimating the amount of variable consideration: the expected value method and the most likely amount method. Under the expected value method, an entity considers the sum of probability-weighted amounts in a range of possible consideration amounts. Under the most likely amount method, an entity
considers the single most likely amount in a range of possible consideration amounts. Whichever method is used should be consistently applied throughout the life of the contract; however, it is not necessary for us to use the same approach for all contracts. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within the control of us or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation (as determined to be appropriate) on a relative stand-alone selling price basis. We recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of each such milestone and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjusts our estimates of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Performance stock awards Subject to Market-based Vesting Conditions
Certain performance stock awards granted in 2019 and 2020 include market-based vesting conditions (“market-based PSAs”). These market-based PSAs vest upon the earlier of i) the date that the closing share price of our common stock meet certain minimum share prices on a volume-weighted basis for a specified period of time or ii) upon a change in control in which the purchase price of our common stock is at or above the same minimum share prices as determined in the award agreement.
We determined the fair value of the market-based PSAs using the Monte Carlo simulation model. The following weighted-average assumptions were used in the Monte Carlo simulation model in determining fair value of these performance stock awards:
(1)Expected term was based on the expiration period of the performance stock awards in the award agreement.
(2)Expected volatility was estimated based on our historical volatility and the historical volatilities of a select group of similar entities..
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized stock-based compensation expense for the market-based PSAs of $6.4 million and $0.5 million, respectively, on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. As of December 31, 2020, the unrecognized compensation cost for the market-based PSAs was $3.2 million with a weighted average expected recognize period of 2.1 years.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual commitments will have an impact on our future liquidity. We believe that we will be able to meet these obligations with our existing cash balances and cash generated from sales of our products and services as well as potential financing activities.
(1)This table does not include any milestone or royalty payments, which may become payable to third parties under agreements, as the timing and likelihood of such payments are not known. Refer to "Contingencies" below for more details.
(2)Operating leases do not include the leases not yet commenced as of December 31, 2020.
(3)The amounts are related to the ABPS Amendment. Refer to "Purchase Commitments" below for detail terms of the purchase commitment.
Operating Lease Obligations
We have commenced operating lease obligations totaled $43.1 million over 6 years, of which $7.6 million were short-term obligations and the rest were long-term as of December 31, 2020. For leases not yet commenced as of December 31, 2020 as well as details of our leases, refer to Part IV, Item 15. - “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 11-Leases.”
Convertible Senior Notes
On February 14, 2020, we issued the 2027 Notes with an aggregate principal balance of $287.5 million, pursuant to the Indenture. The 2027 Notes are senior unsecured obligations and bear interest at a rate of 1.75% per year, payable semiannually in arrears on February 15 and August 15 of each year, beginning on August 15, 2020. The 2027 Notes will mature on February 15, 2027, unless earlier converted, redeemed or repurchased earlier. The 2027 Notes are convertible into cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election. In connection with issuing the 2027 Notes, we received $278.3 million in net proceeds, after deducting the initial purchasers’ discount, commissions, and other issuance costs. Contractually, we may not redeem the 2027 Notes prior to February 20, 2024, and no sinking fund is provided for the 2027 Notes. Refer to Part IV, Item 15. “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 12-Convertible Senior Notes” for details of the convertible senior notes.
Purchase Commitments
•Under the ABPS Amendment, we are subject to minimum purchase obligations of $8.0 million for the year ended in December 31, 2021, and $30.0 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2022, 2023 and 2024. We also have the right to terminate the ABPS Services Agreement, without cause, with an 18-month written notice. The ABPS Amendment contains a lease which has not yet commenced as of December 31, 2020. Refer to Part IV, Item 15. “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements -Note 17-Commitments and Contingencies” for details of the ABPS Services Agreement and the ABPS Amendment.
•Under the Teoxane Agreement, if Teoxane pursues regulatory approval for the RHA® Pipeline Products for certain new indications or filler technologies, including innovations with respect to existing products in the U.S., we will be subject to certain specified cost-sharing arrangements for third party expenses incurred in achieving regulatory approval for such products. We are required to meet certain minimum purchase obligations during each year of the term and are required to meet certain minimum expenditure requirements in connection with commercialization efforts unless prevented by certain conditions such as manufacturing delays. Refer to Part IV, Item 15. “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements -Note 6-Filler Distribution Agreement” for details of the Teoxane Agreement.
Contingencies
We have the following milestone or royalty payments, which may become payable to third parties under agreements, as the timing and likelihood of such payments are not known.
•We have one future milestone payment of $4.0 million upon the achievement of regulatory approval for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection. Refer to Part IV, Item 15. “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements -Note 10-Derivative Liability” for details.
•We are obligated to pay a $2.0 million milestone payment to List Laboratories, which is a developer of botulinum toxin, when a certain regulatory milestone is achieved. We are also obligated to pay royalties to List
Laboratories on future sales of botulinum toxin products. Refer to Part IV, Item 15. “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements -Note 17-Commitments and Contingencies” for details.
•Under the BTRX Purchase Agreement, we are obligated to pay up to $16.0 million to BTRX upon the satisfaction of milestones relating to our product revenue, intellectual property, and clinical and regulatory events. Refer to Part IV, Item 15. “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements -Note 17-Commitments and Contingencies” for details of the BTRX Purchase Agreement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any material off-balance-sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please read Part IV, Item 15. “Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules-Notes to consolidated financial statements-Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.