Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENT WARNING
Certain statements included by reference in this filing containing the words “could,” “may,” “believes,” “anticipates,” “intends,” “expects,” and similar such words constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Any forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance, or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance, or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Such factors include, among others, the impact of COVID-19 on all facets of logistics and operations, as well as costs, our ability to complete capital improvements and ramp up domestic production in response to government agreements, potential tariffs, our ability to maintain liquidity, our maintenance of patent protection, our ability to maintain favorable third party manufacturing and supplier arrangements and relationships, foreign trade risk, our ability to access the market, production costs, the impact of larger market players, specifically Becton, Dickinson and Company ("BD"), in providing devices to the safety market, and other factors referenced in Item 1A. Risk Factors. Given these uncertainties, undue reliance should not be placed on forward-looking statements.
Overview
We have been manufacturing and marketing our products since 1997. VanishPoint® syringes comprised 84.0% of our sales in 2020. EasyPoint® products accounted for 11.8% of sales in 2020. We also manufacture and market a blood collection tube holder, IV safety catheter, and VanishPoint® Blood Collection Set.
Our products have been and continue to be distributed nationally and internationally through numerous distributors.
On May 1, 2020, we were awarded the HHS Order under an existing contract by the Department of Health and Human Services of the United States to supply automated retraction safety syringes for COVID-19 vaccination efforts, which order was in the amount of $83.8 million plus $10 million in expedited freight costs. As of December 31, 2020, we recorded sales of $31.6 million under the 2020 HHS Order, representing 39.0% of our overall revenues
for 2020, and we expect the remaining sales under the HHS Order in 2021. During 2020 and through March 2021, we have timely completed our delivery obligations under the HHS Order.
The Department of Health and Human Services awarded us another contract on February 12, 2021 to supply low dead space safety syringes for COVID-19 vaccination efforts. The base price for the contract and purchase order is $54,217,800 for the five-month base period of performance (February 15, 2021 to July 14, 2021). Such price includes both the fixed price for the products as well as cost reimbursement for freight. The terms of the contract allow for extensions at the option of the U.S. government for up to seven additional one-month periods. If all option periods are exercised, the value of the contract could increase by an additional $92,772,680, including the price of the products and freight reimbursement. For each period, the freight cost is estimated at approximately 25% of the overall price.
Effective July 1, 2020, we entered into the TIA with the United States Government Department of Defense, U.S. Army Contracting Command-Aberdeen Proving Ground, Natick Contracting Division & Edgewood Contracting Division (ACC-APG, NCD & ECD) on behalf of the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) for $53,664,286 in government funding for expanding our domestic production of needles and syringes. Pursuant to the terms of the TIA, we are expecting to make significant additions to our facilities which should allow us to increase domestic production. Additionally, the TIA provides for reimbursement for equipment and supplies. As of early March 2021, we have negotiated contracts for the purchase of automated assembly equipment, molds, and molding equipment, as well as portions of auxiliary equipment, for approximately $42.1 million. As of March 2021, we have substantially completed construction of expanded facilities consisting of approximately 27,800 square feet of additional controlled environment within existing properties and we expect to complete approximately 55,000 square feet of new warehouse space within the second quarter of 2021. The estimated cost of the controlled environment within existing properties is $6.4 million. The increase from the original $6 million estimate is due to change orders and an expedited completion date in order to receive certain manufacturing equipment at an earlier date. The cost of the controlled environment will be funded by the U.S. government under the TIA, while the cost of the new warehouse will be our financial obligation.
Both of the abovementioned orders from the Department of Health and Human Services as well as the TIA from the U.S. government are material events particular to the COVID-19 pandemic and may not be indicative of future operations. While the addition of manufacturing equipment and facilities will greatly increase our production capacity, we cannot be assured that there will be increased demand for our products once orders from the U.S. government have been filled. If future orders are not placed by the U.S. government and orders from new and existing customers do not materialize, we would have significant excess productive capabilities.
On April 17, 2020, we entered into the PPP Loan in the principal amount of $1,363,000 in favor of Independent Bank pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”). The PPP Loan’s original maturity date is April 17, 2022 and bears interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum. We have applied for forgiveness for the entirety of the loan granted under the PPP. We cannot be certain of the amount, if any, which may be forgiven.
As detailed in Note 4 to the financial statements, we held $8.1 million in debt and equity securities as of December 31, 2020, which represented 11.6% of our current assets. We continually monitor our invested balances.
During 2020, we hired 48 new full-time employees, predominantly as production line workers, and terminated several back office employees. We also moderately increased non-executive pay. The net effect of these actions caused a net increase of approximately $1.8 million in our operating expenses for 2020 as compared to 2019.
Historically, unit sales have increased during the flu season. We cannot determine what percent of our increase in domestic sales (excluding the HHS Order) in the second half of 2020 were attributable to flu shots versus preparation for a COVID-19 vaccine.
Product purchases from our Chinese manufacturers have enabled us to increase manufacturing capacity with little capital outlay and have provided a competitive manufacturing cost. In 2020, our Chinese manufacturers produced approximately 85.2% of our products. In the event that we become unable to purchase products from our Chinese manufacturers, we would need to find an alternate manufacturer for the blood collection set, IV catheter,
Patient Safe® syringe, 0.5mL insulin syringe, 0.5mL autodisable syringe, and 2mL, 5mL, and 10mL syringes and we would increase domestic production for the 1mL and 3mL syringes and EasyPoint® needles.
In 1995, we entered into a license agreement with Thomas J. Shaw for the exclusive right to manufacture, market, and distribute products utilizing his patented automated retraction technology and other patented technology. This technology is the subject of various patents and patent applications owned by Mr. Shaw. The license agreement generally provides for quarterly payments of a 5% royalty fee on gross sales of products subject to the license and he receives fifty percent (50%) of the royalties paid to the Company by certain sublicensees of the technology subject to the license.
With increased volumes, our manufacturing unit costs have generally tended to decline. Factors that could affect our unit costs include increases in costs by third party manufacturers, changing production volumes, costs of petroleum products, and transportation costs. Increases in such costs may not be recoverable through price increases of our products.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion contains trend information and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties. Our actual future results could differ materially from our historical results of operations and those discussed in the forward-looking statements. All period references are to our fiscal years ended December 2020 and 2019. Dollar amounts have been rounded for ease of reading.
Comparison of Year Ended
December 31, 2020 and Year Ended December 31,
Domestic sales, including sales to the U.S. government, accounted for 90.2% and 76.3% of the revenues in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Domestic revenues increased 131.4% principally due to increased volumes. Domestic unit sales increased 120.0%. Domestic unit sales were 85.9% of total unit sales for 2020. Domestic unit sales excluding the HHS Order rose approximately 36.4%. International revenues decreased 18.6% representing a return to normal levels after unusually high volumes in 2019. Our international orders may be subject to significant fluctuation over time. Overall unit sales increased 74.0%. Other than the Department of Health and Human Services, our increased sales are predominantly attributable to existing customers as well as several new smaller customers who do not operate as distributors. Our sales under the HHS Order were approximately $31.6 million in 2020 and we expect the remaining sales under the HHS Order in 2021, as well as orders of at least $54.2 million under the new February 2021 contract.
Cost of manufactured product increased 62.7% principally due to an increase in units sold. Royalty expense increased 58.7% due to increased gross sales. Gross profit margins increased from 33.8% in 2019 to 45.2% in 2020 principally due to an overall increase in sales.
Operating expenses increased 15.9% from the prior year due substantially to increased headcount and other employee-related expenses attributable to a larger volume of orders and the expansion activities required by the TIA.
Income from operations was $24.1 million in 2020 compared to income from operations of $3.0 million in 2019 due to the increase in net revenues and resulting gross profit.
Interest and other income increased $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period last year principally due unrealized gains from our investments.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a provision for income taxes of $1,850,234. For a detailed description of the determination and components of calculating the provision, please refer to Note 11 of the financial statements.
During 2020, we engaged in private purchase agreements to purchase shares of outstanding preferred stock in exchange for cash consideration and the issuance of new common stock. We repurchased a total of 22,500 shares of Series III Class B Convertible Preferred Stock, 342,500 shares of Series IV Class B Convertible Preferred Stock,
and 34,000 shares of Series V Class B Convertible Preferred Stock. The aggregate cash consideration equaled $3,786,000, of which $482,670 was paid in 2020 with the remainder payable over a three-year period beginning in February 2021. The aggregate consideration was 754,000 shares of Common Stock. As a result of the transactions, $7,642,049 in unpaid dividends were waived by the shareholders, as measured from the effective date of the transactions. In connection with the transactions, the difference between the fair value of the consideration transferred to the preferred shareholders and the carrying amount of the preferred stock was added to net income available to common shareholders as a deemed capital contribution for the purpose of the calculation of earnings per share. As a result of the described transactions, a total of $2,975,708 was included in the calculation of Income (loss) applicable to common stockholders. Amounts payable as the result of our purchase of preferred stock also comprises a portion of the long-term liabilities set forth on our Balance Sheets. As further discussed in Note 9 of the financial statements, the long-term liabilities of $24,478,697 also includes amounts related to reimbursements from the U.S. government in connection with the TIA.
A comparison of the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 is omitted from this discussion. Such comparison was included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 30, 2020 in Item 7 of Part II thereof.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Discussion of Statement of Cash Flow Items
Cash flow from operations was $19.0 million in 2020, principally due to our net income for the year. The increase in cash was offset by an increase in accounts receivable, largely driven by the HHS Order. There was also an increase in inventory. Additionally, we have recorded a deferred tax asset of $4,631,206 which is material to the adjustments to total cash flow from operations. The deferred tax asset represents amounts available to reduce income taxes payable on taxable income in future years. The determination and calculation of such asset is further discussed in Note 11 of the financial statements.
Cash used by investing activities was $19.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to the purchase of property, plant and equipment, but offset by the net proceeds from the sales and purchases of debt and equity securities. The $21.0 million impact to cash from the purchase of such fixed assets reflects down payments on orders for certain assets detailed in this report in connection with the TIA.
Cash provided by financing activities was $12.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to the proceeds from the PPP Loan, proceeds from the exercise of stock options, and proceeds from the government under the TIA for down payments on our orders for fixed assets.
Historical Sources of Liquidity
We have historically funded operations primarily from the proceeds from revenues, private placements, litigation settlements, and loans.
Internal Sources of Liquidity
Margins
The mix of domestic and international sales affects the average sales price of our products. Generally, the higher the ratio of domestic sales to international sales, the higher the average sales price will be. Some international sales of our products are shipped directly from China to the customer. The number of units produced by us versus manufactured in China can have a significant effect on the carrying costs of Inventory as well as Cost of sales. Additionally, the effect of an overall increase in units sold also has a positive effect on margins. We will continue to evaluate the appropriate mix of products manufactured domestically and those manufactured in China to achieve economic benefits as well as to maintain our domestic manufacturing capability.
Cash Requirements
We have sufficient cash reserves, received a PPP Loan, and have begun to realize income from operations. We also have access to our investments which may be liquidated in the event that we need to access the funds for operations.
Contracts with the U.S. Government
As discussed above, we were awarded a material delivery order by the Department of Health and Human Services of the United States in the total amount of approximately $83.8 million, plus certain expedited freight expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our sales under this HHS Order were approximately $31.6 million and we expect such sales to increase each quarter through May 2021. In February 2021, we received a new contract from the Department of Health and Human Services for additional safety syringes representing $54.2 million in expected revenues and reimbursable freight costs for a five-month base period of performance (February 15, 2021 to July 14, 2021) with additional renewal periods available at the option of the U.S. government.
As discussed above, we entered into a TIA with the U.S. government for approximately $53.7 million in government funding for expanding our domestic production of needles and syringes. As of December 31, 2020, we have received approximately $10.7 million for down payments on the purchase of certain fixed assets. Pursuant to the terms of the TIA, we have begun making significant additions to our facilities which should allow us to increase domestic production. We have substantially completed construction of new controlled environment facilities and we have begun construction of warehousing facilities which are expected to be completed in the second quarter of 2021. While a portion of the planned construction will be funded by the U.S. government, we expect to fund the construction of the new warehouse and expect the cost to be approximately $5.8 million. Through December 31, 2020, have paid a total of approximately $320,000 in progress payments for the new warehouse.
Option Exercises
Stock options were exercised by our employees and directors during 2020, and, consequently, we received approximately $923 thousand to exercise such options.
External Sources of Liquidity
We recently received a PPP Loan, as described above, in the principal amount of $1,363,000. We have applied for forgiveness of this loan but we cannot be certain of the amount, if any, which may be forgiven.
It is unlikely we would choose to raise funds by the public sale of equity despite recent increases in the value of our stock. Our stock price increased materially during 2020 and during the first several months of 2021.
We consider our investment portfolio a source of liquidity as well. For example, in the third quarter of 2020, we liquidated approximately $4.0 million from our investment portfolio for operational needs. As of December 31, 2020, $8.1 million was invested in third party securities.
Capital Resources
Since the execution of the TIA on July 1, 2020, we have begun construction for significant expansion to our facilities. As of March 2021, we have substantially completed construction of expanded facilities consisting of approximately 27,800 square feet of additional controlled environment within existing properties and we expect to complete approximately 55,000 square feet of new warehouse space within the second quarter of 2021. The estimated cost of the controlled environment within existing properties is $6.4 million. The increase from the original $6 million estimate is due to change orders and an expedited completion date in order to receive certain manufacturing equipment at an earlier date. As of early March 2021, we have negotiated contracts for the purchase of automated assembly equipment, molds, and molding equipment, as well as portions of auxiliary equipment, for approximately $42.1 million. To fund the purchase of the automated assembly equipment, auxiliary equipment, and construction of the controlled environment, we are reimbursed by the U.S. government according to the terms in the TIA. The TIA also
allows us to request an advance of funds for larger purchases when necessary. The expenditures which are not reimbursable from the U.S. government under the TIA are funded with cash from operations.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
None.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
Not applicable to smaller reporting companies.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
We are responsible for developing estimates for amounts reported as assets and liabilities, and revenues and expenses in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). Those estimates require that we develop assumptions of future events based on past experience and expectations of economic factors. Among the more critical estimates management makes is the estimate for customer rebates. The amount reported as a contractual allowance for rebates involves examination of past historical trends related of our sales to customers and the related credits issued once contractual obligations of the customers have been met. The establishment of a liability for future claims of rebates against sales in the current period requires that we have an understanding of the relevant sales with respect to product categories, sales distribution channels, and the likelihood of contractual obligations being satisfied. We examine the results of estimates against actual results historically and use the determination to further develop our basis for assumptions in future periods, as well as the accuracy of past estimates.