Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
INTRODUCTION
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect our future results. Our MD&A is presented in six main sections:
• Overview
• Results of Operations
• Liquidity and Capital Resources
• Off Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
• Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
• New Accounting Standards
Our MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. References herein to “Redwood,” the “company,” “we,” “us,” and “our” include Redwood Trust, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries, unless the context otherwise requires. The discussion in this MD&A contains forward-looking statements that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, such as those discussed in the Cautionary Statement in Part 1, Item 1, Business and in Part 1, Item 1A, Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
Our Business
Redwood Trust, Inc., together with its subsidiaries, is a specialty finance company focused on several distinct areas of housing credit. Our goal is to provide attractive returns to shareholders through a stable and growing stream of earnings and dividends, capital appreciation, and a commitment to technological innovation that facilitates risk-minded scale. We operate our business in three segments: Residential Lending, Business Purpose Lending, and Third-Party Investments. Our segments are based on our organizational and management structure, which aligns with how our results are monitored and performance is assessed.
Our primary sources of income are net interest income from our investments and non-interest income from our mortgage banking activities. Net interest income consists of the interest income we earn on investments less the interest expense we incur on borrowed funds and other liabilities. Income from mortgage banking activities is generated through the acquisition and origination of loans and their subsequent sale, securitization, or transfer to our investment portfolios.
Redwood Trust, Inc. has elected to be taxed as a real estate investment trust (“REIT”). We generally refer, collectively, to Redwood Trust, Inc. and those of its subsidiaries that are not subject to subsidiary-level corporate income tax as “the REIT” or “our REIT.” We generally refer to subsidiaries of Redwood Trust, Inc. that are subject to subsidiary-level corporate income tax as “our operating subsidiaries” or “our taxable REIT subsidiaries” or “TRS.”
For additional information on our business, refer to Part I, Item 1, Business of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Update
During the fourth quarter of 2020, our Residential Lending business locked a record $3.78 billion in loans (unadjusted for pipeline fallout), an 81% increase from the third quarter. And our Business Purpose Lending ("BPL") business logged $448 million of originations - an increase of 71% from the third quarter driven by strong single-family rental ("SFR") loan originations. We have allocated additional capital to these businesses, reflecting our expectation of continuing borrower demand for our loan programs. This deployment includes further investments in the financial assets created by our platforms, investments we expect to drive sustainably higher net interest income as we progress through 2021.
Overall credit performance in our investment portfolio remains strong, as delinquencies have continued to decrease since their peak in the summer and strong home price appreciation has kept actual credit losses low. As a result, we continue to see an opportunity for further valuation increases on these investments. Coupled with positive credit trends, high prepayment speeds have begun to provide additional valuation improvements on most of our credit investments held at a discount to par. As prepayments rise and principal pays down on the collateral securing our Sequoia and CoreVest securitization transactions, the call rights we own within these structures are also becoming more valuable. Based on current prepayment trends, we expect up to $600 million of loans collateralizing these securitizations to become redeemable in 2021, well below their estimated fair values.
We believe the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on how Americans are thinking about their housing needs has further validated our core investment thesis, as demand for single-family detached housing has grown significantly. We expect much of that demand to be sustainable, as families choose to move away from dense urban areas, and more people can work remotely out of their homes regardless of proximity to the workplace. This has already caused continuing and spreading effects across both the residential and commercial property sectors, especially in major metropolitan areas.
This is why our primary focus for 2021 will remain on our residential consumer and business purpose lending platforms. The operating capital we allocate to these businesses is currently expected to generate attractive returns at levels very difficult to match when sourcing third-party investments in the current market environment. Most importantly, these businesses serve large and growing markets not covered by government lending programs, and as such are positioned to generate scalable and repeatable sources of future earnings, even in a less favorable interest rate environment. Since the earnings from these platforms are generated within our taxable subsidiary, these earnings can also be retained to provide a steady stream of internally sourced capital that can be deployed to further grow earnings and book value.
Speed and disruption are strategic priorities in 2021 across the Redwood enterprise. Our goal is not simply to grow volume, or issue more securitizations. We want to fundamentally change how the non-Agency mortgage finance sector operates. That entails more speed and automation, and keeping technology at the forefront of our strategic plans. In December 2020, our residential team launched a new technology initiative, Redwood Rapid Funding, with strong initial demand from our counterparties. At CoreVest, we are working to consolidate our technology advantage in speed to market, client service, and our use of data to optimize lead generation.
But internal innovation is only part of our strategy. In January 2021, we launched RWT Horizons, an investment initiative focused on early-stage technology companies with business plans focused on innovations that can disrupt the mortgage finance landscape. The amount of capital deployed through this new platform will likely be small at first, however the investments are designed to have an impact on how our businesses operate. This strategy is premised on extracting value at more points along the mortgage value chain, thereby making us a more meaningful partner to the broad network of market constituents to whom we provide liquidity, and building relationships designed to benefit all parties.
In sum, we believe we are positioned to generate sustainable margins and attractive assets that we expect will result in high-quality earnings in 2021. Our Business Purpose Lending team continues to generate strong origination volumes, supported by growing consumer demand for single-family homes for rent and investor demand for access to this asset class. We believe the size of this market opportunity is $3 trillion and growing, and with CoreVest’s competitive advantages we believe our market share has continued to expand. The securitization market and investor demand for our CoreVest securitizations also continues to be strong, with new alternative funding vehicles already being implemented to diversify our funding channels. We expect to continue to maintain a secure position in our line of credit and build-to-rent bridge products, with an opportunity to delve deeper into these markets.
Our Residential team continues to report strong momentum, with favorable lock volume forecasts in January 2021. While the yield curve has room to steepen with the prospect of another round of fiscal stimulus (and therefore mortgage rates have room to rise), we expect refinancing opportunities with respect to existing jumbo loans will remain attractive in 2021. Additionally, our recent volumes have been almost exclusively from Select loans, with some of the strongest borrower credit profiles we’ve seen since the Great Financial Crisis of 2008. This leaves a significant opportunity to again diversify our purchase mix into Redwood Choice expanded prime and non-QM products. These loans have represented as much as 40% of our quarterly lock activity in recent years.
Redwood remains committed to all our stakeholders, including our shareholders, our employees, and our communities. We’re proud to stand behind our core values, including an earnest focus on diversity, equity and inclusion, and a commitment to strong corporate citizenship, both socially and environmentally. Caring for our employees has never been as important, as we continue to support our team members and their families through the impacts of COVID-19. Investment in our employee programs and stewardship of our culture remain strategic priorities, and we’re proud of the work that we’ve done to engage, develop, and retain our workforce over the past year. Our commitment to our larger communities through volunteerism and charitable giving have also remained in sharp focus for us, particularly as our shared humanity has been amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic.
2020 Financial Overview
This section includes an overview of our 2020 financial results. A detailed discussion of our results of operations is presented in the next section of this MD&A. The following table presents selected financial highlights from 2020 and 2019.
Table 1 - Key Earnings and Return Metrics
We entered 2020 building on the strong momentum gained during 2019. Record monthly loan volumes in January and February and a sense of optimism quickly shifted as the spread of the novel coronavirus accelerated into a global pandemic in mid-March, creating significant dislocations in the financial markets and resulting in one of the fastest market declines in history. Despite the overall strong credit quality and underlying performance of our residential and business purpose loan assets, uncertainty related to the pandemic and its impact on the economy triggered a collapse in liquidity for any sector not explicitly supported by the federal government, and during the first quarter our balance sheet sustained heavy realized and unrealized losses, ultimately driving net a loss and a reduction in our book value for the full year of 2020.
The declines in asset prices in our sector were driven by widespread panic among market participants and the systematic repricing of mortgage-related assets financed by large financial institutions - in particular, assets of the type we owned, which were not explicitly supported by the federal government. In response to these market conditions, we repositioned our investment portfolio and our debt structure, generating significant liquidity and reducing our overall debt as well as our marginable debt. In aggregate, over the course of 2020, our recourse debt declined from $5.15 billion at December 31, 2019 to $1.39 billion at December 31, 2020, and our recourse leverage ratio (the ratio of our recourse debt to tangible shareholders' equity) declined from 3.1x to 1.3x, respectively. Additionally, marginable debt (that portion of recourse debt subject to daily market-value based margin calls), declined to $97 million at December 31, 2020, from $4.12 billion at December 31, 2019. While we realized substantial losses on loans and securities we sold during the early part of the year, a significant portion of the unrealized losses incurred in the first quarter of 2020 were ultimately recovered through the end of the year. Additionally, the actions we took to successfully generate liquidity, meet all our margin calls, and reduce debt, allowed us to avoid the need to raise any dilutive capital when markets were disrupted.
Additionally, as a result of the general market disruptions, both our mortgage banking operations (residential and business purpose) were also impacted, and we experienced a significant reduction in acquisition and origination activities during the first half of the year. The impact to these businesses in the first quarter was acute and resulted in us writing off all the goodwill we had recorded in association with the 5 Arches and CoreVest business purpose lending platforms we acquired in 2019. Additionally, in April we implemented a reduction in force, reducing our overall workforce by approximately 35%. The markets began to stabilize in the spring, and our operating businesses began to see a swift recovery. We repositioned these businesses during the spring and into summer, resetting our underwriting guidelines and re-engaging with loan sellers and with borrowers, and experienced significant growth in production volumes in the third and fourth quarters of 2020, which drove very strong returns for these operations in the second half of the year.
While 2020 was a very challenging year for the world and for our company, we are happy to have finished the year in a position of strength, with over $460 million of cash on hand, an attractive investment portfolio with improving credit trends, and operating businesses on track to continue growing volumes of loan purchases and originations and generate strong returns.
Table 2 - Key Operational Metrics
As discussed above, we made significant changes to our capital structure as a result of the pandemic. In the first half of 2020, we generated significant liquidity through asset sales and then, as our business stabilized in the summer, we began to re-deploy capital back into our investment portfolio - primarily into investments created organically through our mortgage banking platforms, including subordinate securities retained from Sequoia residential and CoreVest single-family securitizations and bridge loans originated by CoreVest.
While our residential mortgage banking business experienced an overall decrease in loan purchases in 2020 due to the effects of the pandemic, we saw loan purchase commitments for this business surge in the third quarter and reach record levels in the fourth quarter of 2020. Given a lag between when loans are locked and purchased, we expect an increase in residential loan purchases to carry into 2021. In 2020, through our Sequoia platform, we completed five Select securitizations and one Choice securitization.
Our business purpose loan originations increased in 2020, benefiting from a full year of operations at our now-combined 5 Arches and CoreVest platforms. We saw sequential increases in loan origination volumes in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 and believe the business is positioned to further increase origination volumes in 2021. In 2020, we completed five single-family rental securitizations through our CoreVest platform.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Within this Results of Operations section, we provide commentary that compares results year-over-year for 2020, 2019, and 2018. Most tables include "changes" columns that show the amounts by which the year's results are greater or less than the results from the prior year. Unless otherwise specified, references in this section to increases or decreases in 2020 refer to the change in results from 2019 to 2020, and increases or decreases in 2019 refer to the change in results from 2018 to 2019.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table presents the components of our net income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Table 3 - Net Income (Loss)
Net Interest Income
Net interest income decreased in 2020, primarily due to lower average asset balances relative to 2019 resulting from portfolio repositioning, including significant asset sales in the first half of 2020 related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as higher borrowing costs associated with non-marginable and non-recourse debt facilities we entered into during 2020.
Net interest income increased in 2019, as higher net capital deployment towards multifamily, third party, and business purpose lending investments improved net interest income. This improvement was partially offset by a decrease in net interest income from residential loans held-for-sale at our residential lending segment, as the average balance of loans in inventory awaiting sale or securitization declined in 2019 as compared with 2018. Additionally, higher interest expense on long-term debt in 2019 from a higher average balance of convertible debt further offset the increase from net capital deployment.
Additional detail on net interest income is provided in the “Net Interest Income” section that follows.
Mortgage Banking Activities, Net
Income from mortgage banking activities, net includes results from both our residential and business purpose mortgage banking operations. The $9 million decrease in 2020 was predominantly due to a decrease in loan acquisition volumes at our residential mortgage banking business as a result of pandemic-related market disruptions. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in mortgage banking income from our business purpose mortgage banking operations, which benefited from a full year of income after our acquisitions of 5 Arches and CoreVest in March and October of 2019, respectively
The $28 million increase in 2019 was due to a $40 million increase from business purpose mortgage banking, partially offset by a $12 million decrease from residential mortgage banking. The increase from business purpose mortgage banking resulted from our acquisitions of 5 Arches and CoreVest and the income generated from those operations. The decrease from residential mortgage banking was primarily due to lower gross margins on slightly higher loan purchase commitments in 2019, relative to 2018.
A more detailed analysis of the changes in this line item is included in the “Results of Operations by Segment” section that follows.
Investment Fair Value Changes, Net
Investment fair value changes, net, is primarily comprised of the change in fair values of our portfolio investments accounted for under the fair value option and interest rate hedges associated with these investments.
The negative investment fair value changes recorded during 2020 were primarily driven by realized losses incurred on assets sales and derivative settlements that occurred in March and April of the year, as we repositioned our portfolio in response to the pandemic. Approximately $360 million of losses were realized from such sales. The remaining net losses for the year were primarily associated with assets we retained that experienced a significant decline in value during the first quarter of 2020 and had not fully recovered their value through the end of the year, as well as a negative fair value changes on our interest only securities resulting from lower benchmark interest rates and higher prepayment speeds during 2020. During 2019, the positive investment fair value changes primarily resulted from tightening credit spreads in several investment classes.
Additional detail on our investment fair value changes is included in the “Results of Operations by Segment” section that follows.
Other Income
The $15 million decrease in Other income in 2020 was primarily the result of losses on our MSR investments, which were driven primarily by increased prepayment speeds, resulting from declines in interest rates during 2020. The $6 million increase in Other income in 2019 primarily resulted from $4 million of business purpose loan administration fee income earned at 5 Arches, as well as a $2 million gain associated with the re-measurement of our initial minority investment and purchase option in 5 Arches upon its acquisition. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in income from our MSR investments as the notional balance of these investments continued to pay down. Details on the composition of Other income is included in Note 20 in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Realized Gains, Net
For 2020, we realized gains of $30 million, including $25 million of gains from the repurchase of $125 million of convertible debt and $5 million of net gains from the sale of $55 million of AFS securities. For 2019, we realized gains of $24 million, primarily from the sale of $110 million of AFS securities and the call of a seasoned Sequoia securitization in the first quarter. For 2018, we realized gains of $27 million, primarily from the sale of $144 million of AFS securities. Of note, all of the gains from extinguishment of debt were excluded from our diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2020, in accordance with GAAP. See Note 17 in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on this calculation.
General and Administrative Expenses
The $6 million increase in general and administrative expenses in 2020 primarily resulted from $14 million of additional expenses at our Business Purpose Lending segment, driven by a full year of operations at our now-combined 5 Arches and CoreVest platforms. This increase was partially offset by a $9 million decrease in general and administrative expenses at our Residential Lending segment, driven by a decrease in loan acquisition activity at our residential mortgage banking business as well as a workforce reduction we implemented in April 2020.
The $33 million increase in general and administrative expenses in 2019 primarily resulted from $24 million of additional expenses from the operations of 5 Arches and CoreVest. The remainder of the increase was primarily due to $7 million in higher compensation expense at the Redwood parent entity (exclusive of 5 Arches and CoreVest), as well as higher systems, consulting, accounting, and legal costs, driven mostly by the acquisition-related expenses associated with 5 Arches and CoreVest. The higher compensation expense at the Redwood parent entity was primarily driven by higher variable compensation, commensurate with improved results in 2019, as well as a higher average employee count in 2019.
Loan Acquisition Costs
The increase in loan acquisition costs for 2020 resulted from an increase in origination activity at our business purpose mortgage banking operations, primarily as a result of the acquisition of CoreVest, and was partially offset by a reduction in expenses from lower acquisition volumes at our residential mortgage banking operations in 2020.
Other Expenses
In the first quarter of 2020, we recorded an $89 million goodwill impairment expense at our Business Purpose Lending segment that resulted from the onset of the pandemic. Exclusive of this amount, other expenses in 2020 and 2019 primarily consisted of amortization expense from intangible assets and contingent consideration we recorded in connection with the acquisitions of 5 Arches and CoreVest in 2019.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes is almost entirely related to activity at our taxable REIT subsidiaries, which primarily includes our mortgage banking activities and MSR investments, as well as certain other investment and hedging activities.
The change to a benefit from income taxes in 2020 from a provision for income taxes in the prior year was the result of GAAP losses at our TRS in 2020. The full benefit from income taxes in 2020 was partially offset by a valuation allowance recorded against our federal net ordinary deferred tax assets.
The decrease in the provision for income taxes for 2019 was driven primarily by lower GAAP income earned at our TRS. Additionally, the provision for 2019 included a $2 million tax benefit resulting from the purchase of 5 Arches. For additional detail on income taxes, see the “Tax Provision and Taxable Income” section that follows.
Net Interest Income
The following tables present the components of net interest income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Table 4 - Net Interest Income
(1)Average balances for residential loans held-for-sale, residential loans held-for-investment, business purpose loans, multifamily loans held-for-investment, and trading securities are calculated based upon carrying values, which represent estimated fair values. Average balances for available-for-sale securities and debt are calculated based upon amortized historical cost, except for ABS issued, which is based upon fair value.
(2)Interest income from residential loans held-for-investment ("HFI") at Redwood exclude loans HFI at consolidated Sequoia or Freddie Mac SLST entities. Interest income from residential loans - HFI at Legacy Sequoia and the interest expense from ABS issued - Legacy Sequoia represent activity from our consolidated Legacy Sequoia entities. Interest income from residential loans - HFI at Sequoia Choice and the interest expense from ABS issued - Sequoia Choice represent activity from our consolidated Sequoia Choice entities. Interest income from residential loans - HFI at Freddie Mac SLST and the interest expense from ABS issued - Freddie Mac SLST represent activity from our consolidated Freddie Mac SLST entities.
The following table details how net interest income changed on a consolidated basis as a result of changes in average investment balances (“volume”) and changes in interest yields (“rate”).
Table 5 - Net Interest Income - Volume and Rate Changes
The following table presents the components of net interest income by segment for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Table 6 - Net Interest Income by Segment
Residential Lending
The $54 million reduction in net interest income for the residential lending segment in 2020 was primarily driven by the liquidation of our FHLB-financed jumbo loan investment portfolio during the first half of 2020, as well as a lower average balance of retained Sequoia securities during the year resulting from sales in the first half of 2020. In both cases, asset sales were associated with the repositioning of our portfolio in response to the pandemic. The $13 million decline in 2019 was primarily due to higher interest costs on our variable-rate long-term FHLB borrowings from higher benchmark interest rates in 2019, as well as a lower average balance of retained Sequoia securities in 2019 resulting from asset sales.
Business Purpose Lending
The $39 million increase in net interest income for the business purpose lending segment in 2020 was primarily driven by the acquisition of CoreVest and it's in-place investment portfolio in the fourth quarter of 2019. The $19 million increase in 2019 was primarily due to the acquisition of 5 Arches in the second quarter of 2019, through which we increased our originations of business purpose loans that were held as earning assets during the year.
Third-party Investments
The $11 million decrease in net interest income for the third-party investments segment in 2020 was primarily driven by a lower average balance of securities during the year, resulting from the sale of a significant amount of securities in the first quarter of 2020 as we repositioned our portfolio in response to the pandemic. The $1 million increase in 2019 was primarily due to higher net interest income from a higher average balance of both multifamily and re-performing loan investments in 2019, partially offset by a lower average balance of other third-party RMBS investments.
Corporate/Other
The Corporate/Other line item in the table above includes net interest income from consolidated Legacy Sequoia entities and interest expense on our convertible debt and trust-preferred securities. The $7 million increase in net interest income from Corporate/Other during 2020 was primarily due to a lower average balance of long-term debt as compared to 2019, as we repaid $201 million of our convertible debt in November 2019 and repurchased $125 million of convertible debt during the second quarter of 2020. The $5 million decrease in net interest income from Corporate/Other during 2019 was primarily due to a higher average balance of long-term debt as compared to 2018, as we issued $200 million of convertible debt in June 2018.
Results of Operations by Segment
Overview
We report on our business using three distinct segments: Residential Lending, Business Purpose Lending, and Third-Party Investments. Our segments are based on our organizational and management structure, which aligns with how our results are monitored and performance is assessed. For additional information on our segments, refer to Note 23 in Part II, Item 8 and Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following table presents the segment contribution from our four segments reconciled to our consolidated net income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Table 7 - Segment Results Summary
Residential Lending
The $229 million decrease in net contribution from our residential lending segment in 2020 was primarily driven by negative fair value changes and lower net interest income on our investments in 2020, in both cases associated with pandemic-related asset sales in the first half of the year, as well as lower mortgage banking income in the first half of the year. The "Residential Lending" section that follows provides additional detail on the activity and results from this segment during 2020.
The $28 million reduction in net contribution from this segment in 2019 was primarily driven by higher negative investment fair value changes and lower mortgage banking income in 2019. The negative investment fair value changes in 2019 primarily resulted from interest rate volatility, which adversely impacted valuations, net of associated hedges. Mortgage banking income decreased due to a lower average balance of loans carried during 2019, which resulted in lower net interest income, as well as lower mortgage banking activities income resulting from lower profit margins. See the previous section for a further description of the changes in net interest income for this segment.
Business Purpose Lending
The $116 million decrease in net contribution from our business purpose lending segment in 2020 was primarily driven by an $89 million charge related to the impairment of our entire goodwill balance for this segment in the first quarter of 2020, as well as from negative investment fair value changes in 2020, triggered by the pandemic. These amounts were offset by an increase in mortgage banking income, as we benefited from a full year of operations from the acquisitions of 5 Arches and CoreVest in 2019. The "Business Purpose Lending" section that follows provides additional detail on the activity and results from this segment during 2020.
The $20 million increase in net contribution from this segment in 2019 primarily resulted from our acquisitions of 5 Arches and CoreVest in 2019 and the increase in business purpose loans held-for-investment through the acquisitions, as well as through originations post-acquisition. Prior to 2019, we did not have significant investments in business purpose loans.
Third-Party Investments
The $441 million decrease in net contribution from our third-party investments segment in 2020 was primarily driven by negative investment fair value changes in 2020, as well as lower net interest income, in both cases associated with pandemic-related asset sales in the first half of 2020. The "Third-Party Investments" section that follows provides additional detail on the activity and results from this segment during 2020.
The $73 million increase in net contribution from this segment in 2019 was primarily associated with positive investment fair value changes in 2019. The positive investment fair value changes in 2019 were primarily driven by tightening credit spreads on our multifamily securities, as well as our re-performing loan securities and other third-party RMBS during that year. See the previous section for a further description of the changes in net interest income for this segment.
Corporate/Other
The $35 million decrease in net expense from Corporate/Other in 2020 was primarily due to a $25 million gain associated with the repurchase of $125 million of convertible debt in the second quarter of 2020 and the associated reduction in interest expense from the repurchase. The $15 million increase in net expense from Corporate/Other in 2019 primarily resulted from a $9 million increase in corporate general and administrative expenses, as well as $3 million of contingent consideration expense associated with our acquisition of 5 Arches, recorded in Other expenses. These increases were partially offset by a $2 million gain associated with the re-measurement of our initial minority investment and purchase option in 5 Arches. The increase in corporate general and administrative expenses in 2019 was primarily due to $7 million in higher compensation expense, driven mostly by higher variable compensation commensurate with improved results in 2019, as well as higher systems, consulting, accounting, and legal costs, driven mostly by the acquisitions of 5 Arches and CoreVest.
The following sections provide a further discussion of our three business segments and their results of operations.
Residential Lending Segment
Overview
Our Residential Lending segment primarily consists of a mortgage loan conduit that acquires residential loans from third-party originators for subsequent sale, securitization, or transfer to our investment portfolio, as well as the investments we retain from these activities. We typically acquire prime, jumbo mortgages and the related mortgage servicing rights on a flow basis from our network of loan sellers and distribute those loans through our Sequoia private-label securitization program or to institutions that acquire pools of whole loans. Our investments in this segment primarily consist of residential mortgage-backed securities ("RMBS") retained from our Sequoia securitizations (some of which we consolidate for GAAP purposes), as well as MSRs retained from jumbo whole loans we sold.
Our Residential Lending segment incurred a $129 million net loss during 2020, driven largely by $153 million of negative investment fair value changes primarily associated with losses on assets we sold to reposition our investment portfolio in response to the pandemic. Additionally, we incurred a $9 million net loss from mortgage banking operations for the full year, as losses incurred in the first half of the year were not fully offset by positive results in the second half of the year.
Mortgage Banking
The following table provides the activity of residential loans held in inventory for sale at our mortgage banking business during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Table 8 - Loan Inventory for Residential Mortgage Banking Operations - Activity
(1)Represents the net transfers of loans from held-for-investment to held-for-sale within our Residential Lending investment portfolio.
The following table provides the fair value changes of our residential loan purchase and forward sale commitments during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Table 9 - Residential Loan Purchase and Forward Sale Commitments and Associated Gains
Income from mortgage banking activities is comprised of mark-to-market adjustments on loans from the time they are purchased to when they are sold, mark-to-market adjustments on new and outstanding loan purchase commitments, gains/losses from associated hedges, and other miscellaneous income/expenses (see Note 19 in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our residential mortgage loan conduit entered into loan purchase commitments (adjusted for expected pipeline fallout) of $4.82 billion, purchased $4.48 billion of prime residential jumbo loans, sold $5.01 billion of loans to third parties, and securitized $2.50 billion of loans. At December 31, 2020, we had identified $3.09 billion of loans for purchase (gross loan locks outstanding, unadjusted for fallout) and had outstanding forward sale agreements for $1.00 billion of loans.
We utilize a combination of capital and our residential loan warehouse facilities to manage our inventory of residential loans held-for-sale. At December 31, 2020, we had residential warehouse facilities outstanding with four different counterparties, with $1.30 billion of total capacity and $1.16 billion of available capacity. These included non-marginable (i.e., not subject to margin calls based on the market value of the underlying collateral) facilities with $600 million of total capacity and marginable facilities with $700 million of total capacity.
Investment Portfolio
The following table presents details of our Residential Lending investment portfolio at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Table 10 - Residential Lending Investments
(1)Excludes Sequoia Choice loans held at VIEs that we consolidate for GAAP purposes.
(2)Excludes $5 million of trading securities that are designated as hedges for our mortgage banking operations and are not considered part of our investment portfolio.
(3)Represents our retained economic investment in the consolidated Sequoia Choice securitization VIEs. For GAAP purposes, we consolidated $1.57 billion of loans and $1.35 billion of ABS issued associated with these investments at December 31, 2020.
The following table presents the components of investment fair value changes for our Residential Lending segment by investment type for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Table 11 - Investment Fair Value Changes, Net from Residential Lending
(1)Includes changes in fair value for loan purchase and forward sale commitments.
As a result of the economic and financial market impacts of the pandemic, the terms of our FHLBC facility evolved and in March 2020 we began entering into transactions to sell several pools of residential whole loans financed through this facility with the objective to pay down our FHLBC borrowings. During the second and third quarters of 2020, we completed the sale of all of our residential loans previously financed at the FHLBC, and repaid all but $1 million of borrowings under this facility. The losses of $93 million recorded in 2020 in association with these loans was effectively realized through their sale.
During 2020, we sold $112 million of securities from our residential lending investment portfolio and retained $37 million of investment securities from five Sequoia securitizations we completed during the year. Investment fair value changes in 2020 included approximately $18 million of realized losses associated with these securities sales. The remaining net losses on our securities investments for 2020 were primarily associated with interest-only securities and resulted from lower interest rates and higher prepayment speeds during 2020, as well as from assets we retained that experienced a significant decline in value during the first quarter of 2020 and had not fully recovered their value through the end of the year.
The decrease in Other investments during 2020 primarily represents a decrease in our MSR investments, as the notional balance of these investments paid down significantly in 2020 as a result of lower interest rates and higher prepayment speeds.
The $11 million of gains from risk management derivatives in 2020 were realized in the first quarter, when we settled all of the hedges for this portfolio.
See the "Investments" section that follows for additional details on investments at this segment and their associated borrowings.
Business Purpose Lending Segment
Overview
Our Business Purpose Lending segment consists of a platform that originates business purpose loans for subsequent securitization or transfer into our investment portfolio, as well as the investments we retain from these activities. These activities are performed through our wholly-owned CoreVest subsidiary, which we acquired in 2019. In 2019 we also acquired another business purpose loan originator, 5 Arches, which was combined with CoreVest during 2020. We typically originate single-family rental and bridge loans and distribute most of our single-family loans through our CoreVest American Finance Lender ("CAFL") private-label securitization program and hold our bridge loans for investment. Single-family rental loans are business purpose mortgage loans to investors in single-family rental properties. Bridge loans are business purpose mortgage loans to investors rehabilitating and reselling or renting residential and small-balance multifamily properties. Our investments in this segment primarily consist of securities retained from CAFL securitizations (which we consolidate for GAAP purposes), and bridge loans.
Our Business Purpose Lending segment incurred a $95 million net loss during 2020, driven largely by an $89 million charge related to the full impairment of its goodwill, and $81 million of negative investment fair value changes on its investment portfolio. The goodwill impairment charge was recorded in the first quarter of 2020 and was triggered by the onset of the pandemic and economic downturn that ensued. Investment fair value changes are discussed further below.
Mortgage Banking
The following table provides the business purpose loans origination activity at Redwood during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Table 12 - Business Purpose Loans - Origination Activity
(1)Our bridge loans are generally originated at our TRS and the majority are transferred to our REIT and a smaller portion sold. Origination fees and any mark-to-market changes on these loans prior to transfer are recognized as mortgage banking income. The loans held at our REIT are classified as held-for-investment, with subsequent fair value changes recorded through Investment fair value changes, net on our consolidated statements of income (loss). For the carrying value and activity of our bridge loans held-for-investment, see the "Investments" section that follows.
(2)For single-family rental loans, amounts represent transfers of loans from held-for-sale to held-for-investment, including when loans are securitized (and consolidated for GAAP purposes) or transferred from our TRS to our REIT with the intent to hold for long-term investment. For bridge loans, represents the transfer of loans from our TRS to our REIT as described in preceding footnote.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we funded $980 million of single-family rental loans, sold $111 million of such loans to third parties and securitized $1.21 billion of loans. All of our outstanding SFR loans are held as inventory in our mortgage banking business and classified as held-for-sale. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we funded $452 million of bridge loans, sold $25 million of loans to a third party and transferred the remaining loans to our BPL investment portfolio.
We utilize a combination of capital and loan warehouse facilities to manage our inventory of single-family rental loans that we hold for sale. At December 31, 2020, we had business purpose warehouse facilities outstanding with four different counterparties, with $1.00 billion of total capacity (used for both SFR and bridge loans) and $785 million of available capacity. All of these facilities are non-marginable (i.e., not subject to margin calls based on the market value of the underlying collateral).
Investment Portfolio
The following table presents details of our Business Purpose Lending investment portfolio at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Table 13 - Business Purpose Lending Investments
(1)Excludes loans held at VIEs that we consolidate for GAAP purposes.
(2)Represents our economic investment in securities issued by consolidated CAFL securitization VIEs. For GAAP purposes, we consolidated $3.25 billion of loans and $3.01 billion of ABS issued associated with these investments at December 31, 2020.
The following table presents the components of investment fair value changes for our Business Purpose Lending segment by investment type for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Table 14 - Investment Fair Value Changes, Net from Business Purpose Lending
(1)Includes changes in fair value of the loans held-for-investment and the ABS issued at the entities, which netted together represent the change in value of our investments (subordinate securities) at the consolidated VIEs.
During 2020, we funded $452 million of business purpose bridge loans and received principal payments of $510 million. Additionally, we retained $104 million of securities from five single-family rental securitizations we completed during 2020. See the "Investments" section that follows for additional details on investments at this segment and their associated borrowings.
The negative investment fair value changes across our business purpose lending investment portfolio were generally triggered by the pandemic. Fair value declines for bridge loans were primarily driven by declines in values of performing loans as well as unrealized losses on delinquent loans, in both cases triggered by the pandemic. Losses on net investments in CAFL entities were primarily driven by spread widening on the securities we own in these entities and higher delinquencies in the loan pools underlying the securitizations. The $12 million of losses on risk management derivatives were realized in the first quarter when we settled all our hedges for this portfolio.
Third-Party Investments Segment
Overview
Our Third-Party Investments segment consists of investments in RMBS issued by third parties, investments in Freddie Mac SLST and K-Series securitizations (both of which we consolidate for GAAP purposes), our servicer advance investments, and other residential and multifamily credit investments not generated through our Residential Lending or Business Purpose Lending segments.
Our Third-Party Investments segment incurred a $291 million net loss during 2020, driven largely by $352 million of negative investment fair value changes primarily associated with losses on assets we sold to reposition our investment portfolio in response to the pandemic.
Investment Portfolio
The following table presents details of the investments in our Third-Party Investments segment at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Table 15 - Third-Party Investments
(1)Represents our economic investment in securities issued by consolidated Freddie Mac SLST securitization entities. For GAAP purposes, we consolidated $2.22 billion of loans and $1.79 billion of ABS issued associated with these investments at December 31, 2020.
(2)Represents our economic investment in securities issued by consolidated Freddie Mac K-Series securitization entities. For GAAP purposes, we consolidated $492 million of loans and $464 million of ABS issued associated with these investments at December 31, 2020.
(3)Other investments includes our servicer advance investments, which for purposes of this table are presented net of $208 million of non-recourse short-term securitization debt, secured by servicing advances at December 31, 2020.
The following table presents the components of investment fair value changes for our Third-Party Investments segment by investment type for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Table 16 - Investment Fair Value Changes, Net from Third-Party Investments
(1)Includes changes in fair value of the loans held-for-investment and the ABS issued at the entities, which netted together represent the change in value of our investments (subordinate securities) at the consolidated VIEs.
During 2020, we retained $56 million of multifamily securities from two securitizations issued through our multifamily joint venture, purchased $25 million of third-party investments, and sold $547 million of third-party investments. Investment fair value changes in 2020 included approximately $207 million of realized losses associated with these sales, which included trading securities we held on balance sheet and securities we owned in the consolidated Freddie Mac K-series entities.
The sales of the subordinate securities issued by four Freddie Mac sponsored K-Series multifamily securitizations resulted in the deconsolidation of $3.86 billion of multifamily loans and other assets, and $3.72 billion of ABS issued and other liabilities associated with these investments. At December 31, 2020, we held subordinate securities in three such securitizations, one of which we consolidated.
The negative investment fair value changes across our third-party investment portfolio were generally triggered by the pandemic. In addition to the sales noted above, in 2020, losses on risk management derivatives were realized when we settled all of our hedges for this portfolio in the first quarter, losses on investments in Freddie Mac SLST entities and servicing advance investments were primarily driven by higher delinquencies in the underlying loan pools, and losses on excess MSRs were primarily driven by higher prepayments speeds resulting from lower interest rates during 2020.
See the "Investments" section that follows for additional details on these investments.
Investments
This section presents additional details on our investment assets and their activity during 2020 and 2019.
Residential Loans at Residential Lending Investment Portfolio
The following table provides the activity of residential loans at our Residential Lending investment portfolio during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Table 17 - Residential Loans at Residential Lending Investment Portfolio - Activity
(1)Represents the net transfers of loans into or out of our investment portfolio and their reclassification between held-for-sale to held-for-investment.
During 2020, we sold all of our residential loans previously held for investment and financed at our FHLBC facility, and repaid all but $1 million of borrowings under this facility. We do not expect to increase borrowings under our FHLBC facility above the existing $1 million of borrowings outstanding.
Single-Family Rental Loans at Business Purpose Lending Investment Portfolio
The following table provides the activity of single-family rental loans at our Business Purpose Lending investment portfolio during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Table 18 -Single-Family Rental Loans at Business Purpose Lending Investment Portfolio - Activity
During the second quarter of 2020, we transferred all of our single-family rental loans previously financed at the FHLBC and held for investment to non-marginable warehouse facilities, repaid our associated FHLBC debt, and reclassified these loans as held-for-sale as part of our business purpose mortgage banking loan inventory.
Bridge Loans Held-for-Investment at Redwood
The following table provides the activity of bridge loans held-for-investment at Redwood during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Table 19 - Bridge Loans Held-for-Investment at Redwood - Activity
(1)All of our bridge loans are originated at our TRS then transferred to our REIT. Origination fees and any mark-to-market changes on these loans prior to transfer are recognized as mortgage banking income. Once the loans are transferred to our REIT, they are classified as held-for-investment, with subsequent fair value changes recorded through Investment fair value changes, net on our consolidated statements of income (loss).
Our $642 million of bridge loans held-for-investment at December 31, 2020 were comprised of first-lien, fixed-rate, interest-only loans with a weighted average coupon of 8.09% and original maturities of six to 24 months. At origination, the weighted average FICO score of borrowers backing these loans was 738 and the weighted average LTV ratio of these loans was 67%. At December 31, 2020, of the 1,725 loans in this portfolio, 31 of these loans with an aggregate fair value of $34 million and an unpaid principal balance of $39 million were greater than 90 days delinquent, of which 25 loans with an aggregate fair value of $33 million and an aggregate unpaid principal balance of $39 million were in foreclosure.
During 2020, we entered into new non-recourse facilities and new non-marginable (i.e., not subject to margin calls based on the market value of the underlying collateral) recourse facilities to finance business purpose bridge loans. While our new non-marginable and non-recourse financing facilities have reduced our contingent liquidity risks, they generally have higher interest costs, which marginally impacted our net interest income. Our non-recourse facility financing bridge loans with $252 million of borrowings outstanding at December 31, 2020 and an interest rate equal to one-month LIBOR plus 7.50% is prepayable in June 2021. We expect to refinance this debt when it becomes prepayable in June, and based on current market rates, expect a reduction in our borrowing costs.
Real Estate Securities Portfolio
The following table sets forth our real estate securities activity by collateral type for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Table 20 - Real Estate Securities Activity by Collateral Type
(1)The effect of principal payments reflects the change in fair value due to principal payments, which is calculated as the cash principal received on a given security during the period multiplied by the prior quarter ending price or acquisition price for that security.
(2)At December 31, 2020, excludes $218 million and $239 million of securities retained from our consolidated Sequoia Choice and CAFL securitizations, respectively, as well as $428 million and $28 million of securities we owned that were issued by consolidated Freddie Mac SLST and Freddie Mac K-Series securitizations, respectively.
(3)Represents the derecognition of mezzanine securities we owned in Freddie Mac K-Series securitizations when we began to consolidate the securitizations upon the acquisition of subordinate interests in these entities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold $659 million of securities, including $540 million of securities we sold in the first quarter of 2020 to reposition our portfolio in response to the pandemic.
At December 31, 2020, our securities consisted of fixed-rate assets (83%), adjustable-rate assets (14%), hybrid assets that reset within the next year (2%), and hybrid assets that reset between 12 and 36 months (1%). For the portions of our securities portfolio that are sensitive to changes in interest rates, we seek to minimize this interest rate risk by using various derivative instruments.
We directly finance our holdings of real estate securities with a combination of capital and collateralized debt in the form of repurchase (or “repo”) financing. The following table presents the fair value of our residential securities that were financed with repurchase debt at December 31, 2020.
Table 21 - Real Estate Securities Financed with Repurchase Debt
(1)Amounts represent carrying value of securities, which are held at GAAP fair value.
(2)GAAP fair value per $100 of principal. Weighted average price excludes IO securities.
(3)Allocated capital divided by GAAP fair value.
(4)Includes $63 million of securities we owned that were issued by consolidated Sequoia Choice securitizations, which we consolidate in accordance with GAAP.
(5)Includes $28 million of securities we owned that were issued by consolidated Freddie Mac K-Series securitizations, which we consolidate in accordance with GAAP.
At December 31, 2020, we had short-term debt incurred through repurchase facilities of $78 million with three different counterparties, which was secured by $115 million of real estate securities (including securities owned in consolidated securitization entities).
At December 31, 2020, real estate securities with a fair value of $363 million (including securities owned in consolidated Sequoia Choice and CAFL securitization entities), were financed with long-term, non-mark-to-market recourse debt through our subordinate securities financing facilities. Additionally, at December 31, 2020, we had $428 million of re-performing loan securities financed with $205 million of non-recourse securitization debt. The remaining $351 million of our securities, including certain securities we own that were issued by consolidated securitization entities, were financed with capital.
The following table presents our real estate securities at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, categorized by portfolio vintage (the years the securities were issued), and by priority of cash flows (senior, mezzanine, and subordinate). Within the following table, we have additionally separated securities issued through our Sequoia platform or by third parties, including the Agencies.
Table 22 - Real Estate Securities by Vintage and Type
(1)At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, senior Sequoia and third-party securities included $28 million and $64 million of IO securities, respectively. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, subordinate third-party securities included $11 million and $6 million of IO securities, respectively. Our interest-only securities included $13 million and $36 million of A-IO-S securities at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, that we retained from certain of our Sequoia securitizations. These securities represent certificated servicing strips and therefore may be negatively impacted by the operating and funding costs related to servicing the associated securitized mortgage loans.
(2)Mezzanine includes securities initially rated AA through BBB- and issued in 2012 or later.
(3)At December 31, 2020, excluded $218 million, $428 million, $28 million, and $239 million of securities we owned that were issued by consolidated Sequoia Choice, Freddie Mac SLST, Freddie Mac K-Series, and CAFL securitizations, respectively. At December 31, 2019, excluded $254 million, $449 million, $252 million, and $191 million of securities we owned that were issued by consolidated Sequoia Choice, Freddie Mac SLST, Freddie Mac K-Series, and CAFL securitizations, respectively. For GAAP purposes we consolidated $7.53 billion of loans and $6.62 billion of non-recourse ABS debt associated with these retained securities.
The following tables present the components of the interest income we earned on AFS securities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Table 23 - Interest Income - AFS Securities
Tax Provision and Taxable Income
Tax Provision under GAAP
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we recorded a tax benefit of $5 million and tax provisions of $7 million and $11 million, respectively. Our tax provision is primarily derived from GAAP net income or loss at our TRS, as we do not book a material tax provision associated with income generated at our REIT. Our TRS income is generally earned from our mortgage banking activities, MSRs, and other non-REIT eligible security investments.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act") was enacted into law. The CARES Act, among other things, provided tax relief to businesses, including the deferral of certain payroll taxes, relief for retaining employees, and other income tax provisions. Based on our review of the CARES Act, we concluded that this new legislation did not have a material impact on our tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Taxable Income
The following table summarizes our taxable income and distributions to shareholders for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. For each of these periods, we had no undistributed REIT taxable income, after the application of net operating loss carryforwards.
Table 24 - Taxable Income
(1)Our tax results for the year ended December 31, 2020 are estimates until we file tax returns for 2020.
In accordance with Internal Revenue Code rules applicable to disaster losses, $59 million of losses incurred in 2020 at our TRS were recognized in 2019 for federal income tax purposes, resulting in higher TRS taxable income for the year ended December 31, 2020 and lower TRS taxable income for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Taxable Income Distribution Requirement
As a REIT, we are required to distribute at least 90% of our REIT taxable income, taking into account the application of available federal net operating loss carryforwards ("NOLs"), to our shareholders. For 2020, we incurred an estimated REIT taxable loss of $7 million; therefore, our minimum dividend distribution requirement was zero. The following table details our federal NOLs and capital loss carryforwards available as of December 31, 2020.
Table 25 - Federal Net Operating and Capital Loss Carryforwards
At December 31, 2019, we maintained $29 million of NOLs at the REIT level. Federal income tax rules require the dividends paid deduction to be applied to reduce REIT taxable income before the applicability of NOLs is considered; therefore, REIT taxable income must exceed our dividend distribution for us to utilize a portion of our NOL and any remaining NOL amount will carry forward into future years. Since annual REIT taxable income, exclusive of the dividends paid deduction, was a taxable loss of $7 million in 2020, the NOL will be increased by this amount. Federal NOLs at the REIT level do not begin to expire until 2029.
The Tax Act created a limitation on the annual usage of REIT NOLs to 80% of REIT taxable income, effective with respect to NOLs arising in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2017. However, under the CARES Act, this 80% limitation only applies to NOLs used in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2020. We do not expect this to materially impact our REIT.
Our TRS NOL carryforwards were acquired in the 5 Arches acquisition. A portion of these NOLs were generated after December 31, 2017 and therefore carry forward indefinitely. These NOLs are subject to the Separate Return Limitation Year ("SRLY") rules, which can limit the usage of the NOLs. Due to uncertainty regarding the utilization of these NOLs, we recorded a valuation allowance against the associated deferred tax asset.
Tax Characteristics of Distributions to Shareholders
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we declared and distributed four regular quarterly dividends totaling $82 million ($0.725 per share). Under the federal income tax rules applicable to REITs, the taxable portion of any distribution to shareholders is determined by (i) taxable income of the REIT, exclusive of the dividends paid deduction and NOLs; and (ii) net capital gains recognized by the REIT, exclusive of capital loss carryforwards. The income or loss generated at our TRS does not directly affect the tax characterization of our dividends.
Under the federal income tax rules applicable to REITs, our 2020 dividend distributions are expected to be characterized for federal income tax purposes as 100% return of capital, which in general is non-taxable (provided it does not exceed a shareholder's basis in Redwood shares) and reduces a shareholder's basis in Redwood shares (but not below zero). To the extent such distributions exceed a shareholder's basis in Redwood shares, such excess amount would be taxable as capital gain. None of our 2020 dividend distributions are expected to be characterized for federal income tax purposes as ordinary income, qualified dividends, or long-term capital gain dividends.
Individual taxpayers may generally deduct 20% of their ordinary REIT dividends from taxable income. This results in a maximum federal effective tax rate of 29.6% on an individual taxpayer’s ordinary REIT dividends, compared to the highest marginal rate of 37%. This deduction does not apply to REIT dividends classified as qualified dividend income or long-term capital gains dividends, as those dividends are taxed at a maximum rate of 20% for individuals.
Differences between Estimated Total Taxable Income and GAAP Income
Differences between estimated taxable income and GAAP income are largely due to the following: (i) we cannot establish loss reserves for future anticipated events for tax but we can for GAAP, as realized credit losses are expensed when incurred for tax and these losses can be anticipated through lower yields on assets or through loss provisions for GAAP; (ii) the timing, and possibly the amount, of some expenses (e.g., certain compensation expenses) are different for tax than for GAAP; (iii) since amortization and impairments differ for tax and GAAP, the tax and GAAP gains and losses on sales may differ, resulting in differences in realized gains on sale; (iv) at the REIT and certain TRS entities, unrealized gains and losses on market valuation adjustments of loans, securities and derivatives are not recognized for tax until the instrument is sold or extinguished; (v) for tax, basis may not be assigned to mortgage servicing rights retained when whole loans are sold resulting in lower tax gain on sale; (vi) for tax, we do not consolidate securitization entities as we do under GAAP; and, (vii) dividend distributions to our REIT from our TRS are included in REIT taxable income, but not GAAP income. As a result of these differences in accounting, our estimated taxable income can vary significantly from our GAAP income during certain reporting periods.
The tax basis in assets and liabilities at the REIT was $2.69 billion and $1.34 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2020. The GAAP basis in assets and liabilities at the REIT was $9.13 billion and $8.02 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2020. The primary difference in both the tax and GAAP assets and liabilities is attributable to securitization entities that are consolidated for GAAP reporting purposes but not for tax purposes.
The tables below reconcile our estimated total taxable income to our GAAP income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Table 26 - Differences between Estimated Total Taxable Income and GAAP Net Income
Potential Taxable Income Volatility
We expect period-to-period volatility in our estimated taxable income. A description of the factors that can cause this volatility is provided below.
Recognition of Gains and Losses on Sale
Since the computation of amortization and impairments on assets may differ for tax and GAAP and many of our assets held for investment purposes are marked-to-market for GAAP, but not for tax, the tax and GAAP basis on assets sold or called may differ, resulting in differences in gains and losses on sale or call. In addition, capital losses in excess of capital gains are generally disallowed and carry forward to future tax years. Subsequent capital gains realized for tax may be offset by prior capital losses and, thus, not affect taxable income. At December 31, 2020, we had $328 million of capital loss carryforwards at the REIT and none at the TRS level.
Prepayments on Securities
We own Sequoia, CAFL, and third-party IO securities. Our tax basis in these securities was $181 million at December 31, 2020. The return on IOs is sensitive to prepayments and, to the extent prepayments vary period to period, income from these IOs will vary. Typically, fast prepayments reduce yields and slow prepayments increase yields. We are not permitted to recognize a negative yield under tax accounting rules, so during periods of fast prepayments our periodic premium expense for tax purposes can be relatively low and the tax cost basis for these securities may not be significantly reduced. Currently, our tax basis is above the fair values for these IOs in the aggregate. If a securitization is called, the remaining tax basis in the IO is expensed, creating an ordinary loss at the call date.
Prepayments also affect the taxable income recognition on other securities we own. For tax purposes, we are required to use particular prepayment assumptions for the remaining lives of each security. As actual prepayment speeds vary, the yield we recognize for tax purposes will be adjusted accordingly. Thus, to the extent actual prepayments differ from our long-term assumptions or vary from period to period, the yield recognized will also vary and this difference could be material.
Credit Losses on Securities and Loans
To determine estimated taxable income, we are generally not permitted to anticipate, or reserve for, credit losses on investments which are generally purchased at a discount. For tax purposes, we accrue the entire purchase discount on a security into taxable income over the expected life of the security. Estimated taxable income is reduced when actual credit losses occur. As we have no credit reserves or allowances for tax, any future credit losses on securities or loans will have a more significant impact on tax earnings than on GAAP earnings and may create significant taxable income volatility to the extent the level of credit losses fluctuates during reporting periods. Credit losses are based on our tax basis, which differs from our basis for GAAP purposes. We anticipate an additional $20 million of credit losses for tax on securities, based on our projection of principal balance losses and assuming a similar tax basis as we have recently experienced, although the timing of actual losses is difficult to accurately project.
Our estimated total taxable income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 included $2 million, $1 million, and $2 million, respectively, in realized credit losses on investments.
Compensation Expense
The total tax expense for equity award compensation is dependent upon varying factors such as the timing of payments of dividend equivalent rights, the distribution of deferred stock units and performance stock units, and the cash deferrals to and withdrawals from our Executive Deferred Compensation Plan. For GAAP purposes, the total expense associated with an equity award is determined at the award date and is recognized over the vesting period. For tax, the total expense is recognized at the date of distribution or exercise, not the award date. In addition, some compensation may not be deductible for tax if it exceeds certain levels. Thus, the total amount of compensation expense, as well as the timing, could be significantly different for tax than for GAAP.
As an example, for GAAP we expense the grant date fair value of performance stock units (PSUs) granted over the vesting term of those PSUs (regardless of the degree to which the performance conditions for vesting are ultimately satisfied, if at all), whereas for tax the value of the PSUs that actually vest in accordance with the performance conditions of those awards and are subsequently distributed to the award recipient is recorded as an expense on the date of distribution. For example, if no PSUs under a particular grant ultimately vest, due to the failure to satisfy the performance conditions, no tax expense will be recorded for those PSUs, even though we would have already recorded expense for GAAP equal to the grant date fair value of the PSU awards. Conversely, for example, if performance is such that a number of shares of common stock equal to 200% of the PSU award ultimately vest and are delivered to the award recipient, expense for tax will equal the common stock value on the date of distribution of 200% of the number of PSUs originally granted. This expense for tax could significantly exceed the recorded expense for GAAP.
In addition, since the timing of distributions of deferred stock units, performance stock units, or cash out of the Executive Deferred Compensation Plan is based on employees' deferral elections, it can be difficult to project when the tax expense will occur.
Mortgage Servicing Rights
For GAAP purposes, we recognize MSRs through the direct acquisition of servicing rights from third parties or through the retention of MSRs associated with residential loans that we have acquired and subsequently sold to non-consolidated securitization entities or to third parties. For tax purposes, basis in our MSR assets is recognized through the direct acquisition of servicing rights from third parties, or to the extent that a retained MSR entitles us to receive a servicing fee in excess of so-called normal servicing (or the right to receive reasonable compensation for services to be performed under the mortgage serving contract). Tax basis in our normal MSR assets is not recognized when MSRs are retained from sales of loans to non-consolidated securitization entities or to third parties, thereby creating a favorable temporary GAAP to tax difference from sale of the loans. No material tax basis in MSR assets was recognized in 2020.
For GAAP purposes, mortgage servicing fee income, net of servicing expense, as well as changes in the estimated fair value of our MSRs, is recognized on our consolidated statements of income over the life of the MSR asset. For tax purposes, only mortgage servicing fee income, net of servicing expense is recognized as taxable income. Any MSR where basis is recognized for tax purposes through acquisition is amortized as a tax expense over a finite life.
Periodic changes in the market values of MSRs are recorded through the income statement for GAAP purposes, but not for tax purposes. Only when MSRs are sold will a tax gain or loss be recognized. As tax basis is not recognized for retained MSRs and the rules for writing-off tax basis of purchased MSRs are restrictive, the tax gain from the sale of MSRs can be substantial.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Summary
In addition to the proceeds from equity and debt capital-raising transactions, our principal sources of cash consist of borrowings under mortgage loan warehouse facilities, securities repurchase agreements, payments of principal and interest we receive from our investment portfolios, proceeds from the sale of portfolio assets, and cash generated from our operating activities. Our most significant uses of cash are to purchase and originate mortgage loans for our mortgage banking operations, to purchase investment securities and make other investments, to repay principal and interest on our debt, to meet margin calls associated with our debt and other obligations, to make dividend payments on our capital stock, and to fund our operations.
At December 31, 2020, our total capital was $1.76 billion and included $1.11 billion of equity capital and $0.65 billion of convertible notes and long-term debt on our consolidated balance sheet, including $199 million of convertible debt due in 2023, $150 million of convertible debt due in 2024, $172 million of exchangeable debt due in 2025, and $140 million of trust-preferred securities due in 2037.
As of December 31, 2020, our unrestricted cash was $461 million. While we believe our available cash is sufficient to fund our operations, we may raise equity or debt capital from time to time to increase our unrestricted cash and liquidity, to repay existing debt, to make long-term portfolio investments, to fund strategic acquisitions and investments, or for other purposes. To the extent we seek to raise additional capital, our approach will continue to be based on what we believe to be in the best interests of the company.
In the discussion that follows and throughout this document, we distinguish between marginable and non-marginable debt. When we refer to non-marginable debt and marginable debt, we are referring to whether such debt is subject to market value-based margin calls on underlying collateral that is non-delinquent. If a mortgage loan is financed under a marginable warehouse facility, to the extent the market value of the loan declines (which market value is generally determined by the counterparty under the facility), we will be subject to a margin call, meaning we will be required to either immediately reacquire the loan or meet a margin requirement to pledge additional collateral, such as cash or additional residential loans, in an amount at least equal to the decline in value. Non-marginable debt may be subject to a margin call due to delinquency of the mortgage or security being financed, or a decline in the value of the underlying asset securing the collateral. For example, we could be subject to a margin call on non-marginable debt if an appraisal or broker price opinion indicates a decline in the value of the property securing the mortgage loan that is financed by us under a loan warehouse facility.
We also distinguish between recourse and non-recourse debt. When we refer to non-recourse debt, we mean debt that is payable solely from the assets pledged to secure such debt, and under which debt no creditor or lender has direct or indirect recourse to us, or any other entity or person (except for customary exceptions for fraud, acts of insolvency, or other "bad acts"), if such assets are inadequate or unavailable to pay off such debt.
We are subject to risks relating to our liquidity and capital resources, including risks relating to incurring debt under residential loan warehouse facilities, securities repurchase facilities, and other short- and long-term debt facilities and other risks relating to our use of derivatives. A further discussion of these risks is set forth below under the heading “Risks Relating to Debt Incurred under Short- and Long-Term Borrowing Facilities" and in Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cash Flows and Liquidity for the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Cash flows from our mortgage banking activities and our investments can be volatile from quarter to quarter depending on many factors, including the timing and amount of securities acquisitions, sales and repayments, the profitability of mortgage banking activities, as well as changes in interest rates, prepayments, and credit losses. Therefore, cash flows generated in the current period are not necessarily reflective of the long-term cash flows we will receive from these investments or activities.
During 2020, in response to the pandemic, we sold a significant amount of investments and repaid a significant amount of debt, which allowed us to reposition and de-lever our balance sheet and generate additional liquidity. Additionally, we entered into several new financing agreements that are non-marginable (i.e., not subject to margin calls based on the market value of the underlying, non-delinquent collateral) and non-recourse, and have longer dated maturities than agreements they replaced that were marginable and recourse to us. While the asset sales and pay-down of debt, along with these new financing agreements, strengthened our liquidity and capital position by removing sources of contingent liquidity risk (from potential market value-based margin calls on non-delinquent collateral), they have also reduced our overall amount of earning assets and in some cases have increased our borrowing costs. In the near-term, while we maintain a higher balance of cash, this will reduce our cash flows from operations. However, given our significant cash position, we believe we are positioned well to meet our near-term liquidity needs.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities were negative $505 million in 2020. This amount includes the net cash utilized during the period from the purchase and sale of residential mortgage loans and the origination and sale of our business purpose loans associated with our mortgage banking activities. Purchases of loans are financed to a large extent with short-term and long-term debt, for which changes in cash are included as a component of financing activities. Excluding cash flows from the purchase, origination, sale, and principal payments of loans classified as held-for-sale, cash flows from operating activities were positive $91 million in 2020, negative $76 million in 2019, and positive $100 million in 2018.
As a result of the pandemic, in late March we determined that our hedges were no longer effectively managing the risks associated with certain of our assets and liabilities and we settled nearly all of our outstanding derivative positions. As a result of these settlements and other hedging activity during the quarter, we made $187 million of cash payments. Additionally, during the six months ended June 30, 2020, our margin receivable (which was primarily associated with our hedges), decreased by $207 million, resulting in an increase to our cash flows from operations. These changes in operating cash flows resulted from actions taken in response to the pandemic that we would generally not expect to recur at such a magnitude in subsequent periods. Additionally, during the six months ended June 30, 2020, we received $38 million in cash related to FHLBC stock that was transferred back to the FHLBC, upon the repayment of substantially all of our borrowings from the FHLBC.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
During 2020, our net cash provided by investing activities was $4.07 billion and primarily resulted from proceeds from sales of loans and real estate securities, as well as principal payments on loans. Although we generally intend to hold our loans and investment securities as long-term investments, we may sell certain of these assets in order to manage our liquidity needs and interest rate risk, to meet other operating objectives, and to adapt to market conditions.
Because many of our investment securities and loans are financed through various borrowing agreements, a significant portion of the proceeds from any sales or principal payments of these assets are generally used to repay balances under these financing sources. Similarly, all or a significant portion of cash flows from principal payments of loans at consolidated securitization entities would generally be used to repay ABS issued by those entities.
As presented in the "Supplemental Noncash Information" subsection of our consolidated statements of cash flows, during 2020, 2019, and 2018, we transferred residential loans between held-for-sale and held-for-investment classification, retained securities from Sequoia and CAFL securitizations we sponsored, consolidated certain multifamily and re-performing residential securitization trusts, and deconsolidated certain multifamily securitization trusts, which represent significant non-cash transactions that were not included in cash flows from investing activities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During 2020, our net cash used in financing activities was $3.31 billion. This primarily resulted from $1.81 billion of net repayments of short-term debt and $2.97 billion of repayments of long-term debt, including repayments of $2.00 billion of FHLBC borrowings, which were associated with the sales of a significant amount of assets noted in the investing activities section above. Additionally, we paid $97 million to purchase and retire $125 million of our convertible debt in the second quarter of 2020, and repurchased $22 million of stock in the third quarter. These outflows of cash were partially offset by $191 million of net proceeds from the issuance and settlements of ABS issued. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we had cash inflows of $1.47 billion related to borrowings under three new non-marginable facilities that were generally used to repay existing borrowings from marginable facilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we declared dividends of $0.725 per common share. On December 7, 2020, the Board of Directors declared a regular dividend of $0.14 per share for the fourth quarter of 2020, which was paid on December 29, 2020 to shareholders of record on December 17, 2020.
In accordance with the terms of our outstanding deferred stock units and restricted stock units, which are stock-based compensation awards, each time we declare and pay a dividend on our common stock, we are required to make a dividend equivalent payment in that same per share amount on each outstanding deferred stock unit, cash-settled deferred stock unit, and restricted stock unit.
Repurchase Authorization
In February 2018, our Board of Directors approved an authorization for the repurchase of our common stock, increasing the total amount authorized for repurchases of common stock to $100 million, and also authorized the repurchase of outstanding debt securities, including convertible and exchangeable debt. This authorization increased the previous share repurchase authorization approved in February 2016 and has no expiration date. This repurchase authorization does not obligate us to acquire any specific number of shares or securities. Under this authorization, shares or securities may be repurchased in privately negotiated and/or open market transactions, including under plans complying with Rule 10b5-1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased 3,047,335 shares of our common stock pursuant to this authorization for $22 million. At December 31, 2020, $78 million of the current authorization remained available for the repurchase of shares of our common stock and we also continued to be authorized to repurchase outstanding debt securities. Like other investments we may make, any repurchases of our common stock or debt securities under this authorization would reduce our available capital and unrestricted cash described above.
Leverage
Our debt-to-equity leverage ratio decreased during 2020, as we repositioned our debt structure and substantially decreased our balance of recourse debt. Additionally, our leverage ratio is impacted by the amount of loans we hold for sale at our mortgage banking businesses and our amount of undeployed capital available for investment.
In the second half of 2020, our acquisitions and purchase commitments of loans in our residential mortgage banking operations and origination volumes in our business purpose mortgage banking operations grew significantly and may continue to grow in 2021. We use short-term recourse debt to finance our loan inventory at both our mortgage banking operations and, all other factors being equal, as the balance of our loan inventory grows our overall leverage will also increase.
At December 31, 2020, we estimate we had approximately $200 million of capital available for investment. As this capital is deployed, our leverage ratio is expected to increase, all other factors being equal, as we generally make investments in loans, securities, and other assets with a combination of capital and borrowings secured by the assets we invest in. In general, higher leverage creates greater liquidity risk as the amount of our equity relative to borrowings decreases, including liquidity risks of the types described in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors,” and in Part II,