Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We are a diversified forest products business that operates in the following business segments:
•High Purity Cellulose
•Forest Products
•Paperboard
•Pulp & Newsprint
Our High Purity Cellulose business has leading positions in the acetate and ethers high purity cellulose end-use markets. In addition, our other business segments provide a more diversified earnings stream.
The following significant events occurred in 2020, 2019 and 2018:
•Our businesses have been significantly impacted by the coronavirus ("COVID-19") pandemic in 2020. However, due to the role they play in producing critical raw materials for pharmaceutical, food, cleaning and other products, our manufacturing facilities in the U.S., Canada and France have remained operating. In order to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on our financial results and operations, we have taken the following actions:
◦To ensure the safety of our employees and the continuity of our operations, we have implemented exacting protocols to reduce the potential spread of COVID-19 in our operating facilities and work spaces.
◦To control costs and minimize pandemic driven losses, we have curtailed operations as necessary to match production with market demand.
◦Due to the financial impacts of COVID-19, we are actively monitoring the recoverability of the carrying value of our long-term assets. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not recognize any impairment charges related to long-lived assets held for use. We will continue to evaluate the recoverability of these and other assets as necessary.
•In December 2020, we issued $500 million in aggregate principal amount of 7.625 percent senior secured notes due 2026 (the “Senior Secured Notes”), at an offering price of 100 percent of the principal amount thereof. We also entered into a five-year senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility with an initial committed amount of $200 million (the “ABL Revolving Credit Facility”). In connection with these transactions, we terminated all commitments and repaid all outstanding obligations under our Senior Secured Credit Facilities and recorded a loss on debt extinguishment of $8 million. See Note 10 - Debt and Finance Leases of our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
•In December 2020, the USDOC finalized the First Administrative Review and determined a reduction of duties on softwood lumber imported into the U.S. from 20 percent to 9 percent for the Company for such duties paid during 2017 and 2018.
•In November 2019, we completed the sale of the Matane Mill for $175 million and used $100 million of the net proceeds to repay borrowings under our Senior Secured Credit Facilities. As a result of the sale, the Matane Mill’s operating results have been classified as discontinued operations and we reorganized our operating and reportable segments to align with our new management reporting structure. Included in discontinued operations is allocated interest expense, due to the required loan payments, and professional fees incurred to sell the operation. See Note 3 - Discontinued Operations of our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
•In October 2019, we settled certain Canadian pension liabilities through the purchase of annuity contracts with an insurance company. The settlement resulted in the recognition of approximately $9 million in settlement expenses which were recognized in “Other components of net periodic benefit costs” in our financial statements. See Note 18 - Employee Benefit Plans of our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
•In September 2019, and again in June 2020, we amended our Senior Secured Credit Facilities. See Note 10 - Debt and Finance Leases of our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
•In September 2019, we announced our Board of Directors determined to suspend the quarterly common stock dividend to improve cash flow.
•In September 2018, we sold our resins business for $17 million, a non-core asset originally acquired as part of our acquisition of Tembec. The resulting gain on sale of $7 million was treated as an adjustment to the bargain purchase gain in 2018.
High Purity Cellulose
We manufacture and market high purity cellulose, which is sold as either cellulose specialties or commodity products. We are the leading global producer of cellulose specialties, which are primarily used in dissolving chemical applications that require a highly purified form of cellulose. Pricing for our cellulose specialties products is typically set by contract for a duration of at least one year based on discussions with customers. Our commodity products primarily consist of commodity viscose and absorbent materials. Commodity viscose is a raw material required for the manufacture of viscose staple fibers which are used in woven and non-woven applications. Absorbent materials, typically referred to as fluff fibers, are used as an absorbent medium in consumer products. Pricing for commodity products is typically referenced to published indexes or based on publicly available spot market prices. Sales of chemicals and energy, a majority of which are by-products, are included in the high purity cellulose segment.
Our four production facilities, located in the U.S., Canada and France, have a combined annual production capacity of approximately 775,000 metric tons of cellulose specialties or commodity products. Additionally, we have dedicated approximately 250,000 metric tons of annual production to commodity products.
Wood fiber, chemicals, and energy represent approximately 28 percent, 14 percent and 6 percent, respectively, of the per metric ton cost of sales. Labor, manufacturing and maintenance supplies, depreciation, manufacturing overhead and transportation costs represent the remaining cost of sales.
Forest Products
We manufacture and market high-quality construction-grade lumber in North America. The lumber, primarily spruce, pine, or fir, is used in the construction of residential and multi-family homes, light industrial and commercial facilities, and the home repair and remodel markets. The chips, manufactured as a by-product of the lumber manufacturing process, are used in our Canadian High Purity Cellulose, Pulp and Newsprint plants. Pricing for lumber is typically referenced to published indexes marketed through our internal sales team. Our six production facilities located in Canada have a targeted annual production capacity of approximately 755 million board feet of lumber.
Wood fiber and energy represents approximately 46 percent and 4 percent, respectively, of the per million board feet cost of sales. Labor, manufacturing and maintenance supplies, depreciation, manufacturing overhead and transportation costs represent the remaining cost of sales.
Paperboard
We manufacture and market paperboard that is used for printing documents, brochures, promotional materials, packaging, paperback book or catalog covers, file folders, tags, and tickets.
Pricing for paperboard is typically referenced to published indices and marketed through our internal sales team. Our production facility located in Canada has the capacity to annually produce 180,000 metric tons of paperboard. Wood pulp, chemicals, and energy represent approximately 60 percent, 15 percent and 6 percent, respectively, of the per metric ton cost of sales. Labor, manufacturing and maintenance supplies, depreciation, manufacturing overhead and transportation costs represent the remaining cost of sales.
Pulp & Newsprint
Pulp
We manufacture and market high-yield pulp which is used by paper manufacturers to produce paperboard, packaging, printing and writing papers and a variety of other paper products. Pricing for high-yield pulp is typically referenced to published indexes marketed through our internal sales team. Our production facility located in Canada has the capacity to annually produce 300,000 metric tons of high-yield pulp.
Wood fiber, chemicals, and energy represent approximately 22 percent, 12 percent and 11 percent, respectively, of the per metric ton cost of sales. Labor, manufacturing and maintenance supplies, depreciation, manufacturing overhead and transportation costs represent the remaining cost of sales.
Newsprint
We manufacture newsprint, a paper grade used to print newspapers, advertising materials and other publications. Pricing for newsprint is typically referenced to published indices and marketed through our internal sales team. Our production facility located in Canada has the capacity to annually produce 205,000 metric tons of newsprint.
Wood fiber and chemicals represent approximately 13 percent and 4 percent, respectively, of the per metric ton cost of sales. Labor, energy, manufacturing and maintenance supplies, depreciation, manufacturing overhead and transportation costs represent the remaining cost of sales.
Market Assessment
The market assessment represents our best current estimate of each business in this environment.
High Purity Cellulose
We are experiencing increased strong demand for our commodity products and stable demand for our high-value cellulose specialties products. Prices for cellulose specialties are expected to decline slightly relative to 2020 while prices for commodity products, fluff and viscose pulps, will increase significantly in the first quarter and are forecasted to remain elevated for the near-term. Overall, we expect increased pricing from 2020 levels while total volumes and mix for 2021 are expected to remain steady compared to 2020 as increased productivity will be offset by an extended maintenance outage at the Jesup facility in the second quarter.
Key costs, including wood, energy and commodity chemical prices declined in 2020 from prior year levels due to both market conditions and our strategic actions. However, certain chemical prices are now trending higher and, overall, future input prices and availability of these inputs remain difficult to predict due to the current unprecedented economic conditions. We will also continue to invest in our business to reduce costs, improve reliability and provide new platforms for growth. Our 2020 investment in a green energy project at our Tartas facility will deliver lower costs and improved reliability starting in 2021.
Forest Products
Prices for lumber continue to remain near all-time high levels driven by exceptional demand in the U.S with housing starts in January 2021 of 1.6 million units, seasonally adjusted, and building permits of 1.9 million, while repair and remodel activity remains elevated as investment in homes remains attractive. With the absence of market downtime experienced in the first half of 2020 and new investments to increase productivity, we expect to produce an incremental 40 million board feet, an increase of 7 percent, compared to prior year.
In December 2020, the U.S. Department of Commerce finalized its administrative review of the period of April 28, 2017 through December 31, 2018 and determined a reduction of duties on softwood lumber imported into the U.S from 20 percent to 9 percent for the Company. We will benefit from the reduced amount of duties expense on lumber sold into the U.S; however there remains no discussion about a full resolution to the softwood lumber dispute which, based on most recent disputes, would likely result in the U.S. returning all or the vast majority of the duties previously paid. Since 2017, we have paid a total of $91 million in duties.
Paperboard
Paperboard prices are expected to increase slightly in early 2021 given solid demand for packaging grades and announced price increases from larger competitors in the industry. Overall profitability is expected to remain flat as price and volume benefits are expected to be offset by increased raw material costs.
Pulp & Newsprint
Pulp and newsprint markets are beginning to recover from lows in 2020 as economies recover from the impacts caused by COVID-19. Larger competitors in both pulp and newsprint markets have recently announced price increases, and we expect higher prices for both products in the near-term. Additionally, we continue to manage production of our newsprint facility in order to minimize costs and improve sales mix. As such, we expect lower newsprint volumes and higher prices in 2021 compared to 2020. Further, we are maintaining focus on the expansion of the Envirosmart™ food service bag, launched in late third quarter, targeting the quick service restaurant end-market and used for items such as sandwiches and to-go orders, which have grown and remain strong in the post COVID-19 environment.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP measures
For a reconciliation of EBITDA to net income, see Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Performance and Liquidity Indicators.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect our assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and to disclose contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base these estimates and assumptions on historical data and trends, current fact patterns, expectations and other sources of information we believe are reasonable. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and New Accounting Pronouncements of our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may affect our financial results and disclosures in future periods.
Accounting Policies:
Revenue Recognition and Measurement
Revenue is recognized when performance obligations under the terms of a contract with a customer are satisfied. The majority of our contracts have a single performance obligation to transfer products. Accordingly, we recognize revenue when control has been transferred to the customer. Generally, control transfers upon delivery to a location in accordance with terms and conditions of the sale. Changes in customer contract terms and conditions, as well as the timing of orders and shipments, may have an impact on the timing of revenue recognition.
Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring our products and is generally based upon contractual arrangements with customers or published indices. We sell our products both directly to customers and through distributors and agents typically under agreements with payment terms less than 90 days.
The nature of our contracts may give rise to variable consideration, which may be constrained, including sales volume-based rebates to customers. We estimate the level of volumes based on anticipated purchases at the beginning of the period and record a rebate accrual for each purchase toward the requisite rebate volume. These estimated rebates are included in the transaction price as a reduction to net sales.
These methodologies are consistent with the manner in which we have historically accounted for the recognition of revenue.
Property, Plant & Equipment
Depreciation expense is computed using the units-of-production method for our High Purity Cellulose, Paperboard, Pulp & Newsprint plant and equipment and the straight-line method for all other property, plant and equipment over the useful economic lives of the assets involved. The total units of production used to calculate depreciation expense is determined by factoring annual production days, based on normal production conditions, by the economic useful life of the asset involved. The physical life of equipment, however, may be shortened by economic obsolescence caused by environmental regulation, competition or other causes. We depreciate our non-production assets, including office, lab, and transportation equipment, using the straight-line depreciation method over 3 to 25 years. Buildings and land improvements are depreciated using the straight-line method over 15 to 35 years and 5 to 30 years, respectively. We believe these depreciation methods are the most appropriate, versus other generally accepted accounting methods, as they most closely match revenues with expenses.
Gains and losses on the retirement of assets are included in operating income. Long-lived assets are reviewed annually for impairment or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets that are held and used is measured by net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. Property, plant and equipment are grouped for purposes of evaluating recoverability at the combined plant level, the lowest level for which independent cash flows are identifiable. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
Accounting Estimates:
Environmental liabilities
At December 31, 2020, we had $172 million of accrued liabilities for environmental costs relating to disposed operations. Numerous price, quantity, cost and probability assumptions are used in estimating these obligations. Factors affecting these estimates include changes in the nature or extent of contamination, changes in the content or volume of the material discharged or treated in connection with one or more impacted sites, requirements to perform additional or different assessment or remediation, changes in technology that may lead to additional or different environmental remediation strategies, approaches and work-plans, discovery of additional or unanticipated contaminated soil, groundwater or sediment on or off-site, changes in remedy selection, changes in law or interpretation of existing law and the outcome of negotiations with governmental agencies or non-governmental parties. We periodically review our environmental liabilities and also engage third-party consultants to assess our ongoing remediation of contaminated sites. Quarterly, we review our environmental liabilities related to assessment activities and remediation costs and adjust them as necessary. Liabilities for financial assurance, monitoring and maintenance activities and other activities are assessed annually. A significant change in any of these estimates could have a material effect on our results of operations. See Note 11 - Environmental Liabilities of our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Determining the adequacy of pension and other postretirement benefit assets and liabilities
Our defined benefit pension and postretirement plans for employees in the U.S., Canada and France require numerous estimates and assumptions to determine the proper amount of pension and postretirement liabilities and annual expense to record in our financial statements. The key assumptions include discount rate, return on assets, salary increases, health care cost trends, mortality rates, longevity and service lives of employees. Although authoritative guidance on how to select most of these assumptions exists, we exercise some degree of judgment when selecting these assumptions based on input from our actuary and other advisors. Different assumptions, as well as actual versus expected results, would change the periodic benefit cost and funded status of the benefit plans recognized in the financial statements.
Our long-term return plan assets assumption was established based on historical long-term rates of return on broad equity and bond indices, discussions with our actuary and investment advisors and consideration of the actual historical annualized rate of returns. In determining future pension obligations, we select a discount rate based on information supplied by our actuary. The actuarial rates are developed by models which incorporate high-quality (AA rated), long-term corporate bond rates into their calculations. The weighted average discount rate decreased from 3.46 percent at December 31, 2019 to 2.48 percent at December 31, 2020.
Our defined pension plans were underfunded by $188 million at December 31, 2020. The underfunded status increased by $25 million in 2020, primarily due to lower discount rates. In 2021, pension expense is expected to increase due to an increase in service cost, higher amortization of actuarial losses partly offset by lower interest cost. Future pension expense will be impacted by many factors including actual investment performance, changes in discount rates, timing of contributions and other employee related matters. See Note 18 - Employee Benefit Plans of our consolidated financial statements for more information.
During 2020, we started the process of winding up certain Canadian pension plans and as a result recorded a settlement gain of $3 million. In 2019, we purchased annuity contracts from a third-party insurance company who has assumed responsibility for future pension benefits for certain participants in our Canadian defined benefit plans. As required under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 715 Compensation-Retirement Benefits, a loss of $9 million was recorded in 2019 on the settlement and de-recognition of the projected benefit obligation.
In 2020, we made mandatory contributions and benefit payments to plan participants of approximately $10 million. During 2021, we expect to make mandatory and discretionary benefit payments to plan participants of approximately $8 million. Future mandatory contribution requirements will vary depending on actual investment performance, changes in valuation assumptions, interest rates and legal requirements to maintain a certain funding status.
The sensitivity of pension expense and projected benefit obligation related to our pension plans to changes in economic assumptions is highlighted below:
Realizability of both recorded and unrecorded tax assets and tax liabilities
We have recorded certain deferred tax assets we believe will be realized in future periods. The recognition of these tax assets is based on our analysis of both positive and negative evidence about the future realization of the tax benefit of each existing deductible temporary difference or carryforward. Future realization is based on the existence of sufficient taxable income of the appropriate character, within the appropriate taxing jurisdiction (for example country, state or province), and within the carryback and carryforward periods available under the applicable tax laws. The strongest form of positive evidence is the evaluation of adjusted historical earnings and future earnings projections within the applicable carryforward periods. This evidence supports the realizability of most recorded deferred tax assets. Tax assets are reviewed periodically for realizability. This review requires management to make assumptions and estimates about future profitability affecting the realization of these tax assets. If the review indicates the realizability may be less than likely, a valuation allowance is recorded.
Our income tax returns are subject to examination by U.S. federal and state taxing authorities as well as foreign jurisdictions, including Canada and France. In evaluating the tax benefits associated with various tax filing positions, we record a tax benefit for an uncertain tax position if it is more-likely-than-not to be realized upon ultimate settlement of the issue. We record a liability for an uncertain tax position that does not meet this criterion. The liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits are adjusted in the period in which it is determined the issue is settled with the taxing authorities, the statute of limitations expires for the relevant taxing authority to examine the tax position or when new facts or information become available. See Note 20 - Income Taxes of our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Results of Operations
Summary of our results of operations for each of the following years ended December 31:
Results of Operations, Year Ended December 31, 2020 versus December 31, 2019
Net sales by segment were as follows:
Net sales decreased $36 million or 2 percent, in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by lower high purity cellulose sales prices and lower newsprint sales prices and volumes, partially offset by strong lumber sales prices. For further assessment of changes in net sales, see the discussion of operating results by segment.
Operating income by segment was as follows:
Operating income for 2020 improved by $110 million when compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily driven by higher prices for lumber and lower costs driven by improved operating reliability, partly offset by declines in newsprint sales prices and volumes. In addition, 2020 reflects the $21 million reduction in duties expense resulting from the U.S. Department of Commerce determination on Canadian softwood lumber imports into the U.S. For further assessment of changes of operating income, see the discussion of Operating Results by Segment.
Non-operating Expenses
Interest expense for 2020 increased $4 million driven by the higher interest rate margin from the amendments to our credit facilities held during most of 2020, as well as increased amortization of debt issuance costs. In December 2020, the Company issued $500 million of 7.625 percent Senior Secured Notes due 2026 (the “Senior Secured Notes”) and closed on its five-year, $200 million senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility (the “ABL Credit Facility”). The Company used the net proceeds from the sale of the Senior Secured Notes, together with cash on hand, to repay all outstanding obligations under its previous Senior Secured Credit Facility. In connection with the early repayment of the Senior Secured Credit Facility, we recorded a loss from extinguishment of long-term debt of $8 million, primarily from writing off unamortized deferred financing fees. For additional information, see Note 10 - Debt and Finance Leases.
Other components of net periodic benefit (expense) changed by $11 million to a $6 million benefit during 2020 as a result of a $3 million pension settlement and curtailment gain recorded during the fourth quarter of 2020 whereas 2019 included a $9 million pension net settlement loss. See Note 18 - Employee Benefit Plans.
Income Taxes
The effective tax benefit rate for 2020 was a benefit of 101 percent. The 2020 effective tax rate benefit differs from the federal statutory rate of 21 percent primarily due to benefits from the CARES Act, the release of certain valuation allowances related to nondeductible interest expense, tax return to accrual adjustments, and tax credits, partially offset by increases to uncertain tax position reserves, nondeductible executive compensation, and lower tax deductions on vested stock compensation. The 2019 effective tax rate from continuing operations was a benefit of 20 percent. See Note 20 - Income Taxes of our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Discontinued Operations
The Company has presented the operating results for its Matane operations, which were sold in November 2019, as discontinued operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. Included in discontinued operations is allocated interest expense for debt that was required to be repaid upon completion of the sale. In addition, legal and administrative costs to sell the operations are included in discontinued operations. Income from discontinued operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 included a $1 million benefit resulting from the final working capital adjustment as required by the sale agreement. Income from discontinued operations increased $67 million during 2019 compared to 2018 and reflects the $84 million gain from the sale of the operations. See Note 3 - Discontinued Operations of our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Operating Results by Segment
High Purity Cellulose
Changes in High Purity Cellulose net sales are as follows:
Total net sales decreased $76 million, or 7 percent, in 2020. Sales prices for cellulose specialties increased 2 percent during the year ended December 31, 2020 whereas commodity prices declined 17 percent primarily driven by COVID-19 and China trade dispute related impacts on demand on the larger commodity pulp and textile markets. Cellulose specialties sale volumes declined 12 percent primarily due to the impact on demand driven by COVID-19. Commodity sales volumes increased 21 percent for the full year compared to 2019 driven by the recovery of the textile markets in the second half of 2020.
Changes in High Purity Cellulose operating income are as follows:
Operating income remained essentially flat in 2020 when compared to the prior year. Lower wood and chemical costs, improved reliability and higher commodity volumes were offset by the impact of lower cellulose specialty volumes and commodity sale price declines during 2020. Included in SG&A and other costs is our share of the loss of the lignin joint venture of $4 million and $5 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Forest Products
Changes in Forest Products net sales are as follows:
Total net sales increased $93 million, or 31 percent, in 2020. Lumber sales prices improved 40 percent due to strong demand while lumber sales volumes decreased by 1 percent as a result of market downtime taken in the first half of the year to address the initial negative impact on demand driven by the COVID-19 pandemic. Other sales were up from higher wood chip sales during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Changes in Forest Products operating income are as follows:
Operating income increased $111 million in 2020. The improvement was primarily driven by the 40 percent increase in lumber sales prices and lower costs driven by the curtailments of production in the early part of 2020. Additionally the Company reversed $21 million of prior expenses related to import duties as the USDOC announced its final determination in December 2020 to reduce the duties on Canadian softwood lumber imported into the U.S. from 20 percent to 9 percent for such duties paid during 2017 and 2018. The years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 include $10 million and $23 million in softwood lumber duties, respectively. Duties incurred during 2020 take into account the $21 million reduction previously discussed.
Paperboard
Changes in Paperboard net sales are as follows:
Total net sales declined $10 million, or 5 percent in 2020. Paperboard sales prices declined 2 percent due to increased competition. Paperboard sales volumes decreased 3 percent.
Changes in Paperboard operating income are as follows:
Operating income increased $14 million in 2020 due to decreased costs from lower pulp raw material prices as well as lower transportation costs.
Pulp & Newsprint
Changes in Pulp & Newsprint net sales are as follows:
Total net sales declined $43 million, or 20 percent, in 2020. Average pulp sales prices declined 6 percent due to weak market conditions during 2020. Pulp sales volumes increased 5 percent. Newsprint sales prices and volumes declined 20 percent and 33 percent, respectively, due to weak demand and market-related downtime resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Changes in Pulp & Newsprint operating income are as follows:
Operating income for Pulp & Newsprint decreased $27 million during 2020, driven by lower pulp and newsprint prices and newsprint volumes, partly offset by higher pulp sales volumes. Costs improved primarily from lower transportation expenses, partially offset by higher energy costs.
Corporate
The operating loss for Corporate decreased by $12 million to $53 million in 2020, when compared to 2019, primarily due to lower environmental reserves charges and reduced spending, partially offset by higher non-cash amortization of technology costs and unfavorable currency impacts in the current year and the impact of an insurance recovery in the prior year.
Results of Operations, Year Ended December 31, 2019 versus December 31, 2018
Net sales decreased $182 million, or 9 percent, in 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease was primarily driven by lower cellulose specialties, lumber, high-yield pulp and newsprint sales. For further assessment of changes in net sales, see the discussion of Operating Results by Segment.
Operating income by segment was as follows:
Operating income for 2019 decreased $231 million when compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily driven by lower sales prices and higher costs. For further assessment of changes of operating income, see the discussion of Operating Results by Segment.
Non-operating Expenses
Interest expense for 2019 increased $4 million driven by higher debt levels throughout most of 2019, increased interest rate margin from the amendment to our credit facilities, increased amortization of deferred loan costs from the $100 million pay-down of our Senior Secured Credit Facilities as a result of the Matane Mill sale, partially offset by lower LIBOR rates. For additional information, see Note 10 - Debt and Finance Leases.
Interest income and other, net, decreased in 2019 as a result of the reduced impact of foreign exchange on the re-measurement of certain debt instruments as a result of our hedging programs.
Other components of net periodic benefit (expense) changed by $13 million to $5 million of expense in 2019 as a result of lower expected long term returns on pension assets and the $9 million pension settlement loss recorded during the fourth quarter of 2019. See Note 18 - Employee Benefit Plans.
We recognized a $20 million gain on bargain purchase during 2018 primarily from tax-related adjustments and the sale of the resins business as a result of finalizing the purchase price allocation of the Acquisition. See Note 4 - Tembec Acquisition.
Income Taxes
The full year 2019 effective tax rate from continuing operations was a benefit of 20 percent compared to an expense of 21 percent for the same period in 2018. The effective tax rate benefit differs from the federal statutory rate of 21 percent primarily due to nondeductible interest expense in the U.S., tax credits, excess tax deductions on vested stock compensation, U.S. Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income, and different statutory tax rates of foreign operations. See Note 20 - Income Taxes of our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Discontinued Operations
Income from discontinued operations increased $67 million and reflects the $84 million gain from the sale of the Matane Mill in 2019. Excluding the gain, income from discontinued operations declined $17 million during 2019 principally driven from lower sales prices and professional fees to sell the operations. See Note 3 - Discontinued Operations of our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Operating Results by Segment
High Purity Cellulose
Changes in High Purity Cellulose net sales are as follows:
Total net sales decreased $65 million, or 5 percent, in 2019. Cellulose specialties sales prices declined in 2019 by 2 percent primarily due to duties on products sold in China, in line with expectations. Cellulose specialties sales volumes declined by 6 percent due to weakness in the acetate, automotive and construction markets as a result of global trade issues and was partially offset by the timing of shipments which favorably impacted revenue recognition. Commodity product sales prices decreased 10 percent primarily due to weaker markets a result of global trade issues; however, the decline was more than offset by a 27 percent increase in sales volumes due to lower demand for cellulose specialties, improved commodity product production and contractual changes to the sales terms and conditions with certain customers. Other sales declined as a result of the sale of the resin business in September 2018.
Changes in High Purity Cellulose operating income are as follows:
Operating income decreased $106 million in 2019. The decrease was driven by lower cellulose specialties sales prices and volumes and a decline in other sales, partially offset by higher commodity sales volumes. Costs increased by $31 million as overall higher sales volumes, as well as higher wood and maintenance costs were only partially offset by lower chemical prices, primarily caustic, and the sale of the resin business. The sale of the resin business negatively impacted operating income $5 million during 2019. Included in SG&A and other costs is our share of the loss of the lignin joint venture of $5 million and $4 million incurred during 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Forest Products
Changes in Forest Products net sales are as follows:
Total net sales declined $57 million, or 16 percent, in 2019. Lumber sales prices declined 21 percent due to weak demand while lumber sales volumes increased by 2 percent as a result of efforts to reduce inventory levels were partially offset by market downtime taken at the production facilities.
Changes in Forest Products operating income are as follows:
Operating income decreased $56 million in 2019. The decline was driven by lower lumber sales prices, partially offset by higher lumber sales volumes. Lower costs were driven by lower wood costs and the reversal of the net realizable inventory reserve of $6 million, partially offset by higher depreciation, transportation and energy costs. SG&A and other costs improved
due to lower softwood lumber duties as a result of lower lumber sales prices. The years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 included $23 million and $26 million in softwood lumber duties, respectively.
Paperboard
Changes in Paperboard net sales are as follows:
Total net sales increased $3 million, or 2 percent in 2019 Paperboard sales prices declined 2 percent due to increased competition. Paperboard sales volumes increased 4 percent primarily due to efforts to reduce inventories.
Changes in Paperboard operating income are as follows:
Operating income was flat in 2019. Paperboard prices declined by 2 percent, partially offset by higher paperboard sales volumes. Costs decreased due to lower pulp raw material prices partially offset by higher transportation and warehousing costs.
Pulp & Newsprint
Changes in Pulp & Newsprint net sales are as follows:
Total net sales declined $67 million, or 24 percent, in 2019. Average pulp sales prices declined 25 percent due to weak demand as a result of global trade issues. Pulp sales volumes decreased 3 percent due to market downtime and production reliability issues at the Temiscaming mill. Newsprint sales prices and volumes declined 11 percent and 13 percent, respectively. The decrease in prices are primarily due to the effects of the removal of duties on newsprint imported into the U.S. and the continued decline in demand. The newsprint volume decline was primarily as a result of reliability issues at the Kapuskasing mill.
Changes in Pulp & Newsprint operating income are as follows:
Operating income for Pulp & Newsprint decreased $70 million in 2019. This was driven by lower pulp sales prices and volumes as well as decreases in newsprint sales prices and volumes. Costs increased due to the lower newsprint production levels, higher maintenance and transportation costs.
Corporate
The operating loss for Corporate remained flat at $65 million in 2019, when compared to 2018, due to lower incentive compensation expense, higher insurance recoveries and the absence of severance expense that is reflected in 2018, offset by higher legal and administrative costs incurred from the loan amendment that was finalized during the fourth quarter of 2019, and unfavorable currency changes. In addition, 2019 had higher environmental expenses from changes to the Port Angeles remediation project and higher cost assumptions for financial assurance on the environmental projects as a result of the increase in our perceived credit risk.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash flows from operations, primarily driven by operating results, have historically been our primary source of liquidity and capital resources. However, our operating cash flows have been volatile in recent years due to decreases in market prices for our commodity products as well as the impact on demand driven by the COVID-19 pandemic. In response, we have maintained a key focus on cash, managing working capital closely and optimizing the timing and level of our capital expenditures. We amended our previous Credit Agreement in 2019 and again in 2020 to provide us with financial flexibility. In December 2020, we completed the private placement of $500 million 7.625% Senior Secured Notes due 2026 (the “Senior Secured Notes”) and concurrently entered into a five-year senior secured asset-based revolving credit agreement (the “ABL Credit Facility”) in an initial aggregate principal amount of $200 million. In connection with these transactions, we terminated all commitments and repaid all outstanding obligations under the existing Credit Agreement. See Note 10 - Debt and Finance Leases of our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
As of December 31, 2020, we are in compliance with all financial and other customary covenants. We continue to believe our future cash flows from operations and availability under our ABL Credit Facility, as well as our ability to access the capital markets, if necessary or desirable, will be adequate to fund our operations and anticipated long-term funding requirements, including capital expenditures, defined benefit plan contributions, and repayment of debt maturities.
The non-guarantor subsidiaries had assets of $797 million, year-to-date revenue of $204 million, covenant EBITDA for the last twelve months is a $9 million loss and liabilities of $283 million as of December 31, 2020.
On September 6, 2019, our Board of Directors suspended our quarterly common stock dividend to use the cash flow to pay down debt and fund capital investments as well as working capital needs. The declaration and payment of future common stock dividends, if any, will be at the discretion of the Board of Directors and will be dependent upon our financial condition, results of operations, capital requirements and other factors the Board of Directors deem relevant. In addition, our debt facilities place limitations on the declaration and payment of future dividends. No dividends were declared in 2020.
On January 29, 2018, our Board of Directors authorized a $100 million common stock share buyback program. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not repurchase any common shares under this buyback program. We do not expect to utilize any further authorization in the near future. During 2018, we repurchased and retired 2,570,449 shares of common stock under this buyback program at an average price of $15.44 per share, excluding commissions, for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $40 million.
A summary of liquidity and capital resources is shown below (in millions of dollars):
(a) Cash and cash equivalents consisted of cash, money market deposits and time deposits with original maturities of 90 days or less.
(b) Amounts available under the ABL Credit Facility fluctuate based on eligible accounts receivable and inventory levels. At December 31, 2020, we had $146 million of gross availability and net available borrowings of $102 million after taking into account standby letters of credit of approximately $44 million. In addition to the availability under the ABL Credit Facility, we have $19 million available under an accounts receivable factoring line of credit in France. See Note 22 - Commitments and Contingencies of our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
(c) Amounts available under the Revolving Credit Facility have been reduced by $33 million and $34 million as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We were also required to maintain between $80 million and $90 million of availability on our Revolving Credit Facility, therefore we show this as a reduction to the December 31, 2019 availability.
(d) See Note 10 - Debt and Finance Leases of our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Cash Flows (in millions of dollars)
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for each of the following years ended December 31:
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $82 million, compared to the prior year period, due to improvements in our operating results, mostly from higher lumber prices and lower costs from improved reliability. The increase was partly offset by an increase in income tax receivables that are expected to be refunded during 2021. Included in cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $20 million of cash provided by discontinued operations.
Cash provided by operating activities in 2019 decreased $205 million when compared to the prior year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to a decline in our operating results mostly from lower prices across all segments, partially offset by a decrease in environmental spending in 2019. Included in cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 was $25 million of cash provided by discontinued operations.
Cash Provided by (Used for) Investing Activities
Cash used for investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $78 million compared to cash provided by investing activities of $53 million during the same prior year period. The year ended December 31, 2019 included proceeds from discontinued operations of $158 million that were received from the November 2019 sale of the Matane mill and $3 million of discontinued operations capital spending. Capital expenditures from continuing operations decreased $28 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same prior year period. The current year included proceeds of $4 million from the sale of assets and $4 million of contributions for our investment in Anomera. See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and New Accounting Pronouncements for additional information on the investment.
Cash used for investing activities of continuing operations during 2019 decreased $10 million when compared to the prior year from a decrease in capital spending. In addition, the year ended December 31, 2018 included $16 million of proceeds received from the sale of the resins business. Included in cash provided by investing activities of discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $155 million of proceeds from the sale of the Matane mill, partly offset by approximately $3 million of capital spending.
Cash Provided by (Used for) Financing Activities
Cash used for financing activities decreased $119 million primarily due a decrease of $109 million in our net long-term debt payments during 2020 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. In addition, the year ended December 31, 2020 included $5 million of short term borrowings from the France factoring line. Common stock dividends paid decreased by $9 million due to the suspension of the quarterly $0.07 dividend starting in the third quarter of 2019. In addition, the preferred stock dividend payments declined by $10 million in 2020 as the preferred stock automatically converted to common stock in August 2019. During 2020, the Company incurred $24 million of debt issuance costs primarily from the Senior Secured Notes due 2026 that were issued in December 2020. Common shares repurchased decreased by $6 million during 2020 when compared to the same prior year period due to fewer shares in lieu of income taxes repurchased. See Note 10 - Debt and Finance Leases and Note 14 - Stockholders' Equity for additional information.
Cash used for financing activities during 2019 increased $22 million when compared to the prior year, primarily due to a net increase in long-term debt payments of $64 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, partially offset by a $36 million decrease in common stock repurchases due to the absence of the share repurchases under the buyback program that occurred in 2018. In addition, common stock and preferred stock dividends decreased in total by $10 million during 2019. In addition, debt issuance costs of $4 million were incurred in 2019.
Performance and Liquidity Indicators
The discussion below is presented to enhance the reader’s understanding of our operating performance, liquidity, ability to generate cash and satisfy rating agency and creditor requirements. This information includes the following measures of financial results: EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted free cash flows. These measures are not defined by U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”) and the discussion of EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted free cash flows is not intended to conflict with or change any of the GAAP disclosures described above. Our management uses these non-GAAP measures to compare our performance to that of prior periods for trend analyses, purposes of determining management incentive compensation and budgeting, forecasting and planning purposes. Our management considers these measures, in addition to operating income, to be important to estimate the enterprise and stockholder values of the Company, and for making strategic and operating decisions. In addition, analysts, investors and creditors use these measures when analyzing our operating performance, financial condition and cash generating ability. Our management uses EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA as performance measures and adjusted free cash flows as a liquidity measure. See “Note about Non-GAAP Financial Measures” on page 2 for limitations associated with non-GAAP measures.
EBITDA is defined by SEC rules as earnings from continuing operations before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is defined by the Company as EBITDA before the pension settlement loss, duties reversal, insurance recoveries, loan amendment costs, non-recurring expenses related to the Company’s review of its commodity asset portfolio, severance expense, gain on bargain purchase, acquisition related costs, inventory write-up to fair value, gain on derivative instrument, gain on debt extinguishment, non-cash impairment, and one-time separation and legal costs. EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA are not necessarily indicative of results that may be generated in future periods.
Below is a reconciliation of Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for each of the years ended December 31 (in millions of dollars):
(a) Non-recurring expenses are related to the Company’s review of its commodity asset portfolio.
(b) The U.S. Department of Commerce announced its final determination in December 2020 to reduce the Company’s duties on Canadian softwood lumber imported into the U.S. from 20 percent to 9 percent. As a result the Company reflected a $21 million reversal of prior period expense during the year ended December 31, 2020.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for 2020 increased compared to 2019, primarily due to higher earnings from operations as a result of higher lumber sales prices and lower costs, primarily from improved reliability. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for 2019 decreased compared to 2018, primarily due to lower earnings from operations as a result of lower sales prices on all our products. For additional information regarding operating results see Results of Operations section of Item 7 - Management Discussion and Analysis.
Adjusted free cash flows is defined as cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations adjusted for capital expenditures, net of proceeds from sale of assets, excluding strategic capital expenditures. Adjusted free cash flows, as defined by the Company, is a non-GAAP measure of cash generated during a period which is available for debt reduction, strategic capital expenditures and acquisitions and repurchase of the Company’s common stock. Adjusted free cash flows is not necessarily indicative of the adjusted free cash flows that may be generated in future periods.
Below is a reconciliation of cash flows from operations to adjusted free cash flows for each of the following years ended December 31 (in millions of dollars):
(a) Capital expenditures, net of proceeds from sale of assets, exclude strategic capital expenditures which we deem discretionary. Strategic capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016 were $22 million, $27 million, $37 million, $11 million and $4 million, respectively.
Adjusted free cash flows in 2020 increased compared to 2019 primarily due to strong lumber prices and lower costs driven by improved reliability, partly offset by lower capital expenditures.
Adjusted free cash flows in 2019 decreased compared to 2018 primarily due lower cash from operating activities driven by lower earnings as a result of lower sales prices on all our products. This was partially offset by our actions to decrease capital expenditures to preserve cash flow.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We utilize off-balance sheet arrangements to provide credit support for certain suppliers and vendors in case of their default on critical obligations, collateral for certain of our self-insurance programs and guarantees for the completion of our remediation of environmental liabilities. These arrangements consist of standby letters of credit and surety bonds. As part of our ongoing operations, we also periodically issue guarantees to third parties. Off-balance sheet arrangements are not considered a source of liquidity or capital resources and do not expose us to material risks or material unfavorable financial impacts. See Note 22 - Commitments and Contingencies of our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Contractual Financial Obligations
Information regarding the letters of credit, surety bonds and other guarantees as of December 31, 2020 is hereby incorporated by reference to Note 22 - Commitments and Contingencies of our consolidated financial statements.
The following table aggregates our contractual financial obligations as of December 31, 2020 and anticipated cash spending by period:
(a)Projected interest payments were calculated based on outstanding principal amounts and interest rates as of December 31, 2020. See Note 10 - Debt and Finance Leases for additional information.
(b)Purchase obligations primarily consist of payments expected to be made on natural gas, steam energy and wood chip purchase contracts. Purchase obligations exclude arrangements the Company can cancel without penalty.
(c)Amounts include estimated postretirement benefit payments and do not include pension funding obligations. See Note 18 - Employee Benefit Plans, for additional information on our pension and postretirement benefit plans.
(d)See Note 5 -Leases for additional information.
Environmental Regulation
We are subject to stringent environmental laws and regulations concerning air emissions, wastewater discharges, waste handling and disposal, and assessment and remediation of environmental contamination, which impact both our current ongoing operations and about 20 former operating facilities or third party-owned sites classified as disposed operations. These include the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 and similar state laws and regulations impacting U.S. facilities, as well as requirements relating to ancillary matters such as financial assurance of our legal obligations for facility closure and post-closure care. Similar laws and legal requirements also impact current and former operating sites in Canada and France, respectively. Management closely monitors our environmental responsibilities and believes we are in material compliance with current requirements. In addition to ongoing compliance with laws and regulations, our facilities operate in accordance with various permits, which are issued by state and federal environmental agencies. Many of these permits impose operating conditions on us which require significant expenditures to ensure compliance. Upon renewal and renegotiation of these permits, the issuing agencies often seek to impose new or additional conditions in response to new environmental laws and regulations, or more stringent interpretations of existing laws and regulations. In addition, under many federal environmental laws, private citizens and organizations, such as environmental advocacy groups, have the right to legally challenge permitting and other decisions made by regulatory agencies.
Our operations are subject to constantly changing environmental requirements, and interpretations of existing requirements, which are often impacted by new policy initiatives, new and amended legislation and regulation, negotiations involving state and federal governmental agencies and various other stakeholders, as well as, at times, litigation. For additional information, see Item 1A - Risk Factors for a discussion of the potential impact of environmental risks on our business, and Item 3 - Legal Proceedings, for a discussion of any environmental-related litigation.
Our future spending requirements in the area of environmental compliance could change significantly based on the passage of new environmental laws and regulations.
Environmental Liabilities
For information and details relating to our estimated environmental liabilities, see Item 1A - Risk Factors and Note 11 - Environmental Liabilities of our consolidated financial statements for more information.