ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the audited Consolidated Financial Statements of Ryerson Holding Corporation and Subsidiaries and the Notes thereto in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. See the section entitled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those discussed in Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview
Business
Ryerson Holding Corporation (“Ryerson Holding”), a Delaware corporation, is the parent company of Joseph T. Ryerson & Son, Inc. (“JT Ryerson”), a Delaware corporation. Affiliates of Platinum Equity, LLC (“Platinum”) own approximately 21,037,500 shares of our common stock, which is approximately 55% of our issued and outstanding common stock.
We are a leading metals service center, value-added processor, and distributor of industrial metals with operations in the United States through JT Ryerson, in Canada through our indirect wholly-owned subsidiary Ryerson Canada, Inc., a Canadian corporation (“Ryerson Canada”), and in Mexico through our indirect wholly-owned subsidiary Ryerson Metals de Mexico, S. de R.L. de C.V., a Mexican corporation (“Ryerson Mexico”). In addition to our North American operations, we conduct processing and distribution operations in China through an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary, Ryerson China Limited (“Ryerson China”), a Chinese limited liability company. Unless the context indicates otherwise, Ryerson Holding, JT Ryerson, Ryerson Canada, Ryerson China, and Ryerson Mexico, together with their subsidiaries, are collectively referred to herein as “Ryerson,” “we,” “us,” “our,” or the “Company.”
Industry and Operating Trends
We are a metals service center providing value-added processing and distribution of industrial metals with operations in the United States, Canada, Mexico, and China. We purchase large quantities of metal products from primary producers and sell these materials in smaller quantities to a wide variety of metals-consuming industries. We carry a full line of nearly 75,000 products in stainless steel, aluminum, carbon steel, and alloy steels and a limited line of nickel and red metals in various shapes and forms. In addition to our metals products, we offer numerous value-added processing and fabrication services, and more than 75% of the metals products we sell are processed by us by bending, beveling, blanking, blasting, burning, cutting-to-length, drilling, embossing, flattening, forming, grinding, laser cutting, machining, notching, painting, perforating, polishing, punching, rolling, sawing, scribing, shearing, slitting, stamping, tapping, threading, welding, or other techniques to process materials to a specified thickness, length, width, shape, and surface quality pursuant to specific customer orders.
Similar to other metals service centers, we maintain substantial inventories of metals to accommodate the short lead times and just-in-time delivery requirements of our customers. Accordingly, we purchase metals to maintain our inventory at levels that we believe to be appropriate to satisfy the anticipated needs of our customers based upon customer forecasts, historic buying practices, supply agreements with customers, mill lead times, and market conditions. Our commitments to purchase metals are generally at prevailing market prices in effect at the time we place our orders. At the request of our customers, we have entered into swaps in order to mitigate our customers’ risk of volatility in the price of metals and we have entered into metals hedges to mitigate our own risk of volatility in the price of metals. We have no long-term, fixed-price metals purchase contracts. When metals prices decline, customer demands for lower prices and our competitors’ responses to those demands could result in lower sale prices and, consequently, lower gross profits and earnings as we sell existing metals inventory. When metals prices increase, competitive conditions will influence how much of the price increase we may pass on to our customers.
The metals service center industry is cyclical and volatile in both demand and pricing, and difficult to predict. In 2020, Ryerson experienced both weaker pricing and demand compared to 2019, with shipments 15.6% lower and average selling prices 8.7% lower, affected by the economic impacts of the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) in North America and China and end-market weakness in the U.S. prior to the start of the pandemic. Changes in average selling prices are primarily driven by commodity metals prices, which
impact Ryerson’s selling prices over the subsequent three to six-month period. During the first quarter of 2021, mill lead times continue to extend. Although mill capacity utilization has increased to nearly Q1 2020 levels, many mills are recovering from unplanned outages in Q4 2020 and supply is likely to remain tight in the near future. In the meantime, Ryerson will continue to rely on the support of its long-term supply chain partners and leverage its North American interconnected network of services centers to react and respond to customer requirements.
In the second half of 2020, indicators in the key steel industry end markets that reported weakness as demand conditions were impacted by temporary customer closures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic began to improve and, in some cases, inflect. This is evidenced by the Institute for Supply Management’s Purchasing Managers’ Index (“PMI”), which reported strength in the last seven months of the year with readings above 50%, indicating general expansion in factory activity. This strength has continued into 2021 with a January reading of 58.7. However, while PMI reports an increase in month-over-month activity, U.S. Industrial Production, while improved from historically low levels reported in April and May of 2020, reported contraction through the end of 2020. This indicates that conditions have improved recently, but are still well below year-ago levels.
According to the Metal Service Center Institute, North American service center volumes declined by 10.7% in 2020 compared to 2019. On a North American basis, we experienced demand contraction more severe than the industry, with tons sold down by 17.0% over the same period. Demand softness was experienced across all of Ryerson’s end-markets, but most significantly in oil and gas, commercial ground transportation, and food processing and agricultural equipment sectors on a year-over-year basis. When customer demand falls, our operations typically generate countercyclical cash flow as our working capital needs decrease.
COVID-19
The global outbreak of COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and a national emergency by the U.S. government in March 2020 and has negatively affected the U.S. and global economies, disrupted global supply chains, resulted in significant travel and transport restrictions, mandated closures and stay-at-home orders, and created significant disruption of the financial markets. As of the date of this filing, COVID-19 continues to be a substantial risk factor for business operations and the Company continues to monitor and address these risks and uncertainties as conditions develop.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Ryerson implemented several policies and procedures to protect the health and welfare of our employees first and foremost, while operating as an essential business and maintaining our liquidity.
At the beginning of the pandemic, we communicated and enforced social distancing practices by alternating employee shifts, eliminating congregation, suspending non-essential travel, and implementing work from home arrangements for those that could work remotely. We also mobilized a task force and engaged our communications team to establish open lines of communications for our employees to ensure that all members of the Ryerson team are informed and supported throughout the pandemic.
Even as the pandemic continues into the beginning of 2021, we remain resilient and committed to protecting our workforce. Led by our dedicated COVID-19 response team, we continue to follow CDC and other relevant governmental guidance appropriate for our business, carefully monitor COVID-19 data in the areas in which we operate, and strive to be safe and nimble in executing our internal response. While some of our locations are more likely to progress through our phased “back to normal business activity” approach more quickly than others, we remain committed to operating our business under COVID-19 safety policies until we are certain that related risks have subsided. To support the sustainability of current circumstances, we are supporting our workforce by reinforcing the importance of mental health and promoting the use of existing benefits such as prescription delivery and telemedicine. Further, we are encouraging our workforce to receive the flu vaccine and, in some locations, we are providing the opportunity to receive the flu vaccine on-site. Additionally, we are encouraging our workforce to receive the COVID-19 vaccine when it is available. Our workforce in our warehouse facilities is classified as group 1b, as described by the CDC, as essential workers, and in many jurisdictions are now eligible to take the vaccine when supply is available.
The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic, vaccine rollouts, and related actions taken by government officials to prevent disease spread, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. Certain of our facilities have experienced temporary work disruptions as a result of COVID-19, but we have generally continued to operate during stay-at-home mandates due to our business being deemed essential by state and local government authorities. While the majority of our customers that announced temporary closures have at this time resumed operations, our business and the business of our customers continues to be impacted by economic pressures and the ultimate impact of COVID-19 remains uncertain.
Furthermore, we deployed a dedicated COVID-19 team to closely monitor all critical areas daily including cash positioning and credit line availability and projections as well as our debt covenant requirements and working capital needs. We continue to actively manage relationships with our customers and vendors to ensure that we balance our receivables and payables cycles. Examples of
specific actions taken in response to COVID-19 include increased focus on working capital management with targeted inventory reductions, receivables risk assessment, limiting discretionary spending, temporarily furloughing employees or reducing work hours, reducing executive and salaried employee pay, delaying salary increases, eliminating non-essential travel, delaying or reducing hiring activities, deferring certain discretionary capital expenditures, payroll tax and pension contribution deferrals, and accelerating Alternative Minimum Tax credit refunds as provided for under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“The CARES Act”). We intend to continue to assess the effect of ongoing government guidance related to COVID-19 that may be issued and intend to take advantage of opportunities that support our balance sheet. With respect to liquidity, we took the actions listed above to bolster our financial condition and have contingency plans in place to reduce costs while supporting business operations. During the fourth quarter, Ryerson restored employee salaries to their previous levels, brought back furloughed employees, and increased work hours to service strengthening business. The Company will also resume limited hiring activities. Ryerson continues to closely monitor its liquidity position as the economy begins to improve.
2020 Performance Highlights
These key metrics illustrate Ryerson’s financial performance for the full year 2020 compared to 2019:
$3.5B
17.9%
($66M)
Total Revenues
Gross Margin
Net Loss Attributable to Ryerson
23% decrease
50bps decrease
$148M decrease
($1.73)
($0.08)
$278M
Diluted EPS
Diluted Adj. EPS
Cash from Operating Activities
$3.90 decrease
$1.87 decrease
$85M increase
Compared to 2019, Ryerson’s revenues decreased by 23% as tons shipped decreased by 15.6% and average selling prices decreased by 8.7%, affected by pandemic induced demand shocks and commodity price deflation. However, both pricing and demand environments improved as the year progressed, leading to fourth quarter 2020 volume and pricing growth of 0.6% and 2.0%, respectively, compared to the third quarter of 2020. Gross margin decreased 50 bps from 2019 due to a $57 million reduction in LIFO income during the year caused by falling costs in inventory, offset by impacts of significantly reduced inventory levels and selling from higher costed LIFO layers as the Company lowered inventory levels in line with demand. Warehousing, delivery, selling, general, and administrative expenses for 2020 decreased by $82.5 million, or 13.0%, compared to 2019 primarily due to lower salaries and wages due to workforce and compensation reductions of $36.4 million in response to the outbreak of COVID-19. Net loss attributable to Ryerson Holding Corporation was $65.8 million, or a loss of $1.73 per diluted share, in 2020 compared to $82.4 million of net income attributable to Ryerson Holding Corporation, or $2.17 per diluted share, for 2019.
To provide greater insight into the Company’s 2020 operating trends apart from the year’s one-time transactions, Ryerson provides adjusted net income (loss) and diluted adjusted earnings (loss) per share figures, which are not U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) financial measures, to compliment the reported GAAP net income (loss) and diluted earnings (loss) per share figures. Management uses these metrics to assess year over year performance excluding non-recurring transactions. Adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted diluted earnings (loss) per share do not represent, and should not be used as a substitute for, net income or earnings per share determined in accordance with GAAP. Illustrated in the below table, the 2020 net loss attributable to Ryerson of $65.8 million includes $17.7 million of expenses largely related to the redemption price paid to creditors as well as unamortized debt issuance costs written off related to the refinance of the 11.0% senior secured notes due 2022 (“2022 Notes”) as well as the redemption of $50.0 million of the 8.50% senior secured notes due 2028 (the “2028 Notes”) completed in the fourth quarter. It also includes $64.6 million of nonrecurring pension settlement expenses driven by the third quarter partial annuitization of our pension liabilities and a lump sum settlement offering in the fourth quarter. See “Pension Funding” discussion below for further details on these transactions. After adjusting for these non-core business transactions, the related benefit for income taxes, and $2.2 million of restructuring expenses, the adjusted net loss attributable to Ryerson for 2020 is $3.1 million, a decrease of $71.0 million compared to the prior year’s adjusted net income attributable to Ryerson of $67.9 million which included adjustments for a gain on sale of assets
related to the fourth quarter 2019 sale and leaseback transaction, an insurance settlement gain, restructuring, loss on retirement of debt, and related income taxes.
Driven by successful working capital management throughout the year, Ryerson generated strong cash from operating activities in 2020 of $278 million, an increase of $85 million over the previous year.
As previously discussed, throughout 2020 in response to the COVID-19 market environment, Ryerson took early and decisive actions to protect the liquidity and recovery capacity of the organization. As a result of these actions, Ryerson ended 2020 with a strong global liquidity of $373 million, composed of $312 million of availability under the Ryerson Credit Facility and foreign debt facilities, and $61 million of cash and cash equivalents. The below bar chart illustrates Ryerson’s liquidity position compared to previous years. Total liquidity is not a GAAP financial measure. We believe that total liquidity provides additional information for measuring our ability to fund our operations. Total liquidity does not represent, and should not be used as a substitute for, net income or cash flows from operations as determined in accordance with GAAP and total liquidity is not necessarily an indication of whether cash flow will be sufficient to fund our cash requirements.
Ryerson’s 2020 Strategy Achievements
Ryerson’s market strategy focuses on providing excellent customer experiences consistently with speed at scale. Our culture is based on our trademarked “say yes, figure it out” mantra as we strive to grow volume and sustainably expand margins by increasing our fabrication business and improving our speed through our use of both tools and analytics.
Ryerson’s financial strategy includes a focus on generating strong cash from operating activities, enabled by industry-leading working capital management and a stronger through the cycle operating model to effectively decrease both net debt and fixed cash commitments. Throughout 2020, the Company made substantial progress on this strategy. In July, Ryerson successfully refinanced its
2022 Notes and issued $500 million in 8.50% 2028 Notes. The reduced interest rate and principal amount is expected to save approximately $16 million in annual interest expenses. In the refinance, Ryerson also secured favorable redemption terms, which will allow the Company to reduce the outstanding principal amount by up to $100 million at 104% plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including the redemption date, with proceeds from a property sale and up to 10% of the original principal amount during each twelve-month period commencing on July 22, 2020 through August 1, 2023 at 103% plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including the redemption date. In October, Ryerson exercised the first of these options to redeem $50 million in outstanding Notes at a price of 103%, plus accrued and unpaid interest through, but not including the redemption date. This redemption is expected to provide Ryerson $4.3 million in additional annual interest rate savings. In November 2020, Ryerson completed an amendment and extension of its $1.0 billion revolving credit facility (as amended, the “Ryerson Credit Facility”). The amendment and five-year extension of the credit facility marked another important advancement in improving Ryerson’s balance sheet and cost of debt capital following the bond refinance. See Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”, Note 10: Debt for a full description of the 2028 Notes and redemption options, and the Ryerson Credit Facility.
Total debt was $740 million and $982 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Throughout the year, Ryerson reduced the outstanding balance on the Ryerson Credit Facility utilizing the cash flows generated by operating activities. Coupled with the reduction in outstanding notes principal achieved through open market repurchases, the July refinance, and October redemption, total debt decreased by $242 million in 2020 and net debt decreased in 2020 by $244 million compared to December 31, 2019. Net debt is not a GAAP financial measure. We believe that net debt provides a clearer perspective of the Company’s overall debt situation. Net debt should not be used as a substitute for total debt outstanding as determined in accordance with GAAP. A reconciliation of debt to net debt is provided with the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” discussion below.
As a result of the 2020 net debt reduction, cash interest payments in 2020 totaled $62 million, compared to $88 million in 2019. Pension and retiree medical contributions also decreased compared to the prior year as Ryerson has deferred $12 million of pension contributions to early 2021 as allowed under the CARES Act. Additionally, as part of Ryerson’s “dual mandated” response to COVID-19, the Company decreased its capital expenditure budget in 2020 from approximately $45 million to approximately $25 million, driving cash contributions to maintenance capital expenditures down to $15 million for the year. In all, fixed cash commitments totaled $88 million in 2020, significantly down from $142 million in the previous year and showing even more substantial improvement compared to 2014, the Company’s first year on the public market. Ryerson’s annual fixed cash commitments are illustrated in the below bar chart.
Industry Developments
On March 1, 2018, the White House announced a 25% tariff on all imported steel products and 10% tariff on all imported aluminum products for an indefinite amount of time under Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act. Subsequently, the White House announced steel quotas, in lieu of tariffs, with South Korea. On May 1, 2018, the White House further announced agreements-in-principle with Argentina, Australia, and Brazil for permanent exemptions from the tariffs in exchange for export quotas or voluntary export restraints, with the exception of Australia which has not agreed to quotas at the time of this report. In May 2019, steel tariffs put in place on Turkey in August of 2018 with the intention of offsetting the weakening Turkish Lira were revised down to 25% from 50%.
Further trade actions announced by the U.S. under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974 imposed various levels of tariffs and duties on imported Chinese goods with China reciprocating in kind on American goods. Currently, effective as of February 14, 2020, the Phase one trade deal reduced U.S. duties from 15% to 7.5% on $120 billion worth of Chinese products while still leaving other tariffs on $250 billion in Chinese products in place. Since the agreement, China has unveiled new tariff exemptions and the countries reaffirmed their phase one trade deal in early May 2020. However, negotiations with China are ongoing and subject to change based on the policies of the Biden administration. If these or other tariffs or duties expire or if others are relaxed or repealed, or if relatively higher U.S. metal prices make it attractive for foreign metal producers to export their products to the U.S., despite the presence of duties or tariffs, the resurgence of substantial imports of foreign steel could create downward pressure on U.S. metal prices which could have a material adverse effect on our potential earnings and future results of operations.
The U.S.-Mexico-Canada-Agreement (“USMCA”), which is designed to replace the North American Free Trade Agreement (“NAFTA”), was ratified by all three countries as of March 13, 2020, and became effective on July 1, 2020. Ryerson expects that implementation of the USMCA will support demand for North American steel through strengthening of rules of origin for steel-intensive goods and will continue to provide tariff-free trade access in North American markets.
In August 2020, President Trump re-imposed a tariff of 10% on some aluminum goods imported from Canada, after having lifted the tariffs in May 2019. However, on September 15, 2020, the administration determined that the imports of Canadian aluminum would normalize, and based on this assumption, the administration decided to remove the 10% tariffs. Additionally, the import quota set for Brazil was lowered in September 2020 for shipments of semi-finished steel for the remainder of 2020. According to the Steel Manufacturers Association, the remaining quota for Brazilian semi-finished steel products has been lowered to 60,000 metric tons, down from 350,000 metric tons.
Further, on October 9, 2020, the U.S. Department of Commerce issued affirmative preliminary antidumping duty determinations on common alloy aluminum sheet from 18 countries, including Bahrain, Brazil, Croatia, Egypt, Germany, Greece, India, Indonesia, Italy, Oman, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Taiwan, and Turkey. The alleged dumping margins range from single digits up through triple digits. The Department of Commerce will investigate whether or not common alloy aluminum sheet is being unfairly dumped or subsidized and whether or not the U.S. is being harmed by the imports of these countries. Preliminary determinations are to be made by the Department of Commerce on or before April 23, 2021.
Acquisitions
On April 2, 2018, we acquired Fanello Industries (“Fanello”), a privately-owned metal service company located in Lavonia, Georgia. Fanello is a processor and service provider that supplies blanking, stamping, laser cutting, bending, and machining metal solutions to a diverse group of industries in the Southeastern United States.
On July 2, 2018, JT Ryerson acquired Central Steel and Wire Company (“CS&W”). CS&W is a leading metal service center with locations across the Central and Eastern United States offering a wide selection of products and capabilities, with a commercial portfolio centered on bar, tube, plate, and steel products. Our combined commercial, operational, and processing strengths provide a broader and deeper array of products to our customers in the Midwest and Northeast United States. The fair value of the consideration totaled $163.5 million. Please refer to Note 2 - “Acquisitions” of Part II, Item 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for further information on our 2018 acquisition of CS&W.
Components of Results of Operations
We generate substantially all of our revenue from sales of our metals products. The majority of revenue is recognized upon delivery of product to customers. The timing of shipment is substantially the same as the timing of delivery to customers given the proximity of our distribution sites to our customers. Revenues associated with products which we believe have no alternative use, and where the Company has an enforceable right to payment, are recognized on an over-time basis. Over-time revenues are recorded in proportion with the progress made toward completing the performance obligation.
Sales, cost of materials sold, gross profit, and operating expense control are the principal factors that impact our profitability:
Net Sales. Our sales volume and pricing are driven by market demand, which is largely determined by overall industrial production and conditions in specific industries in which our customers operate. Sales prices are also primarily driven by market factors such as overall demand and availability of product. Our net sales include revenue from product sales, net of returns, allowances, customer discounts, and incentives.
Cost of materials sold. Cost of materials sold includes metal purchase and in-bound freight costs, third-party processing costs, and direct and indirect internal processing costs. The cost of materials sold fluctuates with our sales volume and our ability to purchase metals at competitive prices. Increases in sales volume generally enable us both to improve purchasing leverage with suppliers, as we buy larger quantities of metals inventories.
Gross profit. Gross profit is the difference between net sales and the cost of materials sold. Our sales prices to our customers are subject to market competition. Achieving acceptable levels of gross profit is dependent on our acquiring metals at competitive prices, our ability to manage the impact of changing prices, and efficiently managing our internal and external processing costs.
Operating expenses. Optimizing business processes and asset utilization to lower fixed expenses such as employee, facility, and truck fleet costs, which cannot be rapidly reduced in times of declining volume, and maintaining low fixed cost structure in times of increasing sales volume, have a significant impact on our profitability. Operating expenses include costs related to warehousing and distributing our products as well as selling, general, and administrative expenses.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our condensed consolidated statements of operations data:
The following charts show the Company’s percentage of sales by major product lines for 2020 and 2019:
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 with the year ended December 31, 2019
Net Sales
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased from the same period a year ago reflecting the impact of the global outbreak of COVID-19 and a slowdown in the metals market that was a continuation from the decline in the industry in 2019. Tons sold decreased in 2020 for all of our product lines with the largest decreases in our carbon long, carbon plate, aluminum flat, and stainless flat product lines. Tons sold per ship day were 7,941 in 2020 as compared to 9,448 in 2019. Prices decreased for all of our product lines in 2020 compared to 2019 as demand and commodity prices were negatively impacted by the pandemic. Average selling price per ton decreased for all of our product lines in 2020 with the largest decreases in our carbon plate, aluminum plate, carbon flat, and aluminum flat products. Both pricing and demand environments improved in the later part of 2020, leading to fourth quarter 2020 volume and pricing growth of 0.6% and 2.0%, respectively, compared to the third quarter of 2020.
Cost of Materials Sold
The decrease in cost of materials sold in 2020 compared to the year ago period is primarily due to the decrease in tons sold and to a decrease in average cost of materials sold per ton. The average cost of materials sold decreased across almost all product lines with the average cost of materials sold for our carbon plate, carbon flat, carbon long, and aluminum flat product lines decreasing more than our other product lines during 2020.
During 2020, LIFO income was $12 million related to decreases in pricing for all product lines. In addition, there was a significant reduction in tons in inventory to manage working capital throughout the pandemic, which led to the liquidation of older LIFO layers that were at a higher cost. During 2019, LIFO income was $69 million related to decreases in pricing for all product lines.
Gross Profit
Gross profit dollars decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 reflecting the impact of the global outbreak of COVID-19, which led to a decrease in tons sold and average selling prices. While our revenue per ton decreased during 2020, our cost of materials sold decreased at a slower pace resulting in lower gross margins compared to the prior year.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses in 2020 were $60.6 million lower than in 2019. The decrease in operating expenses in 2020 was primarily due to lower salaries and wages due to workforce and compensation reductions of $36.4 million in response to the outbreak of COVID-19. The lower headcount also reduced employee benefit expenses by $12.3 million in 2020. In addition, expenses were impacted by changes in the following categories:
•
lower selling, general, and administrative expenses of $24.3 million primarily due to lower use of outside technical services and reduced travel and entertainment expenses;
•
lower delivery expenses of $10.8 million due to lower shipments;
•
lower operating supplies of $7.7 million;
•
lower depreciation of $4.2 million; and
•
a restructuring charge of $2.2 million in 2020 compared to a charge of $2.4 million in 2019. Charges in both periods included severance costs for staff reductions.
The year 2019 included a gain on the sale of assets of $20.6 million related to a sale and leaseback transaction for nine of our service center real estate assets. In addition, the lower operating expenses in 2020 were partially offset by an increase in rent expense of $3.3 million in 2020 primarily due to the leaseback of the properties sold in the fourth quarter of 2019. The year 2019 also included a reduction of $11.0 million in accrued vacation expense after changes to our vacation policy were adopted in 2019 such that vacation is accrued as it is earned instead of in advance of work performed as under the prior policy and a gain on an insurance settlement of $1.5 million.
On a per ton basis, operating expenses increased to $277 per ton in 2020 from $259 per ton in 2019.
Operating Profit
Our operating profit decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to the decrease in tons sold and gross margin discussed above.
Other Expenses
Interest and other expense on debt decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to the redemption of the $530.3 million outstanding balance of our 11.00% Senior Secured Notes due 2022 (the “2022 Notes”) in August 2020, which was preceded by the redemption of $57.6 million of the 2022 Notes during the first six months of 2020. The 2022 Notes were replaced by a lower level of debt at a lower interest rate with the issuance of $500.0 million of the 2028 Notes at 8.50% (the “2028 Notes”). In October 2020, $50.0 million of the 2028 Notes were redeemed. In addition, interest and other expense on debt was lower in 2020 due to a lower level of credit facility borrowings outstanding compared to 2019 related to lower working capital requirements resulting from a slowing metals market, and lower interest rates on credit facility borrowings. Credit facility borrowings were at a lower level in 2020 compared to 2019 despite having borrowed between $40 million and $166 million of excess funds during 2020 to maintain access to cash during the COVID-19 pandemic. Interest expense in 2020 included a $1.0 million charge to writeoff unamortized bond issuance costs related to the $50.0 million of 2028 Notes repurchased in October 2020 and a $0.4 million charge to writeoff unamortized bond issuance costs related to the $57.6 million of 2022 Notes repurchased during the first six months of 2020.
The other income and (expense), net in 2020 includes a $65.9 million pension settlement loss, a $16.2 million loss on the repurchase and redemption of the 2022 Notes, and a $1.5 million loss on the repurchase of $50.0 million of the 2028 Notes. In addition, other income and (expense), net included a $2.3 million gain on the recognition of the fair value of an embedded derivative in the 2028 Notes indenture and $2.1 million credit from net periodic benefit cost other than service cost. See Pension Funding section below for further details on the transactions that resulted in the pension settlement loss. The other expense in 2019 included $1.1 million of foreign currency losses, $1.0 million of expense from net periodic benefit cost other than service cost, and a $0.2 million loss on the redemption of debt.
Provision for Income Taxes
The $24.8 million income tax benefit in 2020 primarily represents taxes at federal and local statutory rates where the Company operates, but generally excludes any tax benefit for losses in jurisdictions with historical losses. During 2020, the Company recorded a benefit of $1.8 million related to the statute of limitations expiring on an uncertain tax position.
The $32.5 million income tax provision in 2019 primarily represents taxes at federal and local statutory rates where the Company operates, but generally excludes any tax benefit for losses in jurisdictions with historical losses. During 2019, the Company recorded a benefit of $0.4 million to reduce valuation allowances previously recorded against certain foreign deferred tax assets.
Noncontrolling Interest
In both 2020 and 2019, Ryerson China’s results of operations was income and the portion attributable to the noncontrolling interest was $0.5 million and $0.3 million, respectively.
Earnings Per Share
Basic loss per share was $1.73 in 2020 and basic earnings per share was $2.19 in 2019. Diluted loss per share was $1.73 in 2020 and diluted earnings per share was $2.17 in 2019. The changes in earnings per share are due to the results of operations discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s primary sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations, and borrowing availability under the Ryerson Credit Facility that matures on November 5, 2025. Our principal source of operating cash is from the sale of metals and other materials. Our principal uses of cash are for payments associated with the procurement and processing of metals and other materials inventories, costs incurred for the warehousing and delivery of inventories, the selling and administrative costs of the business, capital expenditures, and for interest payments on debt.
The global COVID-19 pandemic has led to disruption and volatility in the global capital markets, which, depending on future developments, could adversely impact our capital resources and liquidity in the future. As a proactive, precautionary measure, we borrowed approximately $166 million under the Ryerson Credit Facility in the first quarter of 2020 to maintain access to cash during the COVID-19 pandemic. We reduced this balance to approximately $40 million as of December 31, 2020. Accordingly, we had cash and cash equivalents of $61.4 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $11.0 million at December 31, 2019. Despite the extra borrowing, our total debt outstanding at December 31, 2020 decreased to $740 million compared to $982 million of total debt outstanding at December 31, 2019 due to decreased working capital requirements. We had a debt-to-capitalization ratio of 84% and 85% at December 31, 2020 and at December 31, 2019, respectively. We had total liquidity (defined as cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash from sales of property, plant, and equipment, and availability under the Ryerson Credit Facility and foreign debt facilities) of $373 million at December 31, 2020 versus $439 million at December 31, 2019. Our net debt (defined as total debt less cash and cash equivalents, and restricted cash from sales of property, plant, and equipment) was $679 million and $923 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Total liquidity and net debt are not U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) financial measures. We believe that total liquidity provides additional information for measuring our ability to fund our operations. Total liquidity does not represent, and should not be used as a substitute for, net income or cash flows from operations as determined in accordance with GAAP and total liquidity is not necessarily an indication of whether cash flow will be sufficient to fund our cash requirements. We believe that net debt provides a clearer perspective of the Company’s overall debt situation given the excess borrowings discussed above. Net debt should not be used as a substitute for total debt outstanding as determined in accordance with GAAP.
Below is a reconciliation of cash and cash equivalents to total liquidity:
Below is a reconciliation of total debt to net debt:
Of the total cash and cash equivalents, as of December 31, 2020, $15.2 million was held in subsidiaries outside the United States which is deemed to be permanently reinvested. Ryerson does not currently foresee a need to repatriate earnings from its non-U.S. subsidiaries. Although Ryerson has historically satisfied needs for more capital in the U.S. through debt or equity issuances, Ryerson could elect to repatriate earnings held in foreign jurisdictions, which could result in higher effective tax rates. We have not recorded a deferred tax liability for the effect of a possible repatriation of these earnings as management intends to permanently reinvest these earnings outside of the U.S. Specific plans for reinvestment include funding for future international acquisitions and funding of existing international operations.
The following table summarizes the Company’s cash flows:
Operating activities. Working capital fluctuates throughout the year based on business needs. Working capital needs tend to be counter-cyclical, meaning that in periods of expansion the Company will use cash to fund working capital requirements, but in periods of contraction the Company will generate cash from reduced working capital requirements. Inventory levels decreased significantly in 2020 as the Company brought inventory levels in line with the weak market conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. Accounts receivable also decreased in 2020 as a result of lower sales levels due to the weak market conditions in 2020. In comparison, inventory also decreased in 2019 as prices weakened during 2019 while accounts receivable decreased in 2019 as sales levels decreased during the fourth quarter of 2019 compared to the fourth quarter of 2018. The increase in accounts payable for 2020 is related to increased purchases and operating activities compared to the fourth quarter of the prior year and compared to a decrease in
accounts payable in 2019 as purchases and operating activity decreased compared to the fourth quarter of 2018. In 2020, we recorded a non-cash pension settlement charge of $65.9 million compared to a charge of $1.6 million in 2019. The increase in the charge in 2020 resulted primarily from the purchase of annuities by the Ryerson Pension Plan on behalf of a portion of plan participants which resulted in a settlement loss of $52.5 million in the third quarter of 2020 and to a settlement loss of $10.5 million resulting from the offer of a lump sum window to terminated vested participants in the fourth quarter of 2020. The Company made contributions of $7.1 million in 2020 to the Company’s pension plans compared to contributions of $25.7 million in 2019. The Company elected in 2020 to defer $12 million of U.S. contributions due in 2020 to 2021, as permitted under the CARES Act that was passed in March 2020.
Investing activities. The Company's main investing activities are capital expenditures and proceeds from the sale of property, plant, and equipment. Capital expenditures have decreased year-over-year as the Company reduced the annual capital expenditures budget due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In December 2019, we sold and leased back a group of properties for net proceeds of approximately $61.5 million.
Financing activities. The Company's main source of liquidity to fund working capital requirements is borrowings on its credit facility. While the Company anticipates its current cash balances, cash flows from operations, and available sources of liquidity will be sufficient to meet its cash requirements, approximately $40 million of excess funds were borrowed at December 31, 2020 to maintain access to cash during the COVID-19 pandemic. This borrowing was offset by credit facility repayments from the operating cash flow that was generated in 2020. In addition, during 2020 we redeemed and repurchased the outstanding principal amount of $587.9 million of our 2022 Notes compared to repurchases of $12.7 million in 2019. In the third quarter of 2020, we issued $500 million of our 2028 Notes to replace the 2022 Notes at a lower interest rate and debt level and paid $10.9 million of issuance fees on the transaction. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we redeemed $50.0 million of our 2028 Notes. Book overdrafts fluctuate based on the timing of payments.
As market conditions warrant and subject to our contractual restrictions, liquidity position, and other factors, we may from time to time seek to repurchase or retire our outstanding debt through cash purchases and/or exchanges for other debt or equity securities in open market transactions, privately negotiated transactions, by tender offer, or otherwise. Any such cash repurchases by us may be funded by cash on hand or incurring new debt. The amounts involved in any such transactions, individually or in the aggregate, may be material. Furthermore, any such repurchases or exchanges may result in our acquiring and retiring a substantial amount of such indebtedness, which would impact the trading liquidity of such indebtedness.
In the normal course of business with customers, vendors, and others, we have entered into off-balance sheet arrangements, such as letters of credit, which totaled $17 million as of December 31, 2020. We do not have any other material off-balance sheet financing arrangements. Our off-balance sheet arrangements are not likely to have a material effect on our current or future financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources.
Total Debt
Total debt at December 31, 2020 decreased $241.8 million to $740.0 million from $981.8 million at December 31, 2019, mainly due to the net cash provided by operating activities in 2020.
Total debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020 consisted of the following amounts: $285.0 million borrowing under the Ryerson Credit Facility, $450.0 million under the 2028 Notes, $12.1 million of foreign debt, and $7.8 million of other debt, less $14.9 million of unamortized debt issuance costs. Availability under the Ryerson Credit Facility was $277 million and $348 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. For further information, see Note 10: Debt in Part II, Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Pension Funding
The Company made contributions of $7.1 million in 2020, $25.7 million in 2019, and $27.0 million in 2018 to improve the Company’s pension plans funded status. At December 31, 2020, as reflected in Part II. Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 11, pension liabilities exceeded plan assets by $154 million. The Company elected in 2020 to defer the remaining $12.1 million of U.S. contributions due in 2020 to 2021, as permitted under the CARES Act that was passed in March 2020. The Company anticipates that it will have a minimum required pension contribution of approximately $29.7 million, including the 2020 deferred contributions, in 2021 under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”), Pension Protection Act in the U.S., and the Ontario Pension Benefits Act in Canada. Future contribution requirements depend on the investment returns on plan assets, the impact of discount rates on pension liabilities, and changes in regulatory requirements. The Company is unable to determine the amount or timing of any such contributions required by ERISA or whether any such contributions would have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial position or cash flows. The Company believes that cash flow from operations and the Ryerson Credit Facility will provide sufficient funds to make the minimum required contribution in 2021.
Effective September 28, 2020, the Ryerson Pension Plan purchased annuities on behalf of a portion of plan participants which resulted in settlement accounting. The purchase price was $95.2 million, and the benefit obligation settled was $99.5 million. The pension plan was remeasured as of September 30, 2020. The remeasurement resulted in a settlement loss of $52.5 million which was recorded within Other income and (expense), net in the Statement of Operations as of September 30, 2020. As a result of the remeasurement, the discount rate decreased from 3.15% to 2.59% and the expected long-term rate of return on pension assets decreased from 5.75% to 5.25%.
Effective December 1, 2020, Ryerson offered a lump sum payout to terminated vested participants of the Ryerson Pension Plan. Lump sums of $19.7 million were paid out to plan participants that elected the lump sum option in early December 2020 and the benefit obligation settled was $21.6 million. The pension plan was remeasured as of November 30, 2020. The remeasurement resulted in a settlement loss of $10.5 million which was recorded within Other income and (expense), net in the Consolidated Statement of Operations as of December 31, 2020. As a result of the remeasurement, the discount rate decreased from 2.59% to 2.42% and the expected long-term rate of return on pension assets decreased from 5.25% to 5.15%.
Changes in returns on plan assets may affect our plan funding, cash flows, and financial condition. Differences between actual plan asset returns and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets impact the measurement of the following year’s pension expense and pension funding requirements. However, we believe that cash flow from operations and the Ryerson Credit Facility described above will provide sufficient funds to make the minimum required contributions in 2021.
Income Tax Payments
The Company received income tax refunds of $5.7 million and $6.6 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, and made income tax payments of $2.1 million in 2018.
Material Cash Requirements
The Company expects to make approximately $755 million in principal payments to satisfy its debt obligations, consisting of $12 million in foreign debt coming due in 2021, $8 million of other debt coming due between 2021 through 2024, $285 million for the Ryerson Credit Facility coming due in 2025, and $450 million for the 2028 Notes due in 2028. Please refer to Part II. Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 10: Debt for further information.
The Company leases various assets including real estate, trucks, trailers, mobile equipment, processing equipment, and IT equipment. We have noncancelable operating leases expiring at various times through 2032, and finance leases expiring at various times through 2027. The total amount of future lease payments is estimated to be $153 million with $34 million for the next 12 months. Please refer to Part II. Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 6: Leases for further information.
The Company expects to pay approximately $47 million of interest on the 2028 Notes, Ryerson Credit Facility, foreign debt, and other debt over the next 12 months and $285 million thereafter. Interest payments related to the variable rate debt were estimated using the weighted average interest rate for the Ryerson Credit Facility, including the effect of the interest rate swap.
Purchase obligations with suppliers are entered into when we receive firm sales commitments with certain of our customers. As of December 31, 2020, we had outstanding purchase obligations of approximately $8 million with $7 million expiring in 2021.
Restructuring
In 2020, the Company recorded a $2.2 million charge for employee-related costs primarily for severance costs for corporate staff reductions. The Company paid $1.9 million of the employee costs related to these actions. In addition, the Company paid $0.8 million related to 2019 staff reductions. The remaining $0.5 million of employee-related costs are expected to be paid in 2021.
During 2020, the Company also paid $0.3 million for costs related to facilities closed in prior years and recorded an addition of $0.1 million to the reserve for tenancy-related costs, which was charged to warehousing, delivery, selling, general, and administrative expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The remaining $0.7 million of tenancy-related costs are expected to be paid through 2025.
In 2019, the Company recorded a $2.1 million charge for employee-related costs primarily for severance costs for corporate staff reductions. The Company paid $1.2 million for employee costs related to these actions. In addition, the Company paid $0.3 million related to 2018 staff reductions.
During 2019, the Company also recorded a $0.3 million charge to increase the reserve for tenancy-related costs for a facility closed in 2013. The Company paid $0.9 million in 2019 for costs related to facilities closed in prior years.
In 2018, the Company recorded a $3.6 million charge for employee-related costs primarily for severance costs for corporate staff reductions and two facility closures. The Company paid $3.2 million of the employee costs related to these actions.
During 2018, the Company also recorded a $0.6 million charge to increase the reserve for tenancy-related costs for a facility closed in 2013. The Company paid $0.8 million in costs related to this facility closure.
Deferred Tax Amounts
At December 31, 2020, the Company had a net deferred tax liability of $58 million comprised primarily of a deferred tax asset of $43 million related to pension liabilities, a deferred tax asset related to postretirement benefits other than pensions of $18 million, and deferred tax assets of $48 million related to federal, local, and foreign tax loss carryforwards, offset by a valuation allowance of $7 million and deferred tax liabilities of $63 million related to fixed assets and $100 million related to inventory. The Company’s deferred tax assets include $29 million related to U.S. federal net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards, $18 million related to state NOL carryforwards, and $1 million related to foreign NOL carryforwards at December 31, 2020. Due to the volatile macro-economic conditions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, we may experience fluctuations in our forecasted earnings before income taxes as a result of events which cannot be predicted, which could affect our deferred tax balances.
In accordance with ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes,” the Company assesses the realizability of its deferred tax assets. The Company records a valuation allowance when, based upon the evaluation of all available evidence, it is more-likely-than-not that all or a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In making this determination, we analyze, among other things, our recent history of earnings, the nature and timing of reversing book-tax temporary differences, tax planning strategies, and future income. After considering both the positive and negative evidence available, in the second quarter of 2009, the Company determined that it was more-likely-than-not that it would not realize a portion of its U.S. deferred tax assets. As a result, the Company established a valuation allowance against a portion of its U.S. deferred tax assets. The Company released a portion of the valuation allowance related to one of its U.S. subsidiaries, JT Ryerson, during 2012. The Company released most of the remaining U.S. related valuation allowance during 2013. In 2018, the Company further reduced its valuation allowance related to state and foreign net operating losses. As of December 31, 2018, the Company had a valuation allowance of $29.3 million. As of December 31, 2019, the Company had a valuation allowance of $13.7 million, a decrease of $15.6 million from the prior year mainly related to expiring NOLs and changes to U.S. foreign tax credits previously recorded. As of December 31, 2020, the company had a valuation allowance of $6.6 million, a decrease of $7.1 million from the prior year mainly related to expiring NOLs and changes to U.S foreign tax credits previously recorded.
As described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company assesses the need for a valuation allowance considering all available positive and negative evidence, including past operating results, projections of future taxable income, and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies.
The Company will continue to maintain a valuation allowance on certain U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets until such time as in management’s judgment, considering all available positive and negative evidence, the Company determines that these deferred tax assets are more likely than not realizable.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Preparation of this Form 10-K requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements, and the reported amounts of sales and expenses during the reporting period. Our critical accounting policies, including the assumptions and judgments underlying them, are disclosed in Item 8 within Note 1: “Summary of Accounting and Financial Policies”. These policies have been consistently applied and address such matters as revenue recognition, depreciation methods, inventory valuation, asset impairment recognition, and pension and postretirement expense. While policies associated with estimates and judgments may be affected by different assumptions or conditions, we believe our estimates and judgments associated with the reported amounts are appropriate in the circumstances. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
We consider the policies discussed below as critical to an understanding of our financial statements, as application of these policies places the most significant demands on management’s judgment, with financial reporting results relying on estimation of matters that are uncertain.
Provision for allowances, claims, and doubtful accounts: We perform ongoing credit evaluations of customers and set credit limits based upon review of the customers’ current credit information, payment history, and the current economic and industry environments. We monitor customer payments and maintain a provision for estimated credit losses based on historical experience and specific customer collection issues that we have identified. Estimation of such losses requires adjusting historical loss experience for current economic conditions and judgments about the probable effects of economic conditions on certain customers. We cannot guarantee that the rate of future credit losses will be similar to past experience. Provisions for allowances and claims are based upon historical rates, expected trends, and estimates of potential returns, allowances, customer discounts, and incentives. We consider all available information when assessing the adequacy of the provision for allowances, claims, and doubtful accounts.
Inventory valuation: Our inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. The valuation of our inventories at the lower of cost or market could be subject to certain estimates; however, the measurement is primarily based on historical purchasing and sales information rather than forecasted metals pricing. Inventory costs reflect metal and in-bound freight purchase costs, third-party processing costs, and internal direct and allocated indirect processing costs. Cost is primarily determined by the LIFO method. We regularly review inventory on hand and record provisions for obsolete and slow-moving inventory based on historical and current sales trends. Changes in product demand and our customer base may affect the value of inventory on hand which may require higher provisions for obsolete inventory.
Income Taxes: Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and reserve for uncertain tax positions reflect our best estimate of taxes to be paid. The Company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and several foreign jurisdictions. The determination of the consolidated income tax expense requires judgment and estimation by management. It is possible that actual results could differ from the estimates that management has used to determine its consolidated income tax expense.
We record operating loss and tax credit carryforwards and the estimated effect of temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and the reported amounts in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. We follow detailed guidelines in each tax jurisdiction when reviewing tax assets recorded on the balance sheet and provide for valuation allowances as required. Deferred tax assets are reviewed for recoverability based on historical taxable income, the expected reversals of existing temporary differences, tax planning strategies, and on forecasts of future taxable income. The forecasts of future taxable income require assumptions regarding volume, selling prices, margins, expense levels, and industry cyclicality. If we are unable to generate sufficient future taxable income in certain tax jurisdictions, we may be required to record additional valuation allowances against our deferred tax assets related to those jurisdictions.
The Company’s income tax provisions are based on calculations and assumptions that are subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities. Although the Company believes that the positions taken on filed tax returns are reasonable, it has established tax and interest reserves in recognition that various taxing authorities may challenge the positions taken. For uncertain tax positions, the Company applies the provisions of relevant authoritative guidance, which requires application of a “more likely than not” threshold to the recognition and derecognition of tax positions. The Company’s ongoing assessments of the more likely than not outcomes of tax authority examinations and related tax positions require significant judgment and can increase or decrease the Company’s effective tax rate.
Long-lived Assets and Other Intangible Assets: Long-lived assets held and used are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. We estimate the future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. If the sum of the expected future cash flows (undiscounted and without interest charges) is less than the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment is recognized. Determining whether an impairment has occurred typically requires various estimates and assumptions, including determining which undiscounted cash flows are directly related to the potentially impaired asset, the useful life over which cash flows will occur, their amount, and the asset’s residual value, if any. Any related impairment loss is calculated based upon comparison of the fair value to the carrying value of the asset. Separate intangible assets that have finite useful lives are amortized over their useful lives. An impaired long-lived or intangible asset would be written down to fair value, based on various available valuation techniques, including the discounted cash flow method.
Goodwill: We assess the recoverability of the carrying value of recorded goodwill annually in the fourth quarter of each year or whenever indicators of potential impairment exist. We test for impairment of goodwill by assessing various qualitative factors with respect to developments in our business and the overall economy and calculating the fair value of a reporting unit using the discounted cash flow method, as necessary. Factors that may be considered indicators of impairment include: deterioration in general economic conditions; declines in the market conditions of our products, including metals prices; a sustained significant decline in our share price and market capitalization; reduced future cash flow estimates; and slower growth rates in our industry, among others. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than the carrying value based on our qualitative assessment, we will proceed to the goodwill impairment test. We compare the fair value of the reporting unit in which goodwill resides to its carrying value. If the carrying amount exceeds the fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess, not
to exceed the carrying amount of the goodwill. The fair value of the reporting units is estimated using a combination of an income approach and a market approach as this combination is deemed to be the most indicative of our fair value in an orderly transaction between market participants. An income approach based on discounted future cash flows requires us to estimate income from operations based on projected results and discount rates based on a weighted average cost of capital of comparable companies. A market approach estimates fair value using market multiples of various financial measures of comparable public companies. If these estimates or their related assumptions for commodity prices and demand change in the future, we may be required to record impairment charges for these assets.
Based on the impairment test performed on October 1, 2020, the Company concluded that the fair value of the reporting unit tested for impairment exceeded the carrying value. The discount rate for the reporting unit was estimated to be 15.0% at October 1, 2020. The Company determines a discount rate based on an estimate of a reasonable risk-adjusted return an investor would expect to realize on an investment in the reporting unit. Deterioration in market conditions in our industry or products, changes in expected future cash flows, expected growth rates or to discount rates could result in impairment charges in future periods.
Purchase Price Accounting: Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting. This method requires the Company to record assets and liabilities of the business acquired at their estimated fair market values as of the acquisition date. Any excess of the cost of the acquisition over the fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Any shortfall in the cost of the acquisition compared to the fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded in the Statement of Operations as a bargain gain. The Company uses valuation specialists, where necessary, to perform appraisals and assist in the determination of the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. These valuations require management to make estimates and assumptions that are critical in determining the fair values of the assets and liabilities.
Pension and postretirement benefit plan assumptions: We sponsor various benefit plans covering a portion of our employees for pension and postretirement medical costs. Statistical methods are used to anticipate future events when calculating expenses and liabilities related to the plans. The statistical methods include assumptions about, among other things, the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, rate of increase of health care costs, and the rate of future compensation increases. Our actuarial consultants also use subjective factors such as withdrawal and mortality rates when estimating expenses and liabilities. The discount rate used for U.S. plans reflects the market rate for high-quality fixed-income investments on our annual measurement date (December 31) and is subject to change each year. The discount rate was determined by matching, on an approximate basis, the coupons and maturities for a portfolio of corporate bonds (rated Aa or better by Moody’s Investor Services or AA or better by Standard and Poor’s) to the expected plan benefit payments defined by the projected benefit obligation. The discount rates used for plans outside the U.S. are based on the yield of long term high quality corporate bonds, the duration of the liability, and appropriate judgment.
When calculating pension expense for 2020, we assumed the pension plans’ assets would generate a long-term rate of return between 5.15% and 5.75% for the JT Ryerson plan (adjusted for two remeasurements in 2020) and 3.20% for the CS&W plan, and between 3.00% and 4.75% for the Canadian plans. The expected long-term rate of return assumption was developed based on historical experience and input from the trustee managing the plans’ assets. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is based on a target allocation of assets, which is based on a goal of earning the highest rate of return while maintaining risk at acceptable levels. Our projected long-term rate of return for the JT Ryerson pension plan is slightly higher than some market indices due to the active management of our plans’ assets, and is supported by the historical returns on our plans’ assets. The plans strive to have assets sufficiently diversified so that adverse or unexpected results from one security class will not have an unduly detrimental impact on the entire portfolio. We regularly review actual asset allocation and the pension plans’ investments are periodically rebalanced to the targeted allocation when considered appropriate. Pension expense increases as the expected rate of return on plan assets decreases. Lowering the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets by 50 basis points would have increased 2020 pension expense by approximately $3 million.
Future pension obligations for the U.S. plans were discounted using rates between of 2.42% and 3.09% at December 31, 2020. Future pension obligations for the Canadian plans were discounted using rates between 2.32% and 2.34% at December 31, 2020. Lowering the discount rate by 50 basis points would increase the pension liability at December 31, 2020 by approximately $38 million.
The calculation of other postretirement benefit obligations requires the use of a number of assumptions, including the assumed discount rate for measuring future payment obligations. A decrease in the weighted average discount rate of 50 basis points would increase the postretirement benefit liability by approximately $3 million.
The assumptions used in the actuarial calculation of expenses and liabilities may differ materially from actual results due to changing market and economic conditions, higher or lower withdrawal rates, or longer or shorter life spans of participants. These differences may result in a significant impact on the amount of pension or postretirement benefit expense we may record in the future.
Legal contingencies: We are involved in a number of legal and regulatory matters including those discussed in Note 12 in the Consolidated Financial Statements. We determine whether an estimated loss from a loss contingency should be accrued by assessing
whether a loss is deemed probable and can be reasonably estimated. We analyze our legal matters based on available information to assess potential liability. We consult with outside counsel involved in our legal matters when analyzing potential outcomes. We cannot determine at this time whether any potential liability related to this litigation would materially affect our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recent accounting pronouncements are discussed within Note 1 in the Consolidated Financial Statements.