Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as
a result of certain factors. We discuss factors that we believe could cause or contribute to these differences below and elsewhere in this report, including those set forth under Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report. Discussion and analysis of our 2019 fiscal year specifically, as well as the year-over-year comparison of our 2019 financial performance to 2018, are located in Part II, Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 2, 2020.
Overview
We are a commercial-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on changing the paradigm for the treatment of rare genetic diseases of obesity, which are characterized by early-onset, severe obesity and an insatiable hunger or hyperphagia. Our lead product candidate is IMCIVREE (setmelanotide), a potent melanocortin-4 receptor, or MC4R, agonist for the treatment of rare genetic diseases of obesity. We believe IMCIVREE, for which we have exclusive worldwide rights, has the potential to restore dysfunctional MC4R signaling due to impaired MC4R pathway function. MC4R pathway deficiencies result in the disruption of satiety signals and energy homeostasis in the body, which, in turn, leads to intense feelings of hunger and to obesity. IMCIVREE has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, for chronic weight management in adult and pediatric patients six years of age and older with obesity due to proopiomelanocortin, or POMC, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 1, or PCSK1, leptin receptor, or LEPR, deficiency confirmed by genetic testing. We expect IMCIVREE to be commercially available in the first quarter of 2021.
Our continued development efforts are focused on obesity related to several single gene-related, or monogenic, MC4R pathway deficiencies: Bardet-Biedl syndrome, or BBS; Alström syndrome; POMC or LEPR heterozygous deficiency obesity; steroid receptor coactivator 1, or SRC1, deficiency obesity; SH2B adapter protein 1, or SH2B1, deficiency obesity; MC4R deficiency obesity and Smith-Magenis syndrome, as well as additional disorders as part of investigator-initiated protocols. There are currently no effective or approved treatments for these MC4R pathway-related disorders. We believe that the MC4R pathway is a compelling target for treating these genetic disorders because of its critical role in regulating appetite and weight by promoting satiety and weight control, and that peptide therapeutics are uniquely suited for activating this target.
We recently announced positive topline results from a pivotal Phase 3 clinical trial evaluating setmelanotide for the treatment of insatiable hunger and severe obesity in individuals with BBS or Alström syndrome. The trial met its primary and all key secondary endpoints, showing statistically significant and clinically meaningful reductions in weight and hunger scores. All primary endpoint responders were patients with BBS. There were three evaluable patients with Alström syndrome and none of them met the primary endpoint. We are continuing to analyze the full data from patients with BBS or Alström syndrome, which we plan to present at a medical meeting in the first half of 2021. We plan to complete regulatory submissions to both the FDA and the EMA for BBS in the second half of 2021, and we expect to determine next steps for Alström syndrome upon completing a full analysis of the final data from the Phase 3 trial.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or the FDA, has acknowledged the importance of these results by giving setmelanotide Breakthrough Therapy designation for the treatment of obesity associated with genetic defects upstream of the MC4R in the leptin melanocortin pathways. The Breakthrough Therapy designation currently covers indications for POMC deficiency obesity, LEPR deficiency obesity, BBS and Alström syndrome.
We have ongoing Phase 2 clinical trials, referred to as our Basket Study, in MC4R pathway heterozygous deficiency obesity and POMC epigenetic disorders, which we expanded in the second half of 2019 to include the following additional indications: SRC1 deficiency obesity, SH2B1 deficiency obesity, MC4R deficiency obesity and Smith-Magenis syndrome. We reported preliminary results in MC4R pathway heterozygous deficiency obesity in March 2019. On January 26, 2021, we announced new proof-of-concept interim data from our ongoing Phase 2 Basket Study across individuals with one of three distinct rare genetic diseases of obesity: HET obesity due to a genetic variant in one of the two alleles of the POMC, PCSK1 or LEPR gene, or HETs; obesity due to SRC1 deficiency; and obesity due to SH2B1 deficiency. The primary endpoint of the study is the percent of patients in each subgroup showing at least a 5 percent loss of body weight over three months. Consistent with prior clinical experience, setmelanotide was generally well tolerated in each of these rare genetic diseases of obesity. We are in discussions with the FDA to define a potential path for setmelanotide towards
registration for these indications. Pending the outcome of these discussions, we plan to initiate a pivotal Phase 3 trial evaluating setmelanotide in patients with HET obesity and SRC1 and SH2B1 deficiency obesities in the second half of 2021.
We recently presented new data generated from our proprietary gene curation and selection strategy, which is designed to evaluate a gene’s relevance to the MC4R pathway with the goal of identifying genetic patient populations with the potential to benefit from setmelanotide therapy. Using this proprietary approach, we identified an additional 31 MC4R pathway genes with strong or very strong pathway relevance. Pending discussions with the FDA, we plan to initiate a new exploratory MC4R pathway basket trial in patients with these 31 new genes in the second half of 2021.
In the first half of 2021, we plan to initiate a Phase 2 clinical trial in hypothalamic obesity, initiate a potentially registration-enabling clinical trial of the weekly formulation of setmelanotide, and announce data from a Phase 2 basket study in MC4R-recusable patients. In the second half of 2021, we plan to initiate a clinical trial of setmelanotide in pediatric patients aged two to six. Also in the second half of 2021, we expect to obtain regulatory approval from the European Commission and make IMCIVREE commercially available in Europe in obesities due to POMC, PCSK1 and LEPR deficiencies.
On January 5, 2021, we entered into an asset purchase agreement with Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., or Alexion, pursuant to which we agreed to sell our Rare Pediatric Disease Priority Review Voucher, PRV, to Alexion, or the PRV Transfer. We were awarded the voucher under a FDA program intended to encourage the development of certain rare pediatric disease product applications. We received the PRV when IMCIVREE was approved by the FDA. Pursuant to the transfer agreement, Alexion agreed to pay us $100 million in cash upon the closing of the sale. The PRV Transfer closed on February 17, 2021.
On February 9, 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 5,750,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $30.00 per share, which included the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase up to 750,000 additional shares of common stock. We received aggregate net proceeds from the offering of approximately $161.6 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
Our operations to date have been limited primarily to conducting research and development activities for setmelanotide. To date, we have not generated any product revenue and have financed our operations primarily through the proceeds received from the sales of common and preferred stock, asset sales, as well as capital contributions from the former parent company, Rhythm Holdings LLC. From August 2015 through August 2017, we raised aggregate net proceeds of $80.8 million through our issuance of series A preferred stock. Since our initial public offering, or IPO, on October 10, 2017 and our underwritten follow-on offerings through February 2021, we have raised aggregate net proceeds of approximately $611.4 million through the issuance of our common stock after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering related transaction costs. Since inception, we have received a further $100.0 million from asset sales, specifically in connection with the PRV Transfer. We will not generate revenue from product sales until we are able to successfully establish a marketing and commercialization infrastructure for IMCIVREE. We expect to make IMCIVREE commercially available to patients 6 years of age and older with obesity due to POMC, PCSK1 or LEPR deficiency in the U.S. in the first quarter of 2021. We expect to continue to fund our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings or other sources. We intend to build our own marketing and commercial sales infrastructure and we may enter into collaborations with other parties for certain markets outside the United States. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development or commercialization of setmelanotide.
As of December 31, 2020 we had an accumulated deficit of $459.3 million. Our net losses were $134.0 million and $140.7 million, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses over the foreseeable future. We expect our expenses will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
● continue to conduct clinical trials for setmelanotide;
● engage contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, for the manufacture of clinical and commercial-grade setmelanotide;
● seek regulatory approval for setmelanotide for future indications;
● expand our clinical and financial operations and build a marketing and commercialization infrastructure; and
● continue to operate as a public company.
As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were approximately $172.8 million. We expect that our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2020, together with the aggregate net proceeds from the February 2021 public offering and the proceeds from the PRV Transfer of approximately $260.1 million, will enable us to fund our operating expenses through at least the second half of 2023.
Corporate Background
We are a Delaware corporation organized in February 2013 under the name Rhythm Metabolic, Inc., and as of October 2015, under the name Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
Impact of Novel Coronavirus
We are closely monitoring how the spread of COVID-19 is affecting our employees, business, preclinical studies and clinical trials. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have limited access to our executive offices with most employees continuing their work outside of our offices and travel has been restricted. We have recently updated our timelines on the Basket Study but the changes were unrelated to COVID-19. We are continuing our regular interactions with the FDA and EMA and based on current information. We do not currently anticipate any disruption in the clinical supply of setmelanotide and our CMOs have indicated that they have appropriate plans and procedures in place to ensure uninterrupted future supply of clinical and commercial-grade setmelanotide, subject to potential limitations on their operations due to COVID-19. As a result, we do not currently expect that the COVID-19 pandemic will have a material impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition. At this time, however, there is still uncertainty relating to the trajectory of the pandemic and the impact of related responses, and disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic have resulted and may in the future result in difficulties or delays in initiating, enrolling, conducting or completing our planned and ongoing clinical trials and the incurrence of unforeseen costs as a result of disruptions in clinical supply or preclinical study or clinical trial delays. For example, we experienced interruption of key clinical trial activities, such as patient attendance and clinical trial site monitoring, in our Phase 3 clinical trial evaluating setmelanotide for the treatment of insatiable hunger and severe obesity in individuals with BBS or Alström syndrome. The impact of COVID-19 on our future results will largely depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the ultimate geographic spread of the disease, the duration of the pandemic, travel restrictions and social distancing in the United States and other countries, business closures or business disruptions, the ultimate impact on financial markets and the global economy, the effectiveness of vaccines and vaccine distribution efforts and the effectiveness of other actions taken in the United States and other countries to contain and treat the disease. See “Risk Factors-The COVID-19 pandemic has and may continue to adversely impact our business, including our preclinical studies, clinical trials and our commercialization prospects.” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales. Our lead product candidate, IMCIVREE, was recently approved by the FDA for chronic weight management in adult and pediatric patients six years of age and older with obesity due to POMC, PCSK1 or LEPR deficiency confirmed by genetic testing. We expect IMCIVREE to be commercially available in the first quarter of 2021. We cannot predict if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenues from the commercialization and sale of IMCIVREE.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery and genetic sequencing efforts, and the clinical development of setmelanotide, which include:
● expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including CROs that conduct research and development and preclinical activities on our behalf, and the cost of consultants and CMOs that manufacture drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
● employee-related expenses including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense;
● the cost of lab supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing preclinical and clinical study materials;
● the cost of genetic sequencing of potential patients in clinical studies; and
● facilities, depreciation, and other expenses, which include rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other operating costs.
We expense research and development costs to operations as incurred. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. The capitalized amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
The following table summarizes our current research and development expenses:
We are unable to predict the duration and costs of the current or future clinical trials of our product candidates. The duration, costs, and timing of clinical trials and development of setmelanotide will depend on a variety of factors, including:
● the scope, rate of progress, and expense of our ongoing, as well as any additional, clinical trials and other research and development activities;
● the rate of enrollment in clinical trials;
● the safety and efficacy demonstrated by setmelanotide in future clinical trials;
● changes in regulatory requirements;
● changes in clinical trial design; and
● the timing and receipt of any regulatory approvals.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of our product candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with its development and potential commercialization.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect research and development costs to
increase significantly for the foreseeable future as our setmelanotide and other development programs progress. However, we do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses to commercialization and there can be no guarantee that we can meet the funding needs associated with these expenses.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling expenses consist of professional fees related to preparation for the eventual commercialization of setmelanotide as well as salaries and related benefits for commercial employees, including stock-based compensation. As we accelerate our preparation for commercialization and start to market setmelanotide and as we explore new collaborations to develop and commercialize setmelanotide, we anticipate that these expenses will materially increase.
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, relating to our full-time employees not involved in R&D or commercial activities. Other significant costs include rent, legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters and fees for accounting and consulting services.
The following table summarizes our current selling, general and administrative expenses.
We anticipate that our selling, general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in the future to support continued and expanding development efforts, potential commercialization of setmelanotide and increased costs of operating as a public company. These increases will likely include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel and fees to outside consultants, lawyers and accountants, compliance with exchange listing and SEC expenses, insurance and investor relations costs, among other expenses.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management's discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances on an ongoing basis, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Accrued research and development expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate the value associated with goods and services received in the period in connection with research and development activities. This process involves reviewing quotations and contracts, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost, or alternatively, the deferral of amounts paid for goods or services to be incurred in the future. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses or prepaid expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial
statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at the time those financial statements are prepared. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to CROs, CMOs and consultants in connection with research and development activities.
We accrue our expenses related to CROs, CMOs and consultants based on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with CROs, CMOs and consultants that conduct research and development and manufacturing on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. The allocation of CRO upfront expenses for both clinical trials and preclinical studies generally tracks actual work activity. However, there may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees delivered over a period of time, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust accrued or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Stock-based compensation
We have a 2017 equity incentive plan, or the 2017 Plan. The 2017 Plan provides for the grant of incentive and non-qualified stock options and restricted stock and stock grants to employees, consultants, advisors and directors, as determined by the Board of Directors. As of December 31, 2020, we had reserved 7,484,536 shares of common stock under the 2017 Plan. Shares of common stock issued pursuant to awards are generally issued from authorized but unissued shares. The 2017 Plan provides that the exercise price of incentive stock options cannot be less than 100% of the fair market value of the common stock on the date of the award for participants who own less than 10% of the total combined voting power of stock, and not less than 110% for participants who own more than 10% of the voting power. Awards granted under the 2017 Plan will vest over periods as determined by our Compensation Committee and approved by our Board of Directors.
We estimate the fair value of our stock option awards to employees and non-employees using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the input of subjective assumptions, including (a) the expected volatility of our stock, (b) the expected term of the award, (c) the risk-free interest rate, and (d) expected dividends. Previously due to the lack of a public market for the trading of our common stock and a lack of company-specific historical and implied volatility data, we based our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of companies in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries in a similar stage of development as us and that are publicly traded. For these analyses, we selected companies with comparable characteristics to ours including enterprise value, risk profiles and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the stock-based awards. We compute the historical volatility data using the daily closing prices for the selected companies' shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of our stock-based awards. During 2020, we began to estimate volatility by using a blend of our stock price history for the length of time we have market data for our stock and the historical volatility of similar public companies for the expected term of each grant. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available.
We have estimated the expected life of our employee stock options using the "simplified" method, whereby, the expected life equals the average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option. The risk-free interest rates for periods within the expected life of the option are based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect during the period the options were granted. We have elected to account for forfeitures as they occur. Upon adopting Accounting Standards Update 2018-07, Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting (Topic 718) on July 1, 2018, we elected that unsettled equity-classified awards to nonemployees for which a measurement date has not been established be measured using the adoption date fair value.
Income taxes
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 740, Accounting for Income Taxes, or ASC 740. When uncertain tax positions exist, we recognize the tax benefit of tax positions to the extent that the benefit will more likely than not be realized. The determination as to whether the tax benefit will more likely than not be realized is based upon the technical merits of the tax position as well as consideration of the available facts and circumstances. As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any uncertain tax positions.
Income taxes are recorded in accordance with ASC 740, which provides for deferred taxes using an asset and liability approach. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. We determine our deferred tax assets and liabilities based on differences between financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, which are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are provided, if based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
As of December 31, 2020, we had net operating loss carryforwards to reduce federal and state incomes taxes of approximately $382.3 million and $351.2 million, respectively. If not utilized, these carryforwards begin to expire in 2033. Of the federal net operating loss carryforwards at December 31, 2020, $309.1 million can be carried forward indefinitely. At December 31, 2020, we also had available research and development tax credits for federal and state income tax purposes of approximately $8.1 million and $2.8 million, respectively. Additionally, as of December 31, 2020, we had federal orphan drug credits related to qualifying research of $10.1 million. These tax credit carryforwards begin to expire in 2033 for federal purposes and 2028 for state purposes.
Utilization of the net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to ownership change limitations that have occurred previously or that could occur in the future, as provided by Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the Code, or Section 382, as well as similar state provisions and other provisions of the Code. Ownership changes may limit the amount of net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income and tax, respectively. In general, an ownership change, as defined by Section 382, results from transactions that increase the ownership of 5.0% stockholders in the stock of a corporation by more than 50% in the aggregate over a three-year period.
Results of Operations
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, together with the changes in those items in dollars and as a percentage:
Research and development expense. Research and development expense decreased by $19.0 million to $90.5 million in 2020 from $109.5 million in 2019, a decrease of 17%. The decrease was primarily due to the following:
● a decrease of $15.7 million related to our clinical trials associated with setmelanotide. We completed the GO-ID genotyping study, the POMC and LEPR Phase 3 studies and the once weekly formulation study in early to mid-2020. These decreases were slightly offset by increases related to the expansion of the Phase 2 basket study as well as starting a new renal insufficiency PK study in 2020;
● a decrease of $8.7 million related to translational research and genetic sequencing efforts, as the completion of the GO-ID study resulted in lower sequencing volume; and
● a decrease of $2.4 million related to fewer travel related expenses and conference related programs due to the Covid-19 restrictions in place for most of 2020.
The above decreases were partially offset by:
● an increase of $2.4 million due to the hiring of additional full-time employees in order to support the growth of our research and development programs, as well as efforts to support our education programs for physicians, care providers and patients who are facing rare genetic disorders of obesity;
● an increase of $2.5 million primarily related to purchases of setmelanotide API and drug product for clinical trials and preparation for potential commercialization; and
● an increase of $3.0 million due to the milestone expenses associated with the license agreement with Ipsen on filing the NDA and MMA for setmelanotide for the treatment of POMC and LEPR deficiency obesities.
Selling, general and administrative expense. Selling, general and administrative expense increased by $9.6 million to $46.1 million in 2020 from $36.6 million in 2019, an increase of 26%. The increase was primarily due to the following:
● an increase of approximately $0.9 million in cash related charges incurred with the separation agreements with our former CEO and CCO, and $4.9 million in non-cash related stock compensation expenses related with those separation agreements as well as the hiring of our current CEO in July 2020; and an increase of
approximately $0.5 million for employee related costs in connection with the hiring of additional full-time employees to support planned commercial and operating activities;
● an increase of $1.7 million related to efforts to drive patient engagement and disease awareness about rare genetic causes of obesity and prepare for the potential commercialization of setmelanotide in the U.S.; and
● an increase of $1.2 million related to consulting activity for market access development, legal services and other costs associated with activities and implementation of certain processes relating to our compliance with the Sarbanes Oxley Act.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were approximately $172.8 million.
Cash flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net cash used in operating activities
The use of cash in all periods resulted primarily from our net losses adjusted for non-cash charges and changes in components of working capital.
Net cash used in operating activities was $122.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and consisted primarily of a net loss of $116.1 million adjusted for non-cash items, which consisted of non-cash stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization and rent expense. The change in operating assets and liabilities reflected a total use of cash of approximately $5.9 million for a decrease in prepaid assets, accounts payable and accrued expenses due to the timing of payments and a reduction of overall operating expenses.
Net cash used in operating activities was $122.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, and consisted primarily of a net loss of $127.8 million adjusted for non-cash items, which consisted of non-cash stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization and rent expense. The change in operating assets and liabilities reflected a total use of cash of approximately $6.4 million for an increase in prepaid expenses associated with our CROs and CMOs due to the timing of payments offset by an increase of $10.5 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses. We also received proceeds of $0.9 million from tenant improvement allowances related to our new office space.
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 relates to the net maturities of short-term investments of $158.7 million.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 relates to net purchases of short-term investments of $24.6 million and $3.4 million of cash used for tenant improvements and new furniture and fixtures related to our new office space.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which represents cash proceeds from the exercise of stock options and the issuance of common stock from the ESPP.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $163.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which represents the net proceeds of $161.4 million from our common stock offering in October 2019 and $2.1 million of cash proceeds from the exercise of stock options and the issuance of common stock from the ESPP.
Funding requirements
We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue the clinical development of and seek marketing approval for setmelanotide for future indications. In addition, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution to the extent that such sales, marketing and distribution are not the responsibility of potential collaborators. We also expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
We expect that our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2020, together with the proceeds from the sale of the PRV Transfer and the net proceeds from the 2021 February public offering of approximately $260.1 million, will enable us to fund our operating expenses through at least the second half of 2023. We may need to obtain substantial additional funding in connection with our research and development activities and any continuing operations thereafter. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on favorable terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or future commercialization efforts.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the costs to commercialize setmelanotide, by building an internal sales force or entering into collaborations with third parties and providing support services for patients;
● the scope, progress, results and costs of clinical trials for our setmelanotide program;
● the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our setmelanotide program;
● the obligations owed to Ipsen Pharma S.A.S., or Ipsen, Camurus AB, or Camurus and Takeda pursuant to our license agreements;
● the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
● the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
● our ability to establish and maintain additional collaborations on favorable terms, if at all; and
● the costs of operating as a public company and losing our emerging growth company status.
Although IMCIVREE has been approved by the FDA in certain indications, and we expect IMCIVREE to be commercially available in the first quarter of 2021, IMCIVREE may not achieve commercial success. In addition, developing our setmelanotide program is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that may take years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain future marketing approvals and
achieve product sales. Accordingly, we will need to continue to rely on additional financing to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all.
In addition, the magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our liquidity and future funding requirements is uncertain as of the filing date of this Annual Report as this continues to evolve globally. See “Impact of Novel Coronavirus” above and “Risk Factors- The COVID-19 pandemic has and may continue to adversely impact our business, including our preclinical studies, clinical trials and our commercialization prospects.” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report for a further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing, if available, involves agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
If we raise funds through additional collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our setmelanotide program on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our setmelanotide program that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual obligations
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with CROs and CMOs for clinical trials and clinical supply manufacturing and with vendors for clinical research studies and other services and products for operating purposes. We do not classify these as contractual obligations where the contracts are cancelable at any time by us, generally upon 30 days' prior written notice to the vendor.
Milestone and royalty payments associated with our license agreements with Ipsen, Camurus and Takeda, have not been included as contractual obligations as we cannot reasonably estimate if or when they will occur. Under the terms of the Ipsen license agreement, assuming that setmelanotide is successfully developed, receives regulatory approval and is commercialized, Ipsen may receive aggregate payments of up to $40.0 million upon the achievement of certain development and commercial milestones under the license agreement and royalties on future product sales. The majority of the aggregate payments under the Ipsen license agreement are for milestones that may be achieved no earlier than first commercial sale of setmelanotide. In the event that we enter into a sublicense agreement, we will make payments to Ipsen, depending on the date of the sublicense agreement, ranging from 10% to 20% of all revenues actually received under the sublicense agreement. Under the terms of the Camurus license agreement, assuming that setmelanotide is successfully developed, receives regulatory approval and is commercialized, Camurus may receive aggregate payments of up to $64.75 million upon the achievement of certain development and commercial milestones under the license agreement and royalties on future product sales. The majority of the aggregate payments under the Camurus license agreement are for milestones that may be achieved no earlier than first commercial sale of this formulation of setmelanotide. Under the terms of the Takeda license agreement, assuming that RM-853, is successfully developed, receives regulatory approval and is commercialized, Takeda may receive aggregate payments of up to $140.0 million upon the achievement of certain development and commercial milestones under the license agreement and royalties on future product sales. The majority of the aggregate payments under the Takeda license agreement are for milestones that may be achieved no earlier than first commercial sale of the RM-853.
Based on our current development plans as of December 31, 2020, potential payments due to third parties, during the next 12 months from the filing of this Annual Report are estimated to be approximately $9.0 million in commercial milestones, in connection with our license agreements. These milestones generally become due and payable upon achievement of such milestones or sales. When the achievement of these milestones or
sales have not occurred, such contingencies are not recorded in our financial statements and are excluded from the table below.
In August 2018, we amended our existing Lease Agreement for our head office facility in Boston, Massachusetts. The new lease term commenced in May 2019 and has a term of six years with a five-year renewal option to extend the lease. The new lease includes approximately 13,600 square feet of office space.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of pending and recently adopted accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have, during the period presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under applicable SEC rules.