ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis has been recast to reflect the Strategic Realignment described in this Form 10-K and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We connect people and places with technology that reimagines the business of travel. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused major shifts in the travel ecosystem resulting in the changing needs of our airline, hotel and agency customers. As a result, in 2020 we accelerated the organizational changes we began in 2018 to address the changing travel landscape through the Strategic Realignment to respond to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and cost structure. The organizational changes involve the creation of a functional-oriented structure to further enhance our long-term growth opportunities and help deliver new retailing, distribution and fulfillment solutions to the travel marketplace. As a result of the Strategic Realignment, we now operate our business and present our results through two business segments effective the third quarter of 2020: (i) Travel Solutions, our global business-to-business travel marketplace for travel suppliers and travel buyers, including a broad portfolio of software technology products and solutions for airlines, and (ii) Hospitality Solutions, an extensive suite of leading software solutions for hoteliers. All revenue and expenses previously assigned to the Travel Network and Airline Solutions business segments have been consolidated into a unified revenue and expense structure now reported as the Travel Solutions business segment. The historical results of the Hospitality Solutions reporting segment have not changed. See Note 18. Segment Information, to our consolidated financial statements for results for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 by reportable segment.
A significant portion of our revenue is generated through transaction-based fees that we charge to our customers. For Travel Solutions, we generate revenue from our distribution activities through transaction fees for bookings on our GDS, and from our IT solutions through recurring usage-based fees for the use of our SaaS and hosted systems, as well as upfront fees and professional services fees. For Hospitality Solutions, we generate revenue from recurring usage-based fees for the use of our SaaS and hosted systems, as well as upfront fees and professional services fees. Items that are not allocated to our business segments are identified as corporate and primarily include stock-based compensation expense, litigation costs, corporate headcount-related costs and other items that are not identifiable with either of our segments.
Additionally, we have reclassified expenses on our statement of operations to provide additional clarification on our costs by separating technology costs from cost of revenue and realigning certain expenses previously classified as cost of revenue to selling, general and administrative classification, considering how we assess our results of operations in the current organizational structure. Certain historical amounts have been reclassified to align with the current presentation. See Note 1. Summary of Business and Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements for further information.
Recent Developments Affecting our Results of Operations
The travel industry continues to be adversely affected by the global health crisis due to COVID-19, as well as by government directives that have been enacted to slow the spread of the virus. COVID-19 has had a material impact to our consolidated financial results in 2020, resulting in a material decrease in transaction-based revenue across both of our business units over the prior year. Additionally, our mix of transactions has shifted such that domestic bookings now exceed international bookings, negatively impacting revenue. Revenue during the year, particularly in the second quarter, was negatively impacted by increased cancellation activity. We estimate future cancellations at the end of each reporting period based on the number of undeparted bookings, expected cancellations and an estimated rate. The combination of actual cancellation activity and significantly fewer bookings resulted in a reduction in the cancellation reserve for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to 2019. Lower GDS volumes resulted in a material decline in incentive consideration costs, which was partially offset by a higher provision for expected credit losses due to the impact of COVID-19 on the global economy and our customers and other general increases in bad debt from aging balances as applied under the newly adopted credit impairment standard. Refer to Note 8. Credit Losses for further information.
Given the impact of COVID-19, as previously disclosed, we have responded with measures to increase our cash position, including the suspension of common stock dividends and share repurchases under our $500 million share repurchase program (the "Share Repurchase Program"), borrowing under our Revolver, implementing cost savings measures, and completing debt and equity offerings. Additionally, during the fourth quarter of 2020, we completed the sale of our two headquarters buildings for an aggregate purchase price, net of closing costs, of $69 million in conjunction with an assessment of our real estate footprint, as well as our work from anywhere initiatives. See Note 12. Leases, to our consolidated financial statements for further information. We also took the following actions with regard to our workforce and compensation programs as cost reduction efforts:
•A temporary reduction in base compensation pay for our US-based salaried workforce, including a 25% reduction for our CEO, from March 16, 2020 through July 5, 2020;
•A temporary reduction in the cash retainer for members of our Board of Directors from March 16, 2020 through June 30, 2020;
•The temporary suspension of our 401(k) match program for US-based employees through December 31, 2020;
•Reductions in third-party contracting, vendor costs and other discretionary spending;
•An offering of voluntary unpaid time off, voluntary severance and a voluntary early retirement program in the first quarter of 2020;
•A temporary furlough of approximately one-third of our workforce during the second quarter of 2020; and
•A right-sizing of our global organization through a reduction in force that impacted approximately 800 team members across 44 office locations. This reduction is in addition to the separation of approximately 400 participants in voluntary severance and voluntary early retirement programs described above.
We substantially completed the Strategic Realignment during the year ended December 31, 2020. In connection with these measures, we recorded a $72 million charge associated with these restructuring activities during the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 4. Restructuring Activities, to our consolidated financial statements for further details on the costs incurred related to restructuring. Additionally, to retain key talent in this highly volatile macro environment, we have taken the following specific actions related to our compensation programs which have impacted our operating expenses:
•Replaced the revenue and adjusted earnings per share metrics in our 2020 annual incentive program with measures focused on expense management with payout capped at 50% of original targets, paid in December 2020;
•Amended the key strategic initiatives associated with the long-term performance-based cash incentive awards that are payable in March 2022;
•Amended the 2020 performance metrics associated with performance stock awards that vest in March 2021;
•Awarded time-based restricted stock unit awards to executive and certain key employees in June 2020, with 50% of the units vesting on the first and second anniversaries of the grant date; and
•Awarded cash retention bonuses to certain key technology resources in June 2020 in conjunction with our technology transformation initiatives payable upon the completion of two and three years of service.
We believe the ongoing effects of COVID-19 on our operations and global bookings will continue to have a material negative impact on our financial results and liquidity, and such negative impact may continue well beyond the containment of such outbreak.
In March 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act") was signed into law, which provides over $2 trillion in economic relief in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act also modifies sections of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended ("IRC"). Certain IRC modifications relax limitations on deductions, which were enacted as part of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. We did not participate in the CARES Act loan program during 2020 but did benefit from certain payroll-tax related deferrals and credits. The provisions of the CARES Act did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, several of our customers filed for bankruptcy protection in various jurisdictions. Due to our creditor position, we do not expect significant recovery for amounts due to us prior to the customer's filing for bankruptcy protection and have fully reserved for any amounts due; however, we continue to provide services and receive timely payment for post-bankruptcy balances due in most cases.
Factors Affecting our Results
The impacts of COVID-19 on our business as described above are the most significant factors affecting our current results, and they are expected to continue to significantly impact our future results. The following is a discussion of other trends that we believe are additional significant opportunities and challenges currently impacting our business and industry. The discussion also includes management’s assessment of the effects these trends have had and are expected to have on our results of continuing operations. This information is not an exhaustive list of all of the factors that could affect our results and should be read in conjunction with the factors referred to in the sections entitled “Risk Factors,” “Forward-Looking Statements,” and "-Recent Developments Affecting our Results of Operations" included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Technology transformation and change in mix of technology spend
We expect to further enable our technology transformation with incremental operational and capital expenditure investments in 2021 and continued investment over the next few years which will have a material impact on our financial results. We expect to continue to make significant investments in our re-platforming efforts to open source and cloud-based solutions, as previously disclosed, with the goal of modernizing our architecture, driving efficiency in development and ongoing technology costs, further enhancing the stability and security of our network, and complying with data privacy regulations, and in next-generation retailing capabilities, including NDC and personalized offers, LCCs and full-service hotel PMS offerings. In 2021, we expect total capital expenditures to range from $60 million to $100 million. Technology costs include the cost of our technology transformation.
Through our technology transformation efforts, we expect to benefit from lower cloud infrastructure costs and higher margins, with material cost savings realized beginning in 2024. We believe that continued investment in our technology will help to provide us the necessary framework and infrastructure for a secure and stable architecture for our customers, grow our
addressable market, provide new revenue opportunities, reduce costs and will help to improve sales of our software solutions. However, there are various risks associated with our technology transformation efforts, including not achieving the amount of anticipated cost savings, not completing the steps during their current projected time frame, or changing the approach leading to, among other things, additional changes in our mix of technology spend between operating expense and capitalization.
Geographic mix of travel bookings
The revenue recognized by our Travel Solutions business is affected by the mix between domestic and international travel reservation bookings and the related varying rates paid by airline suppliers. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our mix of transactions shifted during 2020 such that domestic bookings now exceed international bookings, negatively impacting our revenue. The increase in domestic bookings is also partly due to an increase in leisure bookings over business travel. As business travelers have moved to a remote working environment with travel restrictions, leisure travel has increased impacting the domestic and international mix further. Due to our geographic concentration, our results of operations are particularly sensitive to factors affecting North America, which has been accentuated by the impacts of COVID-19. For example, booking fees per transaction in North America have traditionally been lower than those in Europe. As we continue to invest in our technology and expand the travel content and functionality available in our GDS, we anticipate that we will continue to grow global market share. Booking share in the near term, however, could be impacted by the regional mix of travel bookings during recovery from COVID-19. We invest for sustainable share growth, and in certain parts of Asia-Pacific and Latin America, our share may be impacted by travel agency commercial arrangements we have declined to pursue due to credit risk and unfavorable economics. The geographic mix of our Direct Billable Bookings is summarized below:
________________________________________________________________________________________
(1) “Direct Billable Bookings” is the primary metric utilized by Travel Solutions to measure operating performance and includes bookings made through our GDS and through our joint venture partners in cases where we are paid directly by the travel supplier.
Recent insolvencies and the impact of COVID-19 on Travel Solutions customers
In 2020, several Travel Solutions customers filed for bankruptcy but continued to operate. In April 2019, a customer of Travel Solutions, Jet Airways suspended flight operations and is now insolvent which negatively impacted our revenue in 2019 and 2020. Additionally, given the uncertainties surrounding the duration and effects of COVID-19 on transaction volumes in the global travel industry, particularly air travel and hotel transaction volumes, including from airlines’ insolvency or suspension of service or aircraft groundings, our provision for expected credit losses increased in 2020 partially due to fully reserving for aged balances related to certain customers and bankruptcy-related reserves. In the future, we may incur additional credit losses if further bankruptcies occur or our customers lack the ability to pay for services performed. Additionally, bankruptcy proceedings may require the renegotiation of contractual terms that may not be favorable. Our revenue has and may continue to be impacted by contracting with our customers, including force majeure provisions and requests to renegotiate the terms of existing agreements prior to their expiration, including providing temporary concessions on contractual minimums. Future revenues may be negatively impacted by, among other things, reduced sales of our software solutions and reduced Passengers Boarded due to delayed or uncertain implementations and insolvencies of airline carriers. See “Risk Factors-Our travel supplier customers may experience financial instability or consolidation, pursue cost reductions, change their distribution model or undergo other changes.”
Increasing travel agency incentive consideration
Travel agency incentive consideration is a large portion of Travel Solutions expenses. The vast majority of incentive consideration is tied to absolute booking volumes based on transactions such as flight segments booked. Incentive consideration, which often increases once a certain volume or percentage of bookings is met, is provided in two ways, according to the terms of the agreement: (i) on a periodic basis over the term of the contract and (ii) in some instances, up front at the inception or modification of contracts, which is capitalized and amortized over the expected life of the contract.
This consideration grew in the double digits on a per booking basis in 2018 due to higher incentives in certain geographical markets and from new customer conversions and reverted to single-digit growth in 2019. Consideration on a per booking basis declined in 2020 as compared to the prior year due the COVID-19 pandemic; however, we remain focused on managing incentive consideration and expect continued single-digit growth in the near term. Although incentive rate increases may continue to impact margins, we expect these increases to be more than offset by growth in Travel Solutions revenue. This
expectation is based in part on our continuing to offer value added services and content to travel buyers, such as the Sabre Red Workspace, a SaaS product that provides a simplified interface and enhanced travel agency workflow and productivity tools.
Travel buyers can shift their bookings to or from our Travel Solutions business
Our Travel Solutions business relies on relationships with several large travel buyers, including TMCs and OTAs, to drive a large portion of its revenue. Although our contracts with larger travel agencies often increase the amount of the incentive consideration when the travel agency processes a certain volume or percentage of its bookings through our GDS, travel buyers are not contractually required to book exclusively through our GDS during the contract term. Travel buyers may shift bookings to other distribution intermediaries for many reasons, including to avoid becoming overly dependent on a single source of travel content and increase their bargaining power with the GDS providers. For example, certain travel agencies have adopted a dual GDS provider strategy and shifted a sizeable portion of their business from our GDS to a competitor GDS, while other agencies have shifted a sizable portion their business to our GDS. Additionally, the impact of COVID-19 on travel buyers has caused them, and may continue to cause them, to select the GDS with the most favorable terms or contractual commitment.
Increasing importance of LCC/hybrids
LCC/hybrids have become a significant segment of the air travel market, stimulating demand for air travel through low fares. LCC/hybrids have traditionally relied on direct distribution for the majority of their bookings. However, as these LCC/hybrids are evolving, many are increasing their distribution through indirect channels to expand their offering into higher yield markets and to higher yield customers, such as business and international travelers. Other LCC/hybrids, especially start up carriers, may choose not to distribute through the GDS until wider distribution is desired. On October 15, 2019, we acquired Radixx, an airline retailing software provider whose signature products are an LCC passenger service system and internet booking engine. We have invested in Radixx to expand its capabilities and expect to make additional investments to address the LCC space and continue to grow upmarket with a more competitive offering.
Shift to SaaS and hosted solutions by airlines and hotels to manage their daily operations
Historically, large travel suppliers built custom in-house software and applications for their business process needs. In response to a desire for more flexible systems given increasingly complex and constantly changing technological requirements, reduced IT budgets and increased focus on cost efficiency, many travel suppliers turned to third party solutions providers for many of their key technologies and began to license software from software providers. We believe that significant revenue opportunity remains in this outsourcing trend, as legacy in-house systems continue to migrate and upgrade to third party systems; however, the impact of COVID-19 on the travel industry may cause delays in these decisions, which may impact new sales during the pandemic and recovery period. The shift from a model with initial license fees to one with recurring monthly fees associated with our SaaS and hosted solutions, has resulted in an ongoing revenue stream based on the number of passengers boarded. However, under the SaaS and hosted solutions revenue model, revenue recognition may be delayed due to longer implementation schedules for larger suppliers. The SaaS and hosted models’ centralized deployment also allows us to save time and money by reducing maintenance and implementation tasks and lowering operating costs.
Growing demand for continued technology improvements in the fragmented hotel market
Most of the hospitality industry is highly fragmented. Independent hotels and small to medium sized chains (groups of less than 300 properties) comprise a majority of hotel properties and available hotel rooms, with global and regional chains comprising the balance. Hotels use a number of different technology systems to distribute and market their products and operate efficiently. We offer technology solutions to all segments of the hospitality industry. Our SynXis Central Reservation System integrates critical hospitality systems to optimize distribution, operations, retailing and guest experience via one scalable, flexible and intelligent platform. We believe the impact of COVID-19 on the hospitality industry highlights the benefits of a scalable solution such as our SynXis Central Reservation System. As these markets recover and begin to grow, we believe both independent and enterprise hotel owners and operators will continue to seek increased connectivity and integrated solutions to ensure access to global travelers. We anticipate that this will contribute to the continued growth of Hospitality Solutions, which is ultimately dependent upon these hoteliers accepting and utilizing our products and services.
Impact of customer consolidation in Hospitality Solutions
Growth through acquisition and brand consolidation is emerging as a strategy for enterprise hoteliers. This has resulted, and may continue to result, in customer de-migration as larger hotel chains consolidate acquired brands onto their existing technology platforms. Certain of our Hospitality Solutions customers were acquired by larger hoteliers, and it is possible that additional customer consolidations could occur in the future. We expect these consolidations to adversely impact revenue growth for the Hospitality Solutions business.
Continued focus by travel suppliers on cost cutting and exerting influence over distribution
Travel suppliers continue to look for ways to decrease their costs and to increase their control over distribution. Airline consolidations, pricing pressure during contract renegotiations and the use of direct distribution may continue to subject our business to challenges. The shift from indirect distribution channels, such as our GDS, to direct distribution channels, may result from increased content availability on supplier operated websites or from increased participation of meta search engines, such as Kayak and Google, which direct consumers to supplier operated websites. This trend may adversely affect our Travel Solutions contract renegotiations with suppliers that use alternative distribution channels. For example, airlines may withhold part of their content for distribution exclusively through their own direct distribution channels or offer more attractive terms for content
available through those direct channels. This occurred in 2018 when certain European carriers began to withhold part of their content from our GDS to make use of alternative distribution channels, which may adversely affect our future revenue growth. In 2020, we reached an agreement with one such carrier to provide traditional content while enabling content via NDC. However, in North America, which is our largest region, the rate at which bookings have shifted from indirect to direct distribution channels has been relatively consistent for a number of reasons, including the increased participation of LCC/hybrids in direct channels. Over the last few years, notable carriers that previously only distributed directly, including Lion Air, Norwegian and Interjet, have signed agreements with our GDS. In addition, we signed a number of smaller airlines to new participation agreements in 2020, such as Fly Gangwon, Jazeera Airways and Thai Smile Airways. Other carriers such as Southwest Airlines and EVA Airways have further increased their participation in our GDS. Conversely, Air India fully migrated from our GDS during 2019.
These trends have impacted the revenue of Travel Solutions, which recognizes revenue for airline ticket sales based on transaction volumes. Simultaneously, this focus on cost cutting and direct distribution has also presented opportunities for Travel Solutions. Many airlines have turned to outside providers for key systems, process and industry expertise and other products that assist in their cost cutting initiatives in order to focus on their primary revenue generating activities.
Components of Revenues and Expenses
Revenues
Travel Solutions generates revenues from distribution activities through Direct Billable Bookings processed on our GDS, adjusted for estimated cancellations of those bookings. Travel Solutions also generates revenues from IT solutions activities from its product offerings including reservation systems for full-cost and low-cost carriers, commercial and operations products, agency solutions and booking data. Additionally, Travel Solutions generates revenue through software licensing and maintenance fees. Recognition of license fees upon delivery has previously resulted and will continue to result in periodic fluctuations in revenue recognized. Hospitality Solutions generates revenue through upfront solution fees and recurring usage-based fees for the use of our software solutions hosted on secure platforms or deployed through our SaaS and through other professional service fees including Digital Experience ("DX"). Certain professional service fees are discrete sales opportunities that may have a high degree of variability from period to period, and we cannot guarantee that we will have such fees in the future consistent with prior periods.
Cost of revenue, excluding technology costs
Cost of revenue incurred by Travel Solutions and Hospitality Solutions consists primarily of costs associated with the delivery and distribution of our products and services and includes employee-related costs for our delivery, customer operations and call center teams as well as allocated overhead such as facilities and other support costs. Cost of revenue for Travel Solutions also includes incentive consideration expense representing payments or other consideration to travel agencies for reservations made on our GDS which accrue on a monthly basis. Cost of revenue excludes technology costs, which are presented separately below.
Corporate cost of revenue includes certain expenses such as stock-based compensation, restructuring charges and other items not identifiable with either of our segments.
Depreciation and amortization included in cost of revenue is associated with capitalized implementation costs and intangible assets associated with contracts, supplier and distributor agreements purchased through acquisitions or established with our take private transaction in 2007. Cost of revenue also includes amortization of upfront incentive consideration representing upfront payments or other consideration provided to travel agencies for reservations made on our GDS which are capitalized and amortized over the expected life of the contract.
We have reclassified expenses on our statement of operations to provide additional clarification on our costs and to reflect the Strategic Realignment. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we reclassified $1,179 million and $997 million, respectively, from cost of revenue to technology costs and $130 million and $140 million, respectively, from cost of revenue to selling, general, and administrative. As a result, cost of revenue decreased by $1,309 million and $1,137 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 respectively.
Technology Costs
Technology costs incurred by Travel Solutions and Hospitality Solutions consist of expenses related to third-party providers and employee-related costs to operate technology operations including hosting, third-party software, and other costs associated with the maintenance and minor enhancement of our technology. Technology costs also include costs associated with our technology transformation efforts. Technology costs are less variable in nature and therefore may not correlate with related changes in revenue.
Depreciation and amortization included in technology costs is associated with software developed for internal use that supports our products, assets supporting our technology platform, businesses and systems and intangible assets for technology purchased through acquisitions or established through the take private transaction in 2007.
We have reclassified expenses on our statement of operations to provide additional clarification on our costs by separately reporting technology costs. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we reclassified $1,179 million from cost of revenue and $106 million from selling, general and administrative to technology costs. For the year ended December 31, 2018, we reclassified $997 million from cost of revenue and $102 million from selling, general and administrative to technology costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist of professional service fees, certain settlement charges or reimbursements, costs to defend legal disputes, provision for expected credit losses, other overhead costs, and personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, for employees engaged in sales, sales support, account management and who administratively support the business in finance, legal, human resources, information technology and communications.
Depreciation and amortization included in selling, general and administrative expenses is associated with property and equipment, acquired customer relationships, trademarks and brand names purchased through acquisitions or established through the take private transaction in 2007.
We have reclassified expenses on our statement of operations to provide additional clarification on our costs and to reflect the Strategic Realignment. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we reclassified $130 million and $140 million, respectively, from cost of revenue to selling, general, and administrative and $106 million and $102 million, respectively, from selling, general and administrative to technology costs. As a result, selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $24 million and $38 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Intersegment Transactions
We account for significant intersegment transactions as if the transactions were with third parties, that is, at estimated current market prices. Hospitality Solutions pays fees to Travel Solutions for hotel stays booked through our GDS.
Key Metrics
“Direct Billable Bookings” and “Passengers Boarded” are the primary metrics utilized by Travel Solutions to measure operating performance. Travel Solutions generates distribution revenue for each Direct Billable Booking, which includes bookings made through our GDS (e.g., Air, and Lodging, Ground and Sea ("LGS")) and through our equity method investments in cases where we are paid directly by the travel supplier. Air Bookings are presented net of bookings cancelled within the period presented. Travel Solutions also recognizes IT solutions revenue from recurring usage-based fees for Passengers Boarded ("PBs"). The primary metric utilized by Hospitality Solutions is booking transactions processed through the Sabre Hospitality Solutions SynXis Central Reservation System. These key metrics allow management to analyze customer volume over time for each of our product lines to monitor industry trends and analyze performance. We believe that these key metrics are useful for investors and other third parties as indicators of our financial performance and industry trends. While these metrics are based on what we believe to be reasonable estimates of our transaction counts for the applicable period of measurement, there are inherent challenges associated with their measurement. In addition, we are continually seeking to improve our estimates of these metrics, and these estimates may change due to improvements or changes in our methodology.
The following table sets forth these key metrics for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statement of operations data for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Travel Solutions-Revenue decreased $2,546 million, or 68%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year, primarily due to:
• a $2,149 million, or 79%, decrease in transaction-based distribution revenue due to a 78% decrease in Direct Billable Bookings to 125 million resulting from lower transaction volume primarily as a result of reduced travel caused by the COVID-19 pandemic; and
•a $397 million decrease in IT solutions revenue consisting of a $265 million, or 52%, decrease in reservation revenue primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our existing customer base and a $28 million decrease in revenue compared to the same period in the prior year due to the transition away from our services by certain customers and Jet Airways' insolvency in April 2019, partially offset by an increase of $12 million driven by the acquisition of Radixx in October 2019. Passengers Boarded, inclusive of Radixx, decreased by 56% to 323 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, commercial and operations revenue decreased $132 million primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our existing customer base.
Hospitality Solutions-Revenue decreased $118 million, or 40%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily driven by a reduction in SynXis Software and Services revenue due to a decrease in transaction volumes of 38% to 67 million, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of Revenue, excluding technology costs
Travel Solutions-Cost of revenue decreased $1,120 million, or 75%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily the result of a $1,078 million decline in incentive consideration in all regions due to lower transaction volumes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as a $37 million reduction in labor and professional services costs in connection with our cost reduction measures.
Hospitality Solutions-Cost of revenue decreased $62 million, or 40%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily driven by $55 million reduction in transaction-related costs due to the decline in transaction volume as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and a reduction in labor costs in connection with our cost reduction measures.
Corporate-Cost of revenue associated with corporate costs increased $20 million, or 244%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily due to a restructuring charge of $19 million for severance benefits. The increase is partially offset by a reduction in labor costs in connection with our cost reduction measures. See Note 4. Restructuring Activities, to our consolidated financial statements for further details on restructuring activities.
Depreciation and amortization-Depreciation and amortization decreased $1 million, or 2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The decrease is primarily due to customer implementations that became fully amortized during the year.
Amortization of upfront incentive consideration-Amortization of upfront incentive consideration decreased $8 million, or 10%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The decrease is primarily due to a reduction in upfront consideration provided to travel agencies.
Technology Costs
Technology costs decreased by $128 million, or 10%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The decrease is primarily driven by reductions impacting our Travel Solutions and Hospitality Solutions businesses, including a decrease in technology labor of $91 million and $12 million, respectively, in connection with our cost reduction measures, a decrease in depreciation and amortization of $46 million and $10 million, respectively, primarily due to a change in the mix of our technology spend in 2019 resulting in less capitalized internal use software, and a decline in technology costs of $55 million in our Travel Solutions business associated with lower transaction volumes resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. This decrease is partially offset by a continued decline in the capitalization mix of our technology spend as we implement opensource and cloud-based solutions, resulting in an increase in labor costs of $40 million and $6 million in our Travel Solutions and Hospitality Solutions businesses, respectively. Corporate technology costs increased due to a restructuring charge of $32 million for severance benefits. See Note 4. Restructuring Activities, to our consolidated financial statements for further details on restructuring activities.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $14 million, or 2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The decrease is primarily driven by a decrease in labor and professional services costs of $43 million and $3 million in our Travel Solutions and Hospitality Solutions businesses, respectively, and a $29 million decrease in Corporate labor and professional services, each in connection with our cost reduction measures. In addition, other costs declined by approximately $25 million across the company from 2019 primarily in conjunction with our expense management initiatives. Corporate selling, general and administrative costs also declined due to a $27 million decrease in legal costs associated with the now-terminated acquisition of Farelogix. These decreases are substantially offset by an increase in the provision for expected credit losses of $38 million and $8 million in our Travel Solutions and Hospitality Solutions businesses, respectively, primarily related to fully reserving for aged balances related to certain customers, an increase in bankruptcy-related reserves, an increase in our forecasted credit losses due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and other general increases in bad debt from aging balances as applied under the newly adopted credit loss standard. Corporate related selling, general and administrative expenses increased as a result of a $20 million charge for severance benefits recorded in the current year, a $14 million abandonment charge associated with the closure of certain office locations in connection with our restructuring activities in the current year, and an increase of $32 million due to the reversal of a previously accrued loss in the prior year related to the US Airways legal matter. See Note 4. Restructuring Activities, to our consolidated financial statements for further details on restructuring activities.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense increased $79 million, or 50%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to additional borrowings under the 9.250% senior secured notes due 2025 and the 4.000% senior exchangeable notes due 2025 entered into during the second quarter of 2020, and the 7.375% senior secured notes due 2025 entered into in the third quarter of 2020. See Note 9. Debt for further details these debt transactions.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
** not meaningful
As a result of the debt refinancing transactions during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a loss on extinguishment of $22 million. In connection with the extinguishment in August 2020 of our 5.375% senior secured notes due April 2023, we recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of $10 million which consisted of a redemption premium of $7 million and the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs of $3 million. In connection with our extinguishment of our 5.25% senior secured notes due November 2023 and our Term Loan A in December 2020, we recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of $11 million which consisted of a redemption premium of $6 million and the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs of $5 million. See Note 9. Debt, to our consolidated financial statements for further details regarding these debt transactions.
Other expense, net
** not meaningful
Other expense, net increased $58 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to a $46 million charge related to termination payments in connection with our proposed acquisition of Farelogix, a pension plan settlement charge of $18 million, and a benefit recognized in the prior year associated with a reduction to our TRA liability due to the settlement of an audit. The increase is partially offset by a $10 million gain resulting from the sale of our headquarters buildings in the fourth quarter of 2020. See Note 3. Acquisitions, to our consolidated financial statements for
further detail regarding the Farelogix acquisition and Note 12. Leases, to our consolidated financial statements for further details regarding the sale and leaseback transaction.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 3.0% and 17.7%, respectively. The decrease in the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 was primarily due to a $202 million valuation allowance recorded on tax losses generated in the current tax year related to the impact of COVID-19 on our results of operations and various discrete items recorded in each of the respective periods.
The differences between our effective tax rate and the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate primarily resulted from our geographic mix of taxable income in various tax jurisdictions, tax permanent differences, valuation allowances, and tax credits.
Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Revenue
Travel Solutions-Revenue increased $94 million, or 3%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year, primarily due to:
•a $79 million, or 3% increase in transaction-based distribution revenue primarily due to a 1% increase in Direct Billable Bookings to 566 million and growth in the average booking fee rate during the year ended December 31, 2019 due to a discrete shift in the distribution pricing structure for specific European carriers and favorable mix primarily resulting from growth in hotel bookings which have a higher rate; and
•a $15 million increase in IT solutions revenue primarily due to a $10 million increase in commercial and operations revenue driven by license fee revenue from new implementations recognized upon delivery to the customer as well as an increase in revenue related to services and new implementations. Additionally, reservation revenue increased $5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year primarily driven by the acquisition of Radixx and organic growth in our existing customer base despite the decline in Passengers Boarded which was driven by the demigration of the certain customers as well as the impact of Jet Airways' insolvency and the impact of the 737 Max incident on a particular customer.
Hospitality Solutions-Revenue increased $20 million, or 7%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily driven by growth in SynXis Software and Services revenue of $17 million, or 7%, due to an increase in transaction volumes of 22% to 108 million, which includes the migration of certain brands of Wyndham Hotels over the first half of 2018 and early 2019. The migration of these enterprise hotel brands reduced the average rate of our transaction revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 versus the prior year. Additionally, DX service revenue increased $3 million.
Cost of Revenue, excluding technology costs
Travel Solutions-Cost of revenue increased $58 million, or 4%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year, partially as a result of a $71 million increase in incentive consideration primarily due to volume growth in North America bookings as well as rate increases across all regions. The increase is offset by a reduction in labor and professional services costs of $14 million.
Hospitality Solutions-Cost of revenue increased $15 million, or 11%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily driven by a $14 million increase in transaction-related costs to support the growth of our business.
Corporate-Cost of revenue associated with corporate costs increased $2 million, or 40%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily driven by an increase in headcount-related expenses.
Depreciation and amortization-Depreciation and amortization decreased $3 million, or 8% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to customer implementations that became fully amortized during the year.
Amortization of upfront incentive consideration-Amortization of upfront incentive consideration increased $5 million, or 7%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year primarily due to an increase in upfront consideration provided to travel agencies.
Technology Costs
Technology costs increased $187 million, or 17%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year. The increase in both our Travel Solutions and Hospitality Solutions businesses is primarily driven by the decline in the capitalization mix of our technology spend as we implement opensource and cloud-based solutions, resulting in an increase in labor costs of $124 million and $29 million, respectively. Investments pertaining to the modernization, stability, and security of our technology platforms resulted in increased technology costs of $32 million and $4 million in our Travel Solutions and Hospitality Solutions businesses, respectively. Depreciation and amortization increased $11 million compared to the prior year related to our Hospitality Solutions business, primarily due to the completion of software developed for internal use. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in labor-related costs in both our Travel Solutions and Hospitality Solutions businesses of $9 million and $8 million, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $48 million, or 9%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year, primarily driven by an increase in labor costs of $13 million and $2 million in our Travel Solutions and Hospitality Solutions businesses, respectively, and an increase in the provision for expected credit losses of $13 million in our Travel Solutions business. Corporate selling, general and administrative expenses increased due to an increase in legal costs associated with the now-terminated acquisition of Farelogix of $41 million, an increase in labor costs of $9 million, and an increase in other antitrust litigation expenses of $3 million. The increase was partially offset by the reversal of our previously accrued loss related to the US Airways legal matter for $32 million. See Note 17. Commitments and Contingencies, to our consolidated financial statements for further information.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 was 17.7% and 14.4%, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the same period in 2018 was primarily due to the impact of 2018 adjustments related to the enactment of the TCJA for deferred taxes and foreign tax effects of $27 million and, in 2019, an unfavorable impact of our geographic mix of taxable income, partially offset by an increase in net favorable U.S. tax permanent differences and certain tax credits and incentives.
The differences between our effective tax rate and the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate primarily resulted from our geographic mix of taxable income in various tax jurisdictions, tax permanent differences and tax credits.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In the current environment, our current principal sources of liquidity is our cash and cash equivalents on hand. As a result of the significant adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial results and liquidity, we took the following actions in 2020:
•Raised $1.1 billion from the issuance of senior secured and exchangeable notes;
•Raised $598 million in net proceeds from our common stock and mandatory convertible preferred offerings;
•Drew down on our Revolver in the amount of $375 million;
•Reduced our real estate footprint with the sale and leaseback of our headquarters buildings, resulting in net proceeds of $69 million;
•Implemented cost-savings actions as described in "-Recent Developments Affecting our Results of Operations";
•Refinanced over $2 billion of debt;
•Extended our debt maturities to 2023 for the Revolver and 2024 and beyond for our remaining debt maturities; and
•Suspended common stock dividends and share repurchases under our Share Repurchase Program.
Our ending cash balance as of December 31, 2020 was $1.5 billion. See "-Recent Events Impacting Our Liquidity and Capital Resources” for further information.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our cash and cash equivalents, Revolver and outstanding letters of credit were as follows (in thousands):
On March 17, 2020, we drew $375 million under the Revolver to supplement our liquidity needs. We had $375 million outstanding under the Revolver as of December 31, 2020 and no balance outstanding as of December 31, 2019. Borrowing availability under our Revolver is reduced by our outstanding letters of credit and restricted cash collateral. We had outstanding letters of credit totaling $10 million and $12 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which reduced our overall credit capacity under the Revolver. Our Revolver matures on November 23, 2023 at the earliest and February 22, 2024 at the latest, depending on certain "springing" maturity conditions. See “-Senior Secured Credit Facilities .”
We consider cash equivalents to be highly liquid investments that are readily convertible into cash. Securities with contractual maturities of three months or less, when purchased, are considered cash equivalents. We record changes in a book overdraft position, in which our bank account is not overdrawn but recently issued and outstanding checks result in a negative general ledger balance, as cash flows from financing activities. We invest in a money market fund which is classified as cash and cash equivalents in our consolidated balance sheets and statements of cash flows. We held no short-term investments as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
We do not consider the undistributed earnings to be indefinitely reinvested as of December 31, 2020, with certain limited exceptions. We consider the undistributed capital investments in our foreign subsidiaries to be indefinitely reinvested as of December 31, 2020, and, accordingly, have not provided deferred taxes on any outside basis differences. Our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities held by our foreign subsidiaries are available to satisfy domestic liquidity needs arising in the ordinary course of business, including liquidity needs associated with our domestic debt service requirements.
Liquidity Outlook
Given the magnitude of travel decline and the uncertain duration of the COVID-19 impact, we continue to monitor travel activity and take additional steps should we determine they are necessary to support our liquidity position. During the fourth quarter of 2020, in conjunction with a refinancing transaction, we reduced the minimum liquidity requirement under our Senior Secured Credit Facilities from $450 million to $300 million, which remains in place as long as the covenant suspension resulting from a "Material Travel Event Disruption" (See "-Senior Secured Credit Facilities " below) remains in effect. Through our refinancing efforts, with the exception of the Revolver as described above, we also extended our debt maturity profile to 2024 such that we have no significant near-term debt maturities.
We believe that approximately two-thirds of our cost structure is adjustable in the near-term, comprised largely of incentive expenses that decline generally in line with bookings and including other variable expenses that are subject to our cost savings measures. A significant amount of variable expense has declined in line with the overall reduction in travel volumes resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Our technology costs are less variable in nature than other transaction-based costs and include costs associated with our technology transformation. Technology costs represent a significant portion of our cost base that is not considered adjustable in the near term. As noted above, we implemented cost-savings actions, to manage our ongoing cost structure. See "-Recent Developments Affecting our Results of Operations" for further information.
We utilize cash and cash equivalents, supplemented by our Revolver, primarily to pay our operating expenses, make capital expenditures, invest in our information technology infrastructure, products and offerings, pay taxes, pay quarterly dividends on our Preferred Stock (as defined below) when declared, and service our debt and other long-term liabilities. We have suspended share repurchases under our Share Repurchase Program as well as the payment of quarterly cash dividends on our common stock, effective with respect to the dividends occurring after the March 30, 2020 payment.
Due to the significant adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, we have generated significant net operating losses in the current year. As a result, we do not expect to be a U.S. federal cash taxpayer in 2021.
Given the near-term risks around transaction volumes in the global travel industry, particularly air travel transaction volumes, including from airlines’ insolvency or suspension of service or aircraft groundings, we cannot provide assurance that the assumptions used to estimate our liquidity requirements will be accurate. However, based on our assumptions and estimates with respect to our financial condition and expected transaction volumes, we believe that we have resources to sufficiently fund our liquidity requirements over at least the next twelve months. We may conduct additional debt or equity offerings to provide additional liquidity, pay down debt or support future strategic investments. See “-Recent Events Impacting Our Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
The ongoing effects of COVID-19 on our operations and global bookings have had, and we believe they will continue to have, a material negative impact on our financial results and liquidity, and this negative impact may continue well beyond the
containment of the outbreak. On an ongoing basis, we will evaluate and consider strategic acquisitions, divestitures, joint ventures, equity method investments, or outstanding debt obligations in open market or in privately negotiated transactions, as well as other transactions we believe may create stockholder value, improve our liquidity position, enhance financial performance, or support future strategic investments. These transactions may require cash expenditures or generate proceeds and, to the extent they require cash expenditures, may be funded through a combination of cash on hand, debt or equity offerings, or utilization of our Revolver.
Our ability to generate cash depends on many factors beyond our control, and any failure to meet our debt service obligations could harm our business, financial condition and results of operations. Our ability to make payments on and to refinance our indebtedness, and to fund working capital needs and planned capital expenditures will depend on our ability to generate cash in the future, which is subject to general economic, financial, competitive, business, legislative, regulatory and other factors that are beyond our control, including the impacts of COVID-19. See “Risk Factors-The ongoing impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our business and the impact on our results of operations is highly uncertain" and "-We may require more cash than we generate in our operating activities, and additional funding on reasonable terms or at all may not be available.”
Recent Events Impacting Our Liquidity and Capital Resources
Debt Agreements
On December 17, 2020, Sabre GLBL entered into a Sixth Term A Loan Refinancing and Incremental Amendment extending debt maturities to 2027. Refer to "-Senior Secured Credit Facilities" below for further information.
On August 27, 2020, Sabre GLBL entered into a new debt agreement consisting of $850 million aggregate principal amount of the 7.375% senior secured notes due 2025 (the "September 2025 Notes"). The September 2025 Notes are jointly and severally, irrevocably and unconditionally guaranteed by Sabre Holdings and all of Sabre GLBL’s restricted subsidiaries that guarantee Sabre GLBL’s credit facility. The September 2025 Notes bear interest at a rate of 7.375% per annum and interest payments are due semi-annually in arrears on March 1 and September 1 of each year, beginning on March 1, 2021. The September 2025 Notes mature on September 1, 2025. The net proceeds received from the sale of the September 2025 Notes, net of underwriting fees and commissions, plus cash on hand, were used to: (1) repay approximately $319 million principal amount of debt under the Term Loan A; (2) redeem all of the $530 million outstanding 5.375% senior secured notes due 2023; and (3) repay approximately $3 million principal amount of debt under the Term Loan B. See Note 9. Debt, to our consolidated financial statements for further information.
On April 17, 2020, Sabre GLBL entered into two new debt agreements consisting of the following: (1) $775 million aggregate principal amount of 9.25% senior secured notes due 2025 (the "Secured Notes") and (2) $345 million aggregate principal amount of 4.000% senior exchangeable notes due 2025 (the "Exchangeable Notes," and together with the Secured Notes, the "Notes"). See Note 9. Debt, to our consolidated financial statements for further information.
The Secured Notes are jointly and severally, irrevocably and unconditionally guaranteed by Sabre Holdings and all of Sabre GLBL’s restricted subsidiaries that guarantee the Issuer’s credit facility. The Secured Notes bear interest at a rate of 9.250% per annum and interest payments are due semi-annually on April 15 and October 15 of each year, beginning with October 15, 2020. The Secured Notes mature on April 15, 2025.
The Exchangeable Notes are senior, unsecured obligations of Sabre GLBL, accrue interest payable semi-annually in arrears and mature on April 15, 2025, unless earlier repurchased or exchanged. The Exchangeable Notes are exchangeable at their holders’ election, under specified circumstances, into consideration based on Sabre common stock. This consideration consists of shares of Sabre common stock, cash, or a mixture of the two at Sabre GLBL’s election. Upon any future occurrence of a “fundamental change” (as defined in the indenture governing the Exchangeable Notes), holders may require Sabre GLBL to repurchase their Exchangeable Notes at a price equal to principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest. The Exchangeable Notes bear interest at a rate of 4.00% per annum and interest payments are due semi-annually on April 15 and October 15 of each year, beginning with October 15, 2020. The Exchangeable Notes are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by Sabre and Sabre Holdings. The net proceeds from the sales of the Notes are being used for general corporate purposes.
Equity Offerings
On August 24, 2020, we completed concurrent offerings of (1) 3,340,000 shares of our 6.50% Series A Mandatory Convertible Preferred Stock (the "Preferred Stock") which generated net proceeds of approximately $323 million and (2) 41,071,429 shares of common stock which generated net proceeds of approximately $275 million.
Unless previously converted, each share of Preferred Stock will automatically convert, for settlement on the mandatory conversion date, which is expected to be September 1, 2023 into between 11.9048 and 14.2857 shares of the Company’s common stock, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments. The number of shares of the Company’s common stock issuable upon conversion will be determined based on the average volume-weighted average price per share of the Company’s common stock over the 20 consecutive trading day period beginning on, and including, the 21st scheduled trading day immediately before September 1, 2023. Holders of the Preferred Stock will have the right to convert all or any portion of their shares of their Preferred Stock at any time until the close of business on the mandatory conversion date. Early conversions that are not in connection with a “make-whole fundamental change” (as defined in Certificate of Designations governing the Preferred Stock) will be settled at the minimum conversion rate. In addition, the conversion rate applicable to such an early conversion may in certain circumstances be increased to compensate holders of the Preferred Stock for certain unpaid accumulated dividends. If a
make-whole fundamental change occurs, then holders of the Preferred Stock will, in certain circumstances, be entitled to convert their Preferred Stock at an increased conversion rate for a specified period of time and receive an amount to compensate them for certain unpaid accumulated dividends and any remaining future scheduled dividend payments. The Preferred Stock is not subject to redemption at the Company’s option. If the Company liquidates, dissolves or winds up, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, then, subject to the rights of any of the Company’s creditors or holders of any outstanding liquidation senior stock, each share of Preferred Stock will entitle the holder thereof to receive payment for the following amount out of the Company’s assets or funds legally available for distribution to its stockholders, before any such assets or funds are distributed to, or set aside for the benefit of, any liquidation junior stock: (1) the liquidation preference per share of Preferred Stock, which is equal to $100.00 per share; and (2) all unpaid dividends that will have accumulated on such share to, but excluding, the date of such payment.
Dividends on Preferred Stock
The Preferred Stock accumulates cumulative dividends at a rate per annum equal to 6.50% and dividends are payable when, as and if declared by our board of directors, out of funds legally available for their payment to the extent paid in cash, quarterly in arrears on March 1, June 1, September 1 and December 1 of each year, beginning on December 1, 2020 and ending on, and including, September 1, 2023. Declared dividends on the Preferred Stock will be payable, at our election, in cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock. We recorded $8 million of preferred stock dividends in our consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid cash dividends on our preferred stock of $6 million. In February 2021, the Board of Directors declared a dividend of $1.625 per share on Preferred Stock payable on March 1, 2021 to holders of record of the Preferred Stock on February 15, 2021. Subject to certain exceptions, so long as any share of Preferred Stock remains outstanding, no dividends or distributions will be declared or paid on shares of the Company’s common stock or any other class or series of stock ranking junior to the Preferred Stock, and no common stock or any other class or series stock ranking junior to the Preferred Stock will be purchased, redeemed or otherwise acquired for value by the Company or any of its subsidiaries unless, in each case, all accumulated and unpaid dividends for all prior completed dividend periods, if any, have been paid in full. In addition, if (i) less than all accumulated and unpaid dividends on the outstanding Preferred Stock have been declared and paid as of any dividend payment date or (ii) the board of directors declares a dividend on the Preferred Stock that is less than the total amount of unpaid dividends on the outstanding preferred stock that would accumulate to, but excluding, any dividend payment date, no dividends may be declared or paid on any parity stock, unless dividends are declared on the shares of Preferred Stock on a pro rata basis. If accumulated dividends on the outstanding Preferred Stock have not been declared and paid in an aggregate amount corresponding to six or more dividend periods, whether or not consecutive, then, subject to the other provisions of the Preferred Stock, the authorized number of the Company’s directors will automatically increase by two and the holders of the Preferred Stock, voting together as a single class with the holders of each class or series of voting parity stock, if any, will have the right to elect two directors to fill such two new directorships at the Company’s next annual meeting of stockholders (or, if earlier, at a special meeting of the Company’s stockholders called for such purpose).
Dividends on Common Stock
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid a quarterly cash dividend of $0.14 per share of our common stock totaling $39 million. As a result of the significant adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial results and liquidity, on March 16, 2020, we announced the suspension of the payment of quarterly cash dividends on our common stock, effective with respect to the dividends occurring after the March 30, 2020 payment. Future cash dividends, if any, will be at the discretion of our board of directors and the amount of cash dividends per share will depend upon, among other things, our future operations and earnings, capital requirements and surplus, general financial condition, contractual restrictions, number of shares of common stock outstanding and other factors the board of directors may deem relevant. The timing and amount of future dividend payments will be at the discretion of our board of directors.
Share Repurchase Program
In February 2017, we announced the approval of a multi-year share repurchase program (the "Share Repurchase Program") to purchase up to $500 million of Sabre's common stock outstanding. Repurchases under the Share Repurchase Program may take place in the open market or privately negotiated transactions. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not repurchase any shares pursuant to the Share Repurchase Program. On March 16, 2020, we announced the suspension of share repurchases under the Share Repurchase Program in conjunction with certain cash management measures we are undertaking as a result of the market conditions caused by COVID-19. Approximately $287 million remains authorized for repurchase under the Share Repurchase Program as of December 31, 2020.
Senior Secured Credit Facilities
On December 17, 2020, Sabre GLBL entered into a Sixth Term A Loan Refinancing and Incremental Amendment to our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, resulting in additional Term Loan B borrowings of $637 million ("Other Term B Loans") due December 17, 2027. The applicable interest rate margins for the Other Term B Loans is 4.00% per annum for Eurocurrency rate loans and 3.00% per annum for base rate loans, with a floor of 0.75% for the Eurocurrency rate, and 1.75% for the base bate, respectively. The net proceeds from the issuance were used to fully redeem both the $500 million outstanding 5.25% senior secured notes due November 2023 and the $134 million outstanding Term Loan A. Additionally, on December 17, 2020, Sabre GLBL entered into "an Amendment No. 3 to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the "Pro Rata Amendment and the Refinancing Amendment")" which reduced the minimum liquidity requirement in the financial performance described outlined
below from $450 million to $300 million. We incurred no material additional indebtedness as a result of these transactions, other than amounts covering certain interest, fees and expenses.
On August 27, 2020, Sabre GLBL entered into a Third Revolving Facility Refinancing Amendment to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the "Third Revolving Refinancing Amendment") and the First Term A Loan Extension Amendment to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the "Term A Loan Extension Amendment" and, together with the Third Revolving Refinancing Amendment, the "2020 Refinancing"), which extended the maturity of the Revolver from July 1, 2022 to November 23, 2023 at the earliest and February 22, 2024 at the latest, depending on certain "springing" maturity conditions as described in the Third Revolving Refinancing Amendment. In the event that, as of November 23, 2023, the maturity date of the Term Loan B has not been extended or refinanced to a date after August 20, 2024, the extension is subject to an earlier "springing" maturity date of November 23, 2023. In addition to extending the maturity date of the Revolver, the 2020 Refinancing also provides that, during any covenant suspension resulting from a "Material Travel Event Disruption" (as defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement and discussed further below), including during the current covenant suspension period, we must maintain liquidity of at least $450 million on a monthly basis (reduced to $300 million pursuant to the refinancing in December 2020 as discussed above). In addition, during this covenant suspension, the 2020 Refinancing limits certain payments to equity holders, certain investments, certain prepayments of unsecured debt and the ability of certain subsidiaries to incur additional debt. The applicable margins for the Revolver are between 2.50% and 1.75% per annum for Eurocurrency rate loans and between 1.50% and 0.75% per annum for base rate loans, with the applicable margin for any quarter reduced by 25 basis points (up to 75 basis points total) if the Senior Secured First-Lien Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement) is less than 3.75 to 1.0, 3.00 to 1.0, or 2.25 to 1.0, respectively. These interest rate spreads for the Revolver were increased by 0.25%, during covenant suspension, in connection with the 2020 Refinancing.
The applicable margins for the Term Loan B are 2.00% per annum for Eurocurrency rate loans and 1.00% per annum for base rate loans. The maturity date of Term Loan B is February 22, 2024.
Under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, the loan parties are subject to certain customary non-financial covenants, including certain restrictions on incurring certain types of indebtedness, creation of liens on certain assets, making of certain investments, and payment of dividends, as well as a maximum leverage ratio. Pursuant to Credit Agreement Amendments, effective July 18, 2016, the maximum leverage ratio has been adjusted to be based on the Total Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement) and we are required, at all times (no longer solely when a threshold amount of revolving loans or letters of credit were outstanding), to maintain a Total Net Leverage Ratio of less than 4.5 to 1.0.
Under the terms of the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, the financial covenant related to our leverage ratio is suspended for a limited time if a “Material Travel Event Disruption” has occurred. As defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, a “Material Travel Event Disruption” means, in any given calendar month, a decrease of 10% or more in the number of “domestic revenue passenger enplanements” (determined by reference to the monthly “Air Traffic Statistics” published by the Bureau of Transportation Statistics) has occurred as a result of or in connection with a Travel Event (as defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement) as compared to the number of “domestic revenue passenger enplanements” (determined by reference to the monthly “Air Traffic Statistics” published by the Bureau of Transportation Statistics) occurring in the corresponding month during the prior year or, if a Material Travel Event Disruption existed during such month, the most recent corresponding month in which no Material Travel Event Disruption occurred/existed.
As of December 31, 2020, the capacity reductions by domestic airlines in response to the COVID-19 outbreak and related decreases in domestic passenger enplanements, and a recent sharp decline in GDS bookings, has led to a finding that a Material Travel Event Disruption has occurred. As such, the leverage ratio covenant has been suspended for at least the fourth quarter of 2020 and first quarter of 2021.
We are also required to pay down the Term Loan B by an amount equal to 50% of annual excess cash flow, as defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement. This percentage requirement may decrease or be eliminated if certain leverage ratios are achieved. Based on our results for the year ended December 31, 2019, we were not required to make an excess cash flow payment in 2020, and no excess cash flow payment is required in 2021 with respect to our results for the year ended December 31, 2020. We are further required to pay down the term loan with proceeds from certain asset sales or borrowings as defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement.
The Eurocurrency rate is based on LIBOR. In July 2017, the Financial Conduct Authority announced its intention to phase out LIBOR by the end of 2021, and subsequently extended the phase-out date to June 30, 2023. If a published U.S. dollar LIBOR rate is unavailable, the interest rates on our debt indexed to LIBOR will be determined using various alternative methods set forth in our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, any of which could result in interest obligations that are more than or that do not otherwise correlate over time with the payments that would have been made on this debt if U.S. dollar LIBOR were available in its current form. See “Risk Factors-We are exposed to interest rate fluctuations.” We anticipate amending our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement prior to the phaseout of LIBOR to provide for a Eurocurrency rate alternative to LIBOR.
Tax Receivable Agreement
Immediately prior to the closing of our initial public offering in April 2014, we entered into the Tax Receivable Agreement (the "TRA"), which provides the right to receive future payments from us to stockholders and equity award holders that were our stockholders and equity award holders, respectively, immediately prior to the closing of our initial public offering (collectively, the
"Pre-IPO Existing Stockholders"). In connection with the TRA, we made payments, including interest, of $72 million in January 2020, $105 million in 2019, and $60 million in 2018, respectively. In December 2019, we exercised our right under the terms of the TRA to accelerate our remaining payments under the TRA and make an early termination payment of $1 million, to the Pre-IPO Existing Shareholders, which was included in the January 2020 payment of $72 million described above. As a result, no future payments are required to be made to the Pre-IPO Existing Stockholders under the TRA.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities totaled $770 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $1.4 billion decrease in operating cash flow from 2019 is primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 on the travel industry and on our results of operations during 2020, severance payments of $48 million related to restructuring activities during 2020, additional interest payments of $29 million resulting from debt refinancing activities during 2020, acquisition termination fees paid in 2020 of $21 million, and net cash outflows to carriers resulting from the cancellations of previous bookings. This decrease in operating cash flow was partially offset by a $44 million decrease in upfront incentive consideration payments and a $31 million decrease in tax payments.
We expect our cash burn rate to improve sequentially during 2021. We expect the first quarter of 2021 to be negatively impacted by the timing of significant working capital items relative to other quarters in 2021, including the payment of a significant portion of our remaining $23 million severance liability.
Cash provided by operating activities totaled $581 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $144 million decrease in cash flow provided by operating activities from 2018 is primarily due to the increase in technology expenditures, driven by the execution of our technology strategy, including cloud migration, mainframe offload and utilization of agile development methods, which increases the expensed portion of our total technology spend and reduces net income.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had $69 million provided by proceeds from the sale of our two headquarter buildings. Cash provided from the sale was offset by cash used of $65 million on capital expenditures, including $41 million related to software developed for internal use.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we used cash of $243 million in investing activities, including $107 million used in the acquisition of Radixx, net of cash acquired, and $89 million related to software developed for internal use. Additionally, we used cash of $20 million as an advance of purchase price to Farelogix for certain attorneys' fees. Refer to Note 3. Acquisitions for additional information on the now-terminated Farelogix acquisition agreement.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $1,838 million for financing activities. Significant highlights of our financing activities included:
•proceeds from borrowings under the Notes of $1,970 million;
•proceeds from issuance of stock of $598 million;
•proceeds from borrowings under the Revolver of $375 million;
•payment of $1,030 million on senior secured notes due 2023;
•payment of $503 million on Term Loan A and Term Loan B;
•fourth and final annual payment on the TRA liability for $72 million , excluding interest;
•payment of $78 million on debt issuance costs;
•payment of $39 million in dividends on our common stock;
•net payments of $6 million from the settlement of employee stock-option awards, including payments of $6 million in income tax withholdings associated with the settlement of employee restricted-stock awards; and
•payment of $5 million on our capital leases.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we used $410 million for financing activities. Significant highlights of our financing activities included:
•payment of $154 million in dividends on our common stock;
•payment of $45 million on our revolving credit facility and $62 million ion our Term Loan A and Term Loan B, offset by proceeds of $45 million from borrowings on our revolving credit facility;
•annual payment on the TRA liability for $101 million, excluding interest;
•repurchase of 3,673,768 shares of our common stock outstanding totaling $78 million; and
•net payments of $6 million from the settlement of employee stock-option awards, including $7 million in proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options, net of payments for $13 million in income tax withholdings associated with the settlement of employee stock-based awards.
Discontinued Travelocity Business
Cash flows used in discontinued operating activities were $3 million and $2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The cash flows used by discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 primarily resulted from expenses associated with legal contingencies related to hotel occupancy taxes.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, our contractual obligations were as follows (in thousands):
_______________________
(1)Includes all interest and principal of borrowings under our senior secured credit facilities, senior secured notes due 2025, senior exchangeable notes due 2025 and finance lease obligations. Under certain circumstances, we are required to pay a percentage of the excess cash flow, if any, generated each year to our lenders which obligation is not reflected in the table above. Interest on the term loan is based on the LIBOR rate plus a base margin and includes the effect of interest rate swaps. For purposes of this table, we have used projected LIBOR rates for all future periods. See Note 9. Debt, to our consolidated financial statements.
(2)We lease approximately 1.3 million square feet of office space in 70 locations in 38 countries. Lease payment escalations are based on fixed annual increases, local consumer price index changes or market rental reviews. We have renewal options of various term lengths in approximately 50 leases. We have no purchase options and no restrictions imposed by our leases concerning dividends or additional debt. See Note 12. Leases, to our consolidated financial statements.
(3)Represents minimum amounts due to DXC under the terms of an outsourcing agreement through which DXC manages a significant portion of our information technology systems. Also reflects minimum amounts due under other information technology agreements that contain minimum committed spend. Actual payments may vary significantly from the minimum amounts presented.
(4)Purchase obligations represent an estimate of all open purchase orders and contractual obligations in the ordinary course of business for which we have not received the goods or services as of December 31, 2020. Although open purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule and adjust our requirements based on our business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services.
(5)Our letters of credit consist of stand-by letters of credit, underwritten by a group of lenders, which we primarily issue in the normal course of business. The contractual expiration dates of these letters of credit are shown in the table above. There were no claims made against any standby letters of credit during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
(6)Unrecognized tax benefits include associated interest and penalties. The timing of related cash payments for substantially all of these liabilities is inherently uncertain because the ultimate amount and timing of such liabilities is affected by factors which are variable and outside our control.
(7)Excludes pension obligations, see Note 16. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans, to our consolidated financial statements.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no off balance sheet arrangements during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information related to Recent Accounting Pronouncements is included in Note 1. Summary of Business and Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Critical Accounting Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses and other financial information. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates, and our reported financial condition and results of operations could vary under different assumptions and conditions. In addition, our reported financial condition and results of operations could vary due to a change in the application of a particular accounting standard.
Our accounting policies that include significant estimates and assumptions include: (i) estimation for revenue recognition and multiple performance obligation arrangements, (ii) determination of the fair value of assets and liabilities acquired in a business combination, (iii) the evaluation of the recoverability of the carrying value of long-lived assets and goodwill, (iv) assumptions utilized to test recoverability of capitalized implementation costs, (v) judgments in capitalization of software developed for internal use, and (vi) the evaluation of uncertainties surrounding the calculation of our tax assets and liabilities. We regard an accounting estimate underlying our financial statements as a “critical accounting estimate” if the accounting estimate requires us to make assumptions about matters that are uncertain at the time of estimation and if changes in the estimate are reasonably likely to occur and could have a material effect on the presentation of financial condition, changes in financial condition, or results of operations.
We have included below a discussion of the accounting policies involving material estimates and assumptions that we believe are most critical to the preparation of our financial statements, how we apply such policies and how results differing from our estimates and assumptions would affect the amounts presented in our financial statements. We have discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these accounting policies with our Audit Committee. Although we believe these policies to be the most critical, other accounting policies also have a significant effect on our financial statements and certain of these policies also require the use of estimates and assumptions. For further information about our significant accounting policies, see Note 1. Summary of Business and Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition and Multiple Performance Obligation Arrangements
Our agreements with customers of our Travel Solutions business may have multiple performance obligations which generally include software solutions through SaaS and hosted delivery, professional service fees and implementation services. In addition, from time to time, we enter into agreements with customers to provide access to Travel Solutions' GDS and, at or near the same time, enter into a separate agreement to provide IT solutions through SaaS and hosted delivery. These multiple performance obligation arrangements involve judgments, including estimates of the selling prices of goods and services, attribution of variable consideration, assessments of the likelihood of nonpayment and estimates of total costs and costs to complete a project.
Revenue recognition from our IT Solutions products requires significant judgments such as identifying distinct performance obligations including material rights within an agreement, estimating the total contract consideration and allocating amounts to each distinct performance obligation, determining whether variable pricing within a contract meets the allocation objective, and forecasting future volumes. For a small subset of our contracts, we are required to forecast volumes as a result of pricing variability within the contract in order to calculate the rate for revenue recognition. Any changes in these judgments and estimates could have an impact on the revenue recognized in future periods. Our forecasted volumes were significantly impacted in 2020 due to the impacts of COVID-19 on our customers which had, and will continue to have, a significant impact on our current and future revenues.
We evaluate revenue recognition for agreements with customers which generally are represented by individual contracts but could include groups of contracts if the contracts are executed at or near the same time. Typically, access to our GDS and our professional service fees are separated from the implementation and software services. We account for separate performance obligations on an individual basis with value assigned to each performance obligation based on our best estimate of relative standalone selling price ("SSP"). Judgment is required to determine the SSP for each distinct performance obligation. SSP is assessed annually using a historical analysis of contracts with customers executed in the most recently completed calendar year to determine the range of selling prices applicable to a distinct good or service. In making these judgments, we analyze various factors, including discounting practices, price lists, contract prices, value differentiators, customer segmentation and overall market and economic conditions. Based on these results, the estimated SSP is set for each distinct product or service delivered to customers. As our market strategies evolve, we may modify pricing practices in the future which could result in changes to SSP.
Deferred customer advances and discounts are amortized against revenue in future periods as the related revenue is earned. Our contract assets include revenue recognized for services already transferred to a customer, for which the fulfillment of another contractual performance obligation is required, before we have the unconditional right to bill and collect based on contract terms. Contract assets are reviewed for recoverability on a periodic basis based on a review of impairment indicators. Deferred customer advances and discounts are reviewed for recoverability based on future contracted revenues and estimated direct costs of the contract when a significant event occurs that could impact the recoverability of the assets, such as a significant contract modification or early renewal of contract terms. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not impair any of these assets as a result of the related contracts becoming uncollectable, modified or canceled. Contracts are priced to generate total revenues over the life of the contract that exceed any discounts or advances provided and any upfront costs incurred to implement the customer contract.
Air Booking Cancellation Reserve
Transaction revenue for airline travel reservations is recognized by Travel Solutions at the time of the booking of the reservation, net of estimated future cancellations. Cancellations prior to the day of departure are estimated based on the historical level of cancellation rates, adjusted to take into account any recent factors which could cause a change in those rates. In circumstances where expected cancellation rates or booking behavior changes, our estimates are revised, and in these circumstances, future cancellation rates could vary materially, with a corresponding variation in revenue net of estimated future cancellations. Factors that could have a significant effect on our estimates include global security issues, epidemics or pandemics (such as that experienced in the current year as a result of COVID-19), natural disasters, general economic conditions, the financial condition of travel suppliers, and travel related accidents. Our cancellation reserve is highly sensitive to our estimate of bookings that we expect will eventually travel, as well as to the mix of those bookings between domestic and international, given the varying rates paid by airline suppliers. The air booking cancellation reserve was $18 million as of December 31, 2020. If international cancellations increased by 10% on the same estimated base of cancelled bookings, the reserve as of December 31, 2020 would increase by $1 million. If total bookings expected to cancel increased by 10%, the reserve as of December 31, 2020 would increase by $2 million.
Allowance for Credit Losses
We develop and document our methodology used in determining the allowance for credit losses at the portfolio segment level. Within the travel portfolio segment, we identify airlines, hoteliers and travel agencies as each presenting unique risk characteristics associated with historical credit loss patterns unique to each and we determine the adequacy of our allowance for credit loss by assessing the risks and losses inherent in our receivables related to each.
We evaluate the collectability of our receivables based on a combination of factors. In circumstances where we are aware of a specific customer’s inability to meet its financial obligations to us, such as bankruptcy filings or failure to pay amounts due to us or others, we specifically provide for credit losses against amounts due to reduce the recorded receivable to the amount we reasonably believe will be collected. For all other customers, we record reserves for receivables, including unbilled receivables and contract assets, based on historical experience and the length of time the receivables are past due. The estimate of credit losses is developed by analyzing historical twelve-month collection rates and adjusting for current customer-specific factors indicating financial instability and other macroeconomic factors that correlate with the expected collectability of our receivables. All receivables aged over twelve months are fully reserved. Macro economic factors, including the economic downtown, lack of liquidity in the capital markets resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and lack of additional government funding, can have a significant effect on additions to the allowance as the pandemic may result in the restructuring or bankruptcy of additional customers. Given the uncertainties surrounding the duration and effects of COVID-19, we cannot provide assurance that the assumptions used in our estimates will be accurate and actual write-offs may vary from our estimates, resulting in a material impact to our results of operations. See Note 8. Credit Losses, to our consolidated financial statements for further considerations involved in the development of this estimate.
Business Combinations
Authoritative guidance for business combinations requires us to recognize separately from goodwill the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at their acquisition date fair values. Goodwill as of the acquisition date is measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. While we use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date as well as contingent consideration, where applicable, our estimates are inherently uncertain and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates.
Accounting for business combinations requires our management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date including our estimates for intangible assets, contractual obligations assumed, pre-acquisition contingencies, contingent consideration, where applicable, and previously-held investment interests. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain.
Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired include, but are not limited to: future expected cash flows, support agreements, consulting contracts, other customer contracts, acquired developed technologies and patents; the acquired company’s brand and competitive position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired brand will continue to be used in the combined company’s product portfolio; and discount rates. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
For a given acquisition, we may identify certain pre-acquisition contingencies as of the acquisition date and may extend our review and evaluation of these pre-acquisition contingencies throughout the measurement period in order to obtain sufficient information to assess whether we include these contingencies as a part of the fair value estimates of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and, if so, to determine their estimated amounts. If we cannot reasonably determine the fair value of a pre-acquisition contingency (non-income tax related) by the end of the measurement period, which is generally the case given the nature of such matters, we will recognize an asset or a liability for such pre-acquisition contingency if: (i) it is probable that an asset existed or a liability had been incurred at the acquisition date and (ii) the amount of the asset or liability can be reasonably
estimated. Subsequent to the measurement period, changes in our estimates of such contingencies will affect earnings and could have a material effect on our results of operations and financial position.
Depending on the circumstances, the fair value of contingent consideration is determined based on management’s best estimate of fair value given the specific facts and circumstances of the contractual arrangement, considering the likelihood of payment, payment terms and management’s best estimates of future performance results on the acquisition date, if applicable.
In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax related valuation allowances assumed in connection with a business combination are initially estimated as of the acquisition date. We reevaluate these items quarterly based upon facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date with any adjustments to our preliminary estimates being recorded to goodwill if identified within the measurement period. Subsequent to the measurement period or our final determination of the tax allowance’s or contingency’s estimated value, whichever comes first, changes to these uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances will affect our provision for income taxes in our consolidated statement of operations and could have a material impact on our results of operations and financial position.
Goodwill and Long-Lived Assets
We have two reporting units associated with our continuing operations: Travel Solutions and Hospitality Solutions. As a result of the Strategic Realignment, our historical Travel Network and Airline Solutions business segments have been combined into a new business segment, Travel Solutions. In connection with this reorganization, the historical Travel Network and Airline Solutions reporting units and their related goodwill were combined into a single Travel Solutions reporting unit, thereby requiring no reallocation of goodwill based on fair values. There was no change to our historical Hospitality Solutions reporting unit. Goodwill related to our reporting units totaled $2.6 billion as of December 31, 2020.
Due to triggering events related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we performed a quantitative assessment, as of March 31, 2020. This assessment was based on our current projections and was subject to various risks, uncertainties and estimates including: (1) forecasted revenues, expenses and cash flows, including future travel supplier capacity and load factors on those estimates and technology costs, (2) the duration and extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and our customers, (3) current discount and long-term growth rates, (4) the reduction in our market capitalization, (5) current market transaction trends and (6) changes to the regulatory environment impacting our industry. See Note 11. Fair Value Measurements, to our consolidated financial statements. In estimating fair value, we considered current estimates of recovery in global passenger traffic volume to pre-COVID-19 levels. Should a significant change in the estimated recovery period elongate further than our expectations, it could have a material impact on our estimates of fair value. Additionally, we increased discount rates to account for increased risk within our business and estimates. Our interim quantitative impairment assessment as of March 31, 2020 determined that our goodwill was not impaired.
We updated our goodwill assessment quarterly on a qualitative basis during 2020 and determined that our goodwill was not impaired at any reporting date in 2020. Our qualitative assessments considered recent information available regarding the anticipated duration of the recovery period which we believe to be a key assumption, including information as of November 2020 from the International Air Transport Association (IATA) that forecast in its base-case scenario that global passenger traffic is not expected to return to pre-COVID-19 levels until 2024. As of December 31, 2020, based on a qualitative analysis, the fair value exceeded the carrying value for each of our two reporting units by more than 20%. Additionally, we did not record any goodwill impairment charges for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Definite-lived intangible assets are assigned depreciable lives of two to thirty years, depending on classification, and are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of definite-lived intangible assets used in combination to generate cash flows largely independent of other assets may not be recoverable. If impairment indicators exist for definite-lived intangible assets, the undiscounted future cash flows associated with the expected service potential of the assets are compared to the carrying value of the assets. If our projection of undiscounted future cash flows is in excess of the carrying value of the intangible assets, no impairment charge is recorded. If our projection of undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying value, the intangible assets are then measured at fair value and an impairment charge is recorded based on the excess of the carrying value of the assets over its fair value. We also evaluate the need for additional impairment disclosures based on our Level 3 inputs. For fair value measurements categorized within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy, we disclose the valuation processes used by the reporting entity. We did not record material intangible asset impairment charges for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Capitalized Implementation Costs
Capitalized implementation costs represents upfront costs to implement new customer contracts under our SaaS and hosted revenue model. Capitalized implementation costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the related contract term, ranging from three to ten years, as they are recoverable through deferred or future revenues associated with the relevant contract. These assets are reviewed for recoverability on a periodic basis or when an event occurs that could impact the recoverability of the assets, such as the impact of COVID-19 on a particular customer, a significant contract modification or early renewal of contract terms. Recoverability is measured based on the future estimated revenue and direct costs of the contract compared to the capitalized implementation costs. During 2020, we considered current estimates of recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic to 2019 levels, which we believe to be a key assumption in our assessment of recoverability. We record an impairment charge for the portion of the asset considered unrecoverable in the period identified, while considering the uncertainties associated with these types of contracts and judgments made in estimating revenue and direct costs. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $10 million in impairments associated with unrecoverable amounts in capitalized
implementation costs. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded $2 million in impairments associated with unrecoverable amounts in capitalized implementation costs.
Capitalized Software Developed for Internal Use
We capitalize certain costs related to our infrastructure, software applications and reservation systems under authoritative guidance on software developed for internal use during the application development stage. Costs related to preliminary and post project development activities are expensed as incurred. When determining whether applicable costs qualify for capitalization, we use judgment in distinguishing between the preliminary project and application development stages of the project and in determining whether these costs result in additional functionality for existing internal use software. In 2019, our development teams substantially completed the transition to utilizing the agile development methodology, which is characterized by a more dynamic development process with iterative activities that involve planning, design, coding and testing. This methodology requires additional review of the stages to ensure the applicable criteria are met for capitalization and may be less likely to meet the criteria for capitalization. As we expected, this transition towards implementing this methodology reduced our capitalization of certain costs with a corresponding increase in our product and technology operating expenses. Costs that cannot be separated between maintenance of, and relatively minor upgrades and enhancements to, internal use software are also expensed as incurred.
During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we capitalized $41 million, $89 million, and $252 million, respectively, related to software developed for internal use. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an impairment charge of $5 million associated with software developed for internal use based on our analysis of the recoverability of such amounts.
Income and Non-Income Taxes
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of assets and liabilities. We regularly review deferred tax assets by jurisdiction to assess their potential realization and establish a valuation allowance for portions of such assets that we believe will not be ultimately realized. In performing this review, we make estimates and assumptions regarding projected future taxable income, the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences and the implementation of tax planning strategies. A change in these assumptions could cause an increase or decrease to the valuation allowance resulting in an increase or decrease in the effective tax rate, which could materially impact our results of operations. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused increased uncertainty in determining certain key assumptions within the assessment of our future taxable income upon which recognition of deferred tax assets is assessed. At year end, we had a valuation allowance on a portion of our deferred tax assets based on our assessment that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will not be realized. We believe that our estimates for the valuation allowances against deferred tax assets are appropriate based on current facts and circumstances.
When assessing the need for a valuation allowance, all positive and negative evidence is analyzed, including our ability to carry back net operating losses ("NOLs") to prior periods, the reversal of deferred tax liabilities, tax planning strategies and projected future taxable income. Significant losses related to COVID-19 resulted in a three-year cumulative loss in certain jurisdictions, which represents significant negative evidence regarding the ability to realize deferred tax assets. As a result, we established a valuation allowance on a portion of our U.S. deferred tax assets of $165 million as of December 31, 2020. We also established and maintained a U.S. state valuation allowance on current year losses and other deferred tax assets of $15 million and $5 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For non-U.S. deferred tax assets of certain subsidiaries, we established and maintained a valuation allowance on current year losses and other deferred tax assets of $71 million and $33 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We reassess these assumptions regularly, which could cause an increase or decrease to the valuation allowance resulting in an increase or decrease in the effective tax rate, and could materially impact our results of operations.
We operate in numerous countries where our income tax returns are subject to audit and adjustment by local tax authorities. Because we operate globally, the nature of the uncertain tax positions is often very complex and subject to change, and the amounts at issue can be substantial. It is inherently difficult and subjective to estimate such amounts, as we have to determine the probability of various possible outcomes. We re-evaluate uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis. This evaluation is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, effectively settled issues under audit and new audit activity. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had a liability, including interest and penalty, of $96 million and $81 million, respectively, for unrecognized tax benefits, of which $77 million and $63 million, respectively, would affect our effective tax rate if recognized. Such a change in recognition or measurement would result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the provision for income taxes from continuing operations.
Loss Contingencies
While certain legal proceedings and related indemnification obligations and certain tax matters to which we are a party specify the amounts claimed, these claims may not represent reasonably possible losses. Given the inherent uncertainties of litigation and tax claims, the ultimate outcome of these matters cannot be predicted, nor can the amount of possible loss or range of loss, if any, be reasonably estimated, except in circumstances where an aggregate litigation accrual has been recorded for probable and reasonably estimable loss contingencies. A determination of the amount of accrual required, if any, for these contingencies is made after careful analysis of each matter. The required accrual may change in the future due to new information or developments in each matter or changes in approach such as a change in settlement strategy in dealing with these matters. Changes in these factors could materially impact our results of operations.