ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on November 12, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and or the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the Private Units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our entire activity since inception has been to prepare for our IPO, which was consummated on January 14, 2021.
Results of Operations
Our only activities from November 12, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities and those necessary to consummate the IPO, described below. Following the IPO, we do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and marketable securities held after the IPO. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from November 12, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $8,996, which consists of operating and formation costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $84,836. Until the consummation of the IPO, our liquidity needs were satisfied through the receipt of $25,000 from our sale of the founder shares and advances from our Sponsor.
On January 14, 2021, we consummated our IPO of 11,500,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $115,000,000, which included the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 417,200 Private Units to our Sponsor and Ladenburg and its designees, generating gross proceeds of $4,172,000.
Following the IPO, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Units and Private Warrants, a total of $116,150,000 was placed in the trust account. In connection with the IPO, we incurred $6,038,360 consisting of $1,529,500 of underwriting fee, $4,220,500 of deferred underwriting fee, and $288,360 of other offering costs.
On November 19, 2020, the Company issued an unsecured promissory note to the Sponsor for an aggregate principal amount of $250,000 to be used for a portion of the expenses of the IPO. On December 4, 2020, the Company and the Sponsor effected a drawdown of the loan in the amount of $150,000. On January 14, 2021 the loan was repaid in full using a portion of the IPO proceeds allocated to the payment of offering expenses.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, to acquire a target business and to pay our expenses relating thereto. To the extent that our capital stock is used in whole or in part as consideration to effect a business combination, the remaining funds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business. Such working capital funds could be used in a variety of ways including continuing or expanding the target business’ operations, for strategic acquisitions and for marketing, research and development of existing or new products. Such funds could also be used to repay any operating expenses or finders’ fees which we had incurred prior to the completion of our business combination if the funds available to us outside of the trust account were insufficient to cover such expenses.
We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the Insiders, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of notes may be convertible into Private Units, at a price of $10.00 per Private Unit. The units would be identical to the Private Units sold in the Private Placement.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an agreement to pay our Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on January 14, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified not identified any critical accounting policies.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.