ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes thereto, which appear elsewhere in this document. In this discussion, all dollar amounts are presented in thousands, except share and per share data.
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. We intend statements which are not historical in nature to be, and are hereby identified as “forward-looking statements” to be covered by the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. In addition, the Company’s senior management may make forward-looking statements orally to analysts, investors, the media and others. This safe harbor requires that we specify important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in forward-looking statements made by or on behalf of us. We cannot promise that our expectations in such forward-looking statements will turn out to be correct. Our actual results could be materially different from and worse than our expectations. See “Forward-Looking Statements” below for specific important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in forward-looking statements.
Executive Summary and Overview
In this discussion, “Safety” refers to Safety Insurance Group, Inc. and “our Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Safety Insurance Group, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries. Our subsidiaries consist of Safety Insurance Company (“Safety Insurance”), Safety Indemnity Insurance Company (“Safety Indemnity”), Safety Property and Casualty Insurance Company (“Safety P&C”), Safety Northeast Insurance Company (“Safety Northeast”), Safety Asset Management Corporation (“SAMC”), and Safety Management Corporation, which is SAMC’s holding company.
We are a leading provider of private passenger automobile (54.9% of our direct written premiums in 2020), commercial automobile, (14.9% of 2020 direct written premiums), and homeowners (25.0% of 2020 direct written premiums) insurance. In addition to these coverages, we offer a portfolio of other insurance products, including dwelling fire, umbrella and business owner policies (totaling 5.2% of 2020 direct written premiums). Operating exclusively in Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Maine through our insurance company subsidiaries, Safety Insurance, Safety Indemnity, Safety P&C, (together referred to as the “Insurance Subsidiaries”), we have established strong relationships with independent insurance agents, who numbered 871 in 1,095 locations throughout these three states during 2020. We have used these relationships and our extensive knowledge of the market to become the fourth largest private passenger automobile carrier and the second largest commercial automobile carrier in Massachusetts, capturing an approximate 8.4% and 12.8% share, respectively, of the Massachusetts private passenger and commercial automobile markets in 2020, according to statistics compiled by CAR based on automobile exposures. We are the third largest homeowners insurance carrier in Massachusetts, with a market share of 7.0% in 2019. Our principal competitors within the Massachusetts homeowners insurance market are MAPFRE SA, Liberty Mutual Insurance and Chubb, which held 13.1%, 9.8% and 6.3% market shares respectively in 2019 (according to S&P Global Market Intelligence).
Our Insurance Subsidiaries began writing insurance in New Hampshire during 2008 and Maine in 2016. In November 2020, we formed a fourth insurance subsidiary, Safety Northeast Insurance Company, which became licensed to write insurance products in Massachusetts in January of 2021. The table below shows the amount of direct written premiums in each state during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Recent Trends and Events
Beginning in March 2020, the global pandemic associated with the novel coronavirus COVID-19 (“COVID-19”) and related economic conditions caused significant economic effects including temporary closures of many businesses and reduced consumer activity due to shelter-in-place, stay-at-home and other governmental actions. The Company has continued to take many actions that address the health and well-being of our employees while still serving the needs of our agents and insureds.
The pandemic has resulted in fewer cars on the road, resulting in a decrease in frequency of claims, primarily in our private passenger automobile line of business. As a result, for the year ended December 31, 2020, loss and loss adjustment expenses incurred decreased by $105,290 or 20.7%, to $404,556 from $509,846 for the comparable 2019 period.
There are many uncertainties with respect to COVID-19. For further discussion regarding the potential impacts of COVID-19 and related economic conditions on the Company, see "Part I-Item 1A - Risk Factors." These risks include legal challenges or legislative actions that extend business interruption coverage outside of our policy terms for business owner policies, which require direct physical loss or damage to property. As discussed in Note 8 - Commitments and Contingencies, the Company has been named in a lawsuit alleging that the Company improperly denied coverage to commercial insureds for loss of business income resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Our business owner policies serve eligible small and medium sized commercial accounts including but not limited to apartments and condominiums; mercantile establishments; limited cooking restaurants; offices; and special trade contractors. The majority of these business owner policies do not contain a specific exclusion for viruses. However, as viruses do not produce direct physical damage or loss to property, our position is that no coverage exists for this peril. As result, the Company accrued a reserve of $6,500 for legal defense costs for the year ended December 31, 2020. While we continue to evaluate each claim based on the specific facts and circumstances involved, our business owner policies do not provide coverage for business interruption claims unless there is direct physical damage or loss to property.
Direct written premiums for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $53,692, or 6.3%, to $798,712 from $852,404 for the comparable 2019 period. The 2020 decrease reflects the Safety Personal Auto Relief Credit, a 15% policyholder credit, representing $17,711 in total premium which was applied to personal auto policies for the months of April, May and June, as well as changes made by CAR to eligibility requirements which impacted the number of commercial automobile policies that we handle as a Servicing Carrier to the ceded pool. This results in a commensurate decrease in ceded written premium to and assumed from these programs.
We define a “catastrophe” as an event that produces pre-tax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1,000 and involves multiple first-party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including high winds, winter storms, tornadoes, hailstorms, and hurricanes. The nature and level of catastrophes in any period cannot be reliably predicted.
Catastrophe losses incurred by the type of event are shown in the following table.
(1) Total losses incurred include losses plus defense and cost containment expenses and excludes adjusting and other claims settlement expenses.
The following rate changes have been filed and approved by the insurance regulators of Massachusetts and New Hampshire in 2020 and 2019. Our Massachusetts private passenger automobile rates include a 13% commission rate for agents.
Statutory Accounting Principles
Our results are reported in accordance with GAAP, which differ from amounts reported in accordance with statutory accounting principles ("SAP") as prescribed by insurance regulatory authorities, which in general reflect a liquidating, rather than going concern concept of accounting. Specifically, under GAAP:
● Policy acquisition costs such as commissions, premium taxes and other variable costs incurred which are directly related to the successful acquisition of a new or renewal insurance contract are capitalized and amortized on a pro rata basis over the period in which the related premiums are earned, rather than expensed as incurred, as required by SAP.
● Certain assets are included in the consolidated balance sheets whereas, under SAP, such assets are designated as "nonadmitted assets," and charged directly against statutory surplus. These assets consist primarily of premium receivables that are outstanding over ninety days, federal deferred tax assets in excess of statutory limitations, furniture, equipment, leasehold improvements and prepaid expenses.
● Amounts related to ceded reinsurance are shown gross of ceded unearned premiums and reinsurance recoverables, rather than netted against unearned premium reserves and loss and loss adjustment expense reserves, respectively, as required by SAP.
● Fixed maturities securities, which are classified as available-for-sale, are reported at current fair values, rather than at amortized cost, or the lower of amortized cost or market, depending on the specific type of security, as required by SAP.
● The differing treatment of income and expense items results in a corresponding difference in federal income tax expense. Changes in deferred income taxes are reflected as an item of income tax benefit or expense, rather than recorded directly to surplus as regards policyholders, as required by SAP. Admittance testing may result in a charge to unassigned surplus for non-admitted portions of deferred tax assets. Under GAAP reporting, a valuation allowance may be recorded against the deferred tax asset and reflected as an expense.
Insurance Ratios
The property and casualty insurance industry uses the combined ratio as a measure of underwriting profitability. The combined ratio is the sum of the loss ratio (losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred as a percent of net earned premiums) plus the expense ratio (underwriting and other expenses as a percent of net earned premiums, calculated on a GAAP basis). The combined ratio reflects only underwriting results and does not include income from investments or finance and other service income. Underwriting profitability is subject to significant fluctuations due to competition, catastrophic events, weather, economic and social conditions, and other factors.
Our GAAP insurance ratios are presented in the following table for the periods indicated.
Share-Based Compensation
On April 2, 2018, the Company’s Board of Directors adopted the Safety Insurance Group, Inc. 2018 Long-Term Incentive Plan (“the 2018 Plan”), which was subsequently approved by our shareholders at the 2018 Annual Meeting of Shareholders. The 2018 Plan enables the grant of stock awards, performance shares, cash-based performance units, other stock-based awards, stock options, stock appreciation rights, and stock unit awards, each of which may be granted separately or in tandem with other awards. Eligibility to participate includes officers, directors, employees and other individuals who provide bona fide services to the Company. The 2018 Plan supersedes the Company’s 2002 Management Omnibus Incentive Plan (“the 2002 Incentive Plan”).
The 2018 Plan establishes an initial pool of 350,000 shares of common stock available for issuance to our employees and other eligible participants.
The maximum number of shares of common stock between both the 2018 Plan and 2002 Incentive Plan with respect to which awards may be granted is 2,850,000. No further grants will be allowed under the 2002 Incentive Plan. At December 31, 2020, there were 234,170 shares available for future grant. Grants outstanding under the Plans as of December 31, 2020, were comprised of 138,514 restricted shares.
Grants made under the Incentive Plan during the years 2018 through 2020 were as follows.
(1) The fair value per share of the restricted stock grant is equal to the closing price of our common stock on the grant date.
(2) Board of Director members must maintain stock ownership equal to at least four times their annual cash retainer. This requirement must be met within five years of becoming a director.
(3) The shares represent performance-based restricted shares award. Vesting of these shares is dependent upon the attainment of pre-established performance objectives, and any difference between shares granted and shares earned at the end of the performance period will be reported at the conclusion of the performance period
(4) The shares represent a true-up of previously awarded performance-based restricted share awards. The updated shares were calculated based on the attainment of pre-established performance objectives.
Reinsurance
We reinsure with other insurance companies a portion of our potential liability under the policies we have underwritten, thereby protecting us against an unexpectedly large loss or a catastrophic occurrence that could produce large losses, primarily in our homeowners line of business. We use various software products to measure our exposure to catastrophe losses and the probable maximum loss to us for catastrophe losses such as hurricanes. The models include estimates for our share of the catastrophe losses generated in the residual market for property insurance by the FAIR Plan. The reinsurance market has seen from the various software modelers, increases in the estimate of damage from hurricanes in the southern and northeast portions of the United States due to revised estimations of increased hurricane activity and increases in the estimation of demand surge in the periods following a significant event. We continue to manage and model our exposure and adjust our reinsurance programs as a result of the changes to the models. As of January 1, 2020, we have purchased four layers of excess catastrophe reinsurance providing $615,000 of coverage for property losses in excess of $50,000 up to a maximum of $665,000. Our reinsurers’ co-participation is 50.0% of $50,000 for the 1st layer, 80.0% of $50,000 for the 2nd layer, 80.0% of $250,000 for the 3rd layer and 80.0% of $265,000 for the 4th layer. As a result of the changes to the models, our catastrophe reinsurance in 2020 protects us in the event of a “137-year storm” (that is, a storm of a severity expected to occur once in a 137-year period). Most of our reinsurers have an A.M. Best rating of “A+” (Superior) or “A” (Excellent).
We are a participant in CAR, a state-established body that runs the residual market reinsurance programs for commercial automobile insurance in Massachusetts under which premiums, expenses, losses and loss adjustment expenses on ceded business are shared by all insurers writing commercial automobile insurance in Massachusetts. We also participate in the FAIR Plan in which premiums, expenses, losses and loss adjustment expenses on homeowners business that cannot be placed in the voluntary market are shared by all insurers writing homeowners insurance in Massachusetts. The FAIR Plan buys reinsurance to reduce their exposure to catastrophe losses. On July 1, 2020, the FAIR Plan purchased $2,000,000 of catastrophe reinsurance for property losses with retention of $100,000.
We also had $129,766 due from CAR comprising of loss and loss adjustment expense reserves, unearned premiums and reinsurance recoverables.
Effects of Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our consolidated results of operations, except insofar as inflation may affect interest rates.
Non-GAAP Measures
Management has included certain non-generally accepted accounting principles (“non-GAAP”) financial measures in presenting the Company’s results. Management believes that these non-GAAP measures better explain the Company’s results of operations and allow for a more complete understanding of the underlying trends in the Company’s business. These measures should not be viewed as a substitute for those determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). In addition, our definitions of these items may not be comparable to the definitions used by other companies.
Non-GAAP operating income and non-GAAP operating income per diluted share consist of our GAAP net income adjusted by the net realized gains on investments, net impairment losses on investments, changes in net unrealized gains on equity investments, credit loss expense and taxes related thereto. Net income and earnings per diluted share are the GAAP financial measures that are most directly comparable to non-GAAP operating income and non-GAAP operating income per diluted share, respectively. A reconciliation of the GAAP financial measures to these non-GAAP measures is included in the financial highlights below.
Results of Operations
The following table shows certain of our selected financial results.
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 COMPARED TO YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019
Direct Written Premiums. Direct written premiums for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $53,692, or 6.3%, to $798,712 from $852,404 for the comparable 2019 period. The 2020 decrease reflects the Safety Personal Auto Relief Credit, a 15% policyholder credit, representing $17,711 in total premium which was applied to personal auto policies for the months of April, May and June as well as changes made by CAR to eligibility requirements which impacted the number of commercial automobile policies that we handle as a Servicing Carrier to the ceded pool. This results in a commensurate decrease in ceded written premium to and assumed from these programs.
Net Written Premiums. Net written premiums for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $30,872, or 3.9%, to $763,537 from $794,409 for the comparable 2019 period. The 2020 decrease was primarily due to the factors
that decreased direct written premiums.
Net Earned Premiums. Net earned premiums for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $17,699, or 2.2%, to $771,078 from $788,777 for the comparable 2019 period. The 2020 decrease was primarily due to the Safety Personal Auto Relief Credit as discussed above.
The effect of reinsurance on net written and net earned premiums is presented in the following table.
Net Investment Income. Net investment income for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $5,620, or 12.0%, to $41,045 from $46,665 for the comparable 2019 period. The decreases are a result of lower floating yields on our bank loan portfolio, lower interest income on certain partnership investments and fixed maturity amortization resulting from prepayment activity on certain residential mortgage-backed securities. Net effective annual yield on the investment portfolio was 2.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 3.4% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our duration was 3.2 years at December 31, 2020, compared to 3.3 years at December 31, 2019.
Earnings from Partnership Investments. Earnings from partnership investments were $6,901 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1,937 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The 2020 earnings reflects an increase in investment appreciation and cash proceeds received as a return on capital. Timing and generation of these returns on capital can vary based on the results and transactions of the underlying partnerships.
Net Realized Gains on Investments. Net realized gains on investments were $957 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $2,976 for the comparable 2019 period.
The gross unrealized gains and losses on investments in fixed maturity securities, including redeemable preferred stocks that have characteristics of fixed maturities, short term investments, equity securities, including interests in mutual funds, and other invested assets were as follows:
(1) Residential mortgage-backed securities consists of obligations of U.S. Government agencies including collateralized mortgage obligations issued, guaranteed and/or insured by the following issuers: Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA), Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC), Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA) and the Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB).
(2) Equity securities include common stock, preferred stock, mutual funds and interests in mutual funds held to fund the Company’s executive deferred compensation plan.
(3) Our investment portfolio included 270 securities in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2020.
(4) Other invested assets are accounted for under the equity method which approximates fair value.
The composition of our fixed income security portfolio by rating was as follows:
Ratings are generally assigned upon the issuance of the securities and are subject to revision on the basis of ongoing evaluations. Ratings in the table are as of the date indicated.
As of December 31, 2020, our portfolio of fixed maturity investments was principally comprised of investment grade corporate fixed maturity securities, U.S. government and agency securities, and asset-backed securities. The portion of our non-investment grade portfolio of fixed maturity investments is primarily comprised of variable rate secured and senior bank loans and high yield bonds.
The following table illustrates the gross unrealized losses included in our investment portfolio and the fair value of those securities, aggregated by investment category. The table also presents the length of time that they have been in a continuous unrealized loss position of December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company concluded that $1,054 of unrealized losses were due to credit factors and were recorded as an allowance for expected credit losses and credit loss expense. The Company concluded that outside of the securities that were recognized as credit impaired, the unrealized losses recorded on the fixed maturity portfolio at December 31, 2020 resulted from fluctuations in market interest rates and other temporary market conditions as opposed to fundamental changes in the credit quality of the issuers of such securities. Based upon the analysis performed, the Company’s decision to hold these securities, the Company’s current level of liquidity and our history of positive operating cash flows, management believes it is more likely than not that it will not be required to sell any of its securities before the anticipated recovery in the fair value to its amortized cost basis.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the company recognized $889 of OTTI losses which consisted entirely of credit impairments under the previous accounting guidance in ASC 320, Investments - Debt and Equity Securities.
Specific qualitative analysis was also performed for securities appearing on our “Watch List,” if any.
Qualitative analysis considered such factors as the financial condition and the near term prospects of the issuer, whether the debtor is current on its contractually obligated interest and principal payments, changes to the rating of the security by a rating agency and the historical volatility of the fair value of the security.
The majority of unrealized losses recorded on the investment portfolio at December 31, 2020 resulted from fluctuations in market interest rates and other temporary market conditions as opposed to fundamental changes in the credit quality of the issuers of such securities. Given our current level of liquidity, the fact that we do not intend to sell these securities, and that it is more likely than not that we will not be required to sell these securities prior to recovery of the cost basis of these securities, these decreases in values are viewed as being temporary.
For information regarding fair value measurements of our investment portfolio, refer to Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 16, Fair Value of Financial Instruments, of this Form 10-K.
Net Impairment Losses on Investments. Net impairment losses on investments was $889 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Credit Loss Expense. Credit loss expense on investments was $1,054 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Finance and Other Service Income. Finance and other service income includes revenues from premium installment charges, which we recognize when earned, and other miscellaneous income and fees. Finance and other service income increased by $39, or 0.2%, to $16,872 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $16,833 for the comparable 2019 period.
Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses. Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $105,290, or 20.7%, to $404,556 from $509,846 for the comparable 2019 period.
Our GAAP loss ratio for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 52.5% and 64.6%, respectively. Our GAAP loss ratio excluding loss adjustment expenses was 43.7% and 56.1% for the years ended December 31, 2020
and 2019, respectively. Total prior year favorable development included in the pre-tax results for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $54,844, compared to $42,049, for the comparable 2019 period.
Underwriting, Operating and Related Expenses. Underwriting, operating and related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $22,346, or 9.2%, to $266,482 from $244,136 for the comparable 2019 period. Our GAAP expense ratio for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to 34.6% from 31.0% for the comparable 2019 period. The 2020 increase is driven by an increase in contingent commission expense as well as costs associated with various system modernization in our claims, billing and underwriting areas and a reduction in certain expense allowances offered under the Servicing Carrier program that have decreased with the related written premium as noted above.
Interest Expense. Interest expense was $440 and $90 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The 2020 increase is due to the interest associated with the borrowing from the FHLB as noted within Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 10, Debt, of this Form 10-K. The credit facility commitment fee included in interest expense was $75 for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Income Tax Expense Our effective tax rates were 20.9% and 19.5% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The effective rates for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were lower than the statutory rates primarily due to the effects of tax-exempt investment income.
Net Income. Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $138,211 compared to a net income of $99,601 for the comparable 2019 period.
Non-GAAP Operating Income. Non-GAAP operating income as defined above was $130,033 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $81,004 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The comparison of results for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 can be found in the Company’s 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As a holding company, Safety’s assets consist primarily of the stock of our direct and indirect subsidiaries. Our principal source of funds to meet our obligations and pay dividends to shareholders, therefore, is dividends and other permitted payments from our subsidiaries, principally Safety Insurance. Safety is the borrower under our credit facility.
Safety Insurance’s sources of funds primarily include premiums received, investment income and proceeds from sales and redemptions of investments. Safety Insurance’s principal uses of cash are the payment of claims, operating expenses and taxes, the purchase of investments and payment of dividends to Safety.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $109,460, $112,456, and $127,691 during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Our operations typically generate positive cash flows from operations as most premiums are received in advance of the time when claim and benefit payments are required. These positive operating cash flows are expected to continue to meet our liquidity requirements.
Net cash used for investing activities was $35,524, $52,964, and $83,004 for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, as purchases of fixed maturity and equity securities exceeded proceeds from the sales, paydowns, calls and maturities of fixed maturity and equity securities.
Net cash used for financing activities was $64,574, $52,667, and $48,813 during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Net cash used for financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 is comprised of dividend payments to shareholders and share buybacks, partially offset by the proceeds from a $30,000 borrowing from the FHLB-Boston on March 17, 2020. The borrowing is for a term of five years, bearing interest at a rate of 1.42%. Interest is payable monthly, and the principal is due on the maturity date of March 17, 2025 but may be
prepaid in whole or in part by the Company in advance. Net cash used for financing activities during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 is comprised of dividend payments to shareholders.
The Insurance Subsidiaries maintain a high degree of liquidity within their respective investment portfolios in fixed maturity and short-term investments. We do not anticipate the need to sell these securities to meet the Insurance Subsidiaries cash requirements. We expect the Insurance Subsidiaries to generate sufficient operating cash to meet all short-term and long-term cash requirements. However, there can be no assurance that unforeseen business needs or other items will not occur causing us to have to sell securities before their values fully recover; thereby causing us to recognize additional impairment charges in that time period.
Credit Facility
For information regarding our Credit Facility, please refer to Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 10, Debt, of this Form 10-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding Recent Accounting Pronouncements, please refer to Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of this Form 10-K.
Regulatory Matters
Our insurance company’s subsidiaries are subject to various regulatory restrictions that limit the maximum amount of dividends available to be paid to their parent without prior approval of the Commissioner. The Massachusetts statute limits the dividends an insurer may pay in any twelve-month period, without the prior permission of the Commissioner, to the greater of (i) 10% of the insurer’s surplus as of the preceding December 31 or (ii) the insurer’s net income for the twelve-month period ending the preceding December 31, in each case determined in accordance with statutory accounting practices. Our Insurance Subsidiaries may not declare an “extraordinary dividend” (defined as any dividend or distribution that, together with other distributions made within the preceding twelve months, exceeds the limits established by Massachusetts statute) until thirty days after the Commissioner has received notice of the intended dividend and has not objected. As historically administered by the Commissioner, this provision requires the Commissioner’s prior approval of an extraordinary dividend. Under Massachusetts law, an insurer may pay cash dividends only from its unassigned funds, also known as earned surplus, and the insurer’s remaining surplus must be both reasonable in relation to its outstanding liabilities and adequate to its financial needs. At year-end 2020, the statutory surplus of Safety Insurance was $754,066, and its net income for 2020 was $121,446. As a result, a maximum of $121,446 is available in 2020 for such dividends without prior approval of the Commissioner. As a result of this Massachusetts statute, the Insurance Subsidiaries had restricted net assets in the amount of $632,620 at December 31, 2020. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, Safety Insurance recorded dividends to Safety of $89,156.
The maximum dividend permitted by law is not indicative of an insurer’s actual ability to pay dividends, which may be constrained by business and regulatory considerations, such as the impact of dividends on surplus, which could affect an insurer’s ratings or competitive position, the amount of premiums that can be written and the ability to pay future dividends.
Since the initial public offering of its common stock in November 2002, the Company has paid regular quarterly dividends to shareholders of its common stock. Quarterly dividends paid during 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
On February 16, 2021, our Board approved and declared a quarterly cash dividend on our common stock of $0.90 per share to be paid on March 15, 2021 to shareholders of record on March 5, 2021. We plan to continue to declare and pay quarterly cash dividends in 2021, depending on our financial position and the regularity of our cash flows.
On August 3, 2007, the Board of Directors approved a share repurchase program of up to $30,000 of the Company’s outstanding common shares. As of December 31, 2020, the Board of Directors had cumulatively authorized increases to the existing share repurchase program of up to $150,000 of its outstanding common shares. Under the program, the Company may repurchase shares of its common stock for cash in public or private transactions, in the open market or otherwise. The timing of such repurchases and actual number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of factors including price, market conditions and applicable regulatory and corporate requirements. The program does not require us to repurchase any specific number of shares and may be modified, suspended or terminated at any time without prior notice. At December 31, 2020, the Company had purchased 2,831,168 shares of common stock at a cost $123,834. As of December 31, 2019, the Company had purchased 2,279,570 shares at a cost of $83,835.
Management believes that the current level of cash flow from operations provides us with sufficient liquidity to meet our operating needs over the next 12 months. We expect to be able to continue to meet our operating needs after the next 12 months from internally generated funds. Since our ability to meet our obligations in the long term (beyond such twelve-month period) is dependent upon such factors as market changes, insurance regulatory changes and economic conditions, no assurance can be given that the available net cash flow will be sufficient to meet our operating needs. We expect that we would need to borrow or issue capital stock if we needed additional funds, for example, to pay for an acquisition or a significant expansion of our operations. There can be no assurance that sufficient funds for any of the foregoing purposes would be available to us at such time.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no material obligations under a guarantee contract meeting the characteristics identified in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 460, Guarantees. We have no material retained or contingent interests in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity. We have no material obligations, including contingent obligations, under contracts that would be accounted for as derivative instruments. We have no obligations, including contingent obligations, arising out of a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity held by, and material to, us, where such entity provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to, or engages in leasing, hedging or research and development services with us. We have no direct investments in real estate and no holdings of mortgages secured by commercial real estate. Accordingly, we have no material off-balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
We have obligations to make future payments under contracts and credit-related financial instruments and commitments. At December 31, 2020, certain long-term aggregate contractual obligations and credit-related commitments are summarized as follows:
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had loss and LAE reserves of $567,581, unpaid reinsurance recoverables of $106,311 and net loss and LAE reserves of $461,270. Our loss and LAE reserves are estimates as described in more detail under Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. The specific amounts and timing of obligations related to case reserves, IBNR reserves and related LAE reserves are not set contractually, and the amounts and timing of these obligations are unknown. Nonetheless, based upon our cumulative claims paid over the last ten years, the Company estimates that its loss and LAE reserves will be paid in the period shown above. While management believes that historical performance of loss payment patterns is a reasonable source for projecting future claims payments, there is inherent uncertainty in this estimated projected settlement of loss and LAE reserves, and as a result these estimates will differ, perhaps significantly, from actual future payments. Our operations typically generate substantial positive cash flows from operations as most premiums are received in advance of the time when claim and benefit payments are required. These positive operating cash flows are expected to continue to meet our liquidity requirements, including any unexpected variations in the timing of claim settlements.
As part of the Company’s investment activity, we have committed $110,000 to investments in limited partnerships. The Company has contributed $61,455 to these commitments as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the remaining committed capital that could be called is $51,112, which includes potential recallable capital distributions.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves.
Significant periods of time can elapse between the occurrence of an insured loss, the reporting to us of that loss and our final payment of that loss. To recognize liabilities for unpaid losses, we establish reserves as balance sheet liabilities. Our reserves represent estimates of amounts needed to pay reported and unreported losses and the expenses of investigating and paying those losses, or loss adjustment expenses. Every quarter, we review our previously established reserves and adjust them, if necessary.
When a claim is reported, claims personnel establish a “case reserve” for the estimated amount of the ultimate payment. The amount of the reserve is primarily based upon an evaluation of the type of claim involved, the circumstances surrounding each claim and the policy provisions relating to the loss. The estimate reflects the informed judgment of such personnel based on general insurance reserving practices and on the experience and knowledge of the claims person. During the loss adjustment period, these estimates are revised as deemed necessary by our claims department based on subsequent developments and periodic reviews of the cases. When a claim is closed with or without a payment, the difference between the case reserve and the settlement amount creates a reserve deficiency if the payment exceeds the case reserve or a reserve redundancy if the payment is less than the case reserve.
In accordance with industry practice, we also maintain reserves for IBNR. IBNR reserves are determined in accordance with commonly accepted actuarial reserving techniques on the basis of our historical information and experience. We review and make adjustments to incurred but not yet reported reserves quarterly. In addition, IBNR reserves can also be expressed as the total loss reserves required less the case reserves on reported claims.
When reviewing reserves, we analyze historical data and estimate the impact of various loss development factors, such as our historical loss experience and that of the industry, trends in claims frequency and severity, our mix of business, our claims processing procedures, legislative enactments, judicial decisions, legal developments in imposition of damages, and changes and trends in general economic conditions, including the effects of inflation. A change in any of these factors from the assumption implicit in our estimate can cause our actual loss experience to be better or worse
than our reserves, and the difference can be material. There is no precise method, however, for evaluating the impact of any specific factor on the adequacy of reserves, because the eventual development of reserves is affected by many factors.
In estimating all our loss reserves, we follow the guidance prescribed by Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 944, Financial Services - Insurance.
Management determines our loss and LAE reserves estimate based upon the analysis of our actuaries. A reasonable estimate is derived by selecting a point estimate within a range of indications as calculated by our actuaries using generally accepted actuarial techniques. The key assumption in most actuarial analysis is that past patterns of frequency and severity will repeat in the future, unless a significant change in the factors described above takes place. Our key factors and resulting assumptions are the ultimate frequency and severity of claims, based upon the most recent ten years of claims reported to the Company, and the data CAR reports to us to calculate our share of the residual market, as of the date of the applicable balance sheet. For each accident year and each coverage within a line of business our actuaries calculate the ultimate losses incurred. Our total reserves are the difference between the ultimate losses incurred and the cumulative loss and loss adjustment payments made to date. Our IBNR reserves are calculated as the difference between our total reserves and the outstanding case reserves at the end of the accounting period. To determine ultimate losses, our actuaries calculate a range of indications and select a point estimation using such actuarial techniques as:
● Paid Loss Indications: This method projects ultimate loss estimates based upon extrapolations of historic paid loss trends. This method tends to be used on short tail lines such as automobile physical damage.
● Incurred Loss Indications: This method projects ultimate loss estimates based upon extrapolations of historic incurred loss trends. This method tends to be used on long tail lines of business such as automobile liability and homeowner’s liability.
● Bornhuetter-Ferguson Indications: This method projects ultimate loss estimates based upon extrapolations of an expected amount of IBNR, which is added to current incurred losses or paid losses. This method tends to be used on small, immature, or volatile lines of business, such as our BOP and umbrella lines of business.
● Bodily Injury Code Indications: This method projects ultimate loss estimates for our private passenger and commercial automobile bodily injury coverage based upon extrapolations of the historic number of accidents and the historic number of bodily injury claims per accident. Projected ultimate bodily injury claims are then segregated into expected claims by type of injury (e.g. soft tissue injury vs. hard tissue injury) based on past experience. An ultimate severity, or average paid loss amounts, is estimated based upon extrapolating historic trends. Projected ultimate loss estimates using this method are the aggregate of estimated losses by injury type.
Such techniques assume that past experience, adjusted for the effects of current developments and anticipated trends, is an appropriate basis for predicting our ultimate losses, total reserves and resulting IBNR reserves. It is possible that the final outcome may fall above or below these amounts as a result of a number of factors, including immature data, sparse data, or significant growth in a line of business. Using these methodologies our actuaries established a range of reasonably possible estimations for net reserves of approximately $424,437 to $478,251 as of December 31, 2020 compared to a range of $450,927 to $504,753 as of December 31, 2019. In general, the low and high values of the ranges represent reasonable minimum and maximum values of the indications based on the techniques described above. Our selected point estimate of net loss and LAE reserves based upon the analysis of our actuaries was $461,270 as of December 31, 2020 compared to $488,194 as of December 31, 2019.
The following tables present the point estimation of the recorded reserves and the range of estimations by line of business for net loss and LAE reserves as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
The following table presents our total net reserves and the corresponding case reserves and IBNR reserves for each line of business as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our total IBNR reserves for our private passenger automobile line of business were comprised of $(45,308) and $(66,422) related to estimated ultimate decreases in the case reserves, including anticipated recoveries (i.e. salvage and subrogation), and $15,901 and $21,488 related to our estimation for not yet reported losses, respectively.
Our IBNR reserves consist of our estimate of the total loss reserves required less our case reserves. The IBNR reserves for CAR assumed commercial automobile business are 44.2% of our total reserves for CAR assumed commercial automobile business as of December 31, 2020 due to the reporting delays in the information we receive from CAR, as described further in the section on Residual Market Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves. Our IBNR reserves for FAIR Plan assumed homeowners are 65.9% of our total reserves for FAIR Plan assumed homeowners at December 31, 2020 due to similar reporting delays in the information we receive from FAIR Plan.
The following tables present information by line of business for our total net reserves and the corresponding retained (i.e. direct less ceded) reserves and assumed reserves as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Residual Market Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves
We are a participant in CAR, the FAIR Plan and other various residual markets and assume a portion of losses and LAE on business ceded by the industry participants to the residual markets. We estimate reserves for assumed losses and LAE that have not yet been reported to us by the residual markets. Our estimations are based upon the same factors we use for our own reserves, plus additional factors due to the nature of and the information we receive.
Residual market deficits consist of premium ceded to the various residual markets less losses and LAE and is allocated among insurance companies based on a various formulas (the “Participation Ratio”) that take into consideration a company’s voluntary market share.
Because of the lag in the various residual market estimations, and in order to try to validate to the extent possible the information provided, we estimate the effects of the actions of our competitors in order to establish our Participation Ratio.
Although we rely to a significant extent in setting our reserves on the information the various residual markets provide, we are cautious in our use of that information, because of the delays in receiving data from the various residual markets. As a result, we have to estimate our Participation Ratio and these reserves are subject to significant judgments and estimates.
Sensitivity Analysis
Establishment of appropriate reserves is an inherently uncertain process. There can be no certainty that currently established reserves based on our key assumptions regarding frequency and severity in our lines of business, or our assumptions regarding our share of the CAR loss will prove adequate in light of subsequent actual experience. To the extent that reserves are inadequate and are strengthened, the amount of such increase is treated as a charge to earnings in the period that the deficiency is recognized. To the extent that reserves are redundant and are released, the amount of the release is a credit to earnings in the period the redundancy is recognized. For the twelve months ended
December 31, 2020, a 1 percentage-point change in the loss and LAE ratio would result in a change in reserves of $7,710. Each 1 percentage-point change in the loss and loss expense ratio would have had a $6,090 effect on net income, or $0.40 per diluted share.
Our assumptions consider that past experience, adjusted for the effects of current developments and anticipated trends, are an appropriate basis for establishing our reserves. Our individual key assumptions could each have a reasonable possible range of plus or minus 5 percentage-points for each estimation, although there is no guarantee that our assumptions will not have more than a 5 percentage point variation. The following sensitivity tables present information for each of our primary lines of business on the effect each 1 percentage-point change in each of our key assumptions on unpaid frequency and severity could have on our retained (i.e., direct minus ceded) loss and LAE reserves and net income for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. In evaluating the information in the table, it should be noted that a 1 percentage-point change in a single assumption would change estimated reserves by 1 percentage-point. A 1 percentage-point change in both our key assumptions would change estimated reserves within a range of plus or minus 2 percentage-points.
Our estimated share of CAR loss and LAE reserves is based on assumptions about our Participation Ratio, the size of CAR, and the resulting deficit (similar assumptions apply with respect to the FAIR Plan). Our assumptions consider that past experience, adjusted for the effects of current developments and anticipated trends, is an appropriate basis for establishing our CAR reserves. Each of our assumptions could have a reasonably possible range of plus or minus 5 percentage-points for each estimation.
The following sensitivity table presents information of the effect each 1 percentage-point change in our assumptions on our share of reserves for CAR and other residual markets could have on our assumed loss and LAE reserves and net income for the year ended December 31, 2020. In evaluating the information in the table, it should be noted that a 1 percentage-point change in our assumptions would change estimated reserves by 1 percentage-point.
Reserve Development Summary
The changes we have recorded in our reserves in the past illustrate the uncertainty of estimating reserves. Our prior year reserves decreased by $54,844, $42,049 and $56,488 during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
The following table presents a comparison of prior year development of our net reserves for losses and LAE for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Each accident year represents all claims for an annual accounting period in which loss events occurred, regardless of when the losses are actually reported, booked or paid. Our financial statements reflect the aggregate results of the current and all prior accident years.
At the end of each period, the reserves were re-estimated for all prior accident years. Our prior year reserves decreased by $54,844, $42,049, and $56,488 for the years ended 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The decreases in prior year reserves in 2020 resulted from re-estimations of prior year’s ultimate loss and LAE liabilities and are primarily composed of reductions of $26,902 in our retained automobile reserves and $21,717 in our retained other than auto and homeowner’s reserves. The decreases in prior year reserves in 2019 resulted from re-estimations of prior year’s ultimate loss and LAE liabilities and are primarily composed of reductions of $25,623 in our retained automobile reserves and $14,182 in our retained other than auto and homeowner reserves. The decrease in prior year reserves during 2018 is primarily composed of reductions of $36,266 in our retained automobile reserves and $18,947 in our retained
homeowners reserves. It is not appropriate to extrapolate future favorable or unfavorable development of reserves from this past experience.
The following table presents information by line of business for prior year development of our net reserves for losses and LAE for the year ended December 31, 2020.
To further clarify the effects of changes in our reserve estimates for CAR and other residual markets, the next two tables break out the information in the table above by source of the business (i.e., non-residual market vs. residual market).
The following table presents information by line of business for prior year development of retained reserves for losses and LAE for the year ended December 31, 2020 that is, all our reserves except for business ceded or assumed from CAR and other residual markets.
The following table presents information by line of business for prior year development of reserves assumed from residual markets for losses and LAE for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The improved retained private passenger and commercial automobile results were primarily due to fewer IBNR claims than previously estimated and better than previously estimated severity on our established bodily injury and property damage case reserves. Our retained other than auto and homeowners line of business prior year reserves decreased, due primarily to fewer IBNR claims than previously estimated.
In estimating all our loss reserves, including CAR, we follow the guidance prescribed by ASC 944, Financial Services-Insurance.
For further information, see “Results of Operations: Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses.”
Investment Impairments
The Company uses a systematic methodology to evaluate declines in fair values below cost or amortized cost of our investments. Some of the factors considered in assessing impairment of fixed maturities due to credit losses include the extent to which the fair value is less than amortized cost, the financial condition of and the near and long-term prospects of the issuer, whether the debtor is current on its contractually obligated interest and principal payments, changes to the rating of the security by a rating agency, the historical volatility of the fair value of the security and whether it is more like than not that the Company will be required to sell the investment prior to an anticipated recovery in value. This methodology ensures that we evaluate available evidence concerning any declines in a disciplined manner.
Beginning January 1, 2020, ASC 326, Credit Losses: Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments changed the process by which AFS debt securities are evaluated for impairment, as the standard requires a new impairment model based on expected credit losses rather than incurred credit losses. Under the new guidance, an entity recognizes its estimate of expected credit losses through an allowance account.
For fixed maturities that the Company does not intend to sell or for which it is more likely than not that the Company would not be required to sell before an anticipated recovery in value, the Company separates the credit loss component of the impairment from the amount related to all other factors and reports the credit loss component as credit loss expense. The impairment related to all other factors (non-credit factors) is reported in other comprehensive income. The allowance is adjusted for any additional credit losses and subsequent recoveries. Upon recognizing a credit loss, the cost basis is not adjusted.
For further information, see “Results of Operations: Net Impairment Losses on Investments.”
Forward-Looking Statements
Forward-looking statements might include one or more of the following, among others:
● Projections of revenues, income, earnings per share, capital expenditures, dividends, capital structure or other financial items;
● Descriptions of plans or objectives of management for future operations, products or services;
● Forecasts of future economic performance, liquidity, need for funding and income;
● The impact of COVID-19 and related economic conditions, including the Company's assessment of the vulnerability of certain categories of investments due to the economic disruptions associated with COVID-19;
● Legal and regulatory commentary;
● Descriptions of assumptions underlying or relating to any of the foregoing; and
● Future performance of credit markets.
Forward-looking statements can be identified by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. They often include words such as “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “plan,” “estimate,” “aim,” “projects,” or words of similar meaning and expressions that indicate future events and trends, or future or conditional
verbs such as “will,” “would,” “should,” “could,” or “may.” All statements that address expectations or projections about the future, including statements about the Company’s strategy for growth, product development, market position, expenditures and financial results, are forward-looking statements.
Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance. By their nature, forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties. There are a number of factors, many of which are beyond our control, that could cause actual future conditions, events, results or trends to differ significantly and/or materially from historical results or those projected in the forward-looking statements. These factors include but are not limited to:
● The competitive nature of our industry and the possible adverse effects of such competition;
● Conditions for business operations and restrictive regulations in Massachusetts;
● The possibility of losses due to claims resulting from severe weather;
● The possibility that the Commissioner may approve future rule changes that change the operation of the residual market;
● The possibility that existing insurance-related laws and regulations will become further restrictive in the future;
● Our possible need for and availability of additional financing, and our dependence on strategic relationships, among others;
● The effects of emerging claim and coverage issues on the Company’s business are uncertain, and court decisions or legislative or regulatory changes that take place after the Company issues its policies, including those taken in response to COVID-19 (such as requiring insurers to cover business interruption claims irrespective of terms or other conditions included in the policies that would otherwise preclude coverage), can result in an unexpected increase in the number of claims and have a material adverse impact on the Company's results of operations;
● The possibility that civil litigation and/or the Commissioner may require additional premium relief payouts related to COVID-19;
● The impact of COVID-19 and related risks, including on the Company's employees, agents or other key partners, could materially affect the Company's results of operations, financial position and/or liquidity; and
● Other risks and factors identified from time to time in our reports filed with the SEC. Refer to Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors.
Some other factors, such as market, operational, liquidity, interest rate, equity and other risks, are described elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Factors relating to the regulation and supervision of our Company are also described or incorporated in this report. There are other factors besides those described or incorporated in this report that could cause actual conditions, events or results to differ from those in the forward-looking statements.
Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date on which they are made. We do not undertake any obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking statements to reflect circumstances or events that occur after the date the forward-looking statements are made.