Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations, and quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in this Form 10-K, as well as Part II, Item 7 "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Form 10-K for the year ended January 31, 2020, which provides additional information on comparisons of fiscal 2020 and 2019. It contains forward-looking statements (which may be identified by words such as those described in “Risk Factors-Forward-Looking Statement Risks” in Part I of this report), including statements regarding our intent, belief, or current expectations with respect to, among other things, trends affecting our financial condition or results of operations; backlog; our industry; government budgets and spending; market opportunities; the impact of competition; and the impact of the Unisys Federal and Engility acquisitions. Such statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks and uncertainties, and actual results may differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors. Risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this report, particularly in “Risk Factors” in Part I of this report. Due to such risks, uncertainties and assumptions you are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date hereof. We do not undertake any obligation to update these factors or to publicly announce the results of any changes to our forward-looking statements due to future results or developments.
We use the terms "SAIC," the “Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” to refer to Science Applications International Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries.
The Company utilizes a 52/53 week fiscal year ending on the Friday closest to January 31, with fiscal quarters typically consisting of 13 weeks. Fiscal 2019 began on February 3, 2018 and ended on February 1, 2019, fiscal 2020 began on February 2, 2019 and ended on January 31, 2020, and fiscal 2021 began on February 1, 2020 and ended on January 29, 2021.
Business Overview
We are a leading technology integrator providing full life cycle services and solutions in the technical, engineering and enterprise information technology (IT) markets. We developed our brand by addressing our customers’ mission critical needs and solving their most complex problems for over 50 years. As one of the largest pure-play technical service providers to the U.S. government, we serve markets of significant scale and opportunity. Our primary customers are the departments and agencies of the U.S. government. We serve our customers through approximately 2,100 active contracts and task orders and employ approximately 26,000 individuals who are led by an experienced executive team of proven industry leaders. Our long history of serving the U.S government has afforded us the ability to develop strong and longstanding relationships with some of the largest customers in the markets we serve. Substantially all of our revenues and tangible long-lived assets are generated by or owned by entities located in the United States.
Economic Opportunities, Challenges and Risks
In fiscal 2021, we generated greater than 95% of our revenues from contracts with the U.S. government, including subcontracts on which we perform. Our business performance is affected by the overall level of U.S. government spending and the alignment of our offerings and capabilities with the budget priorities of the U.S. government. Appropriations measures passed in December 2020 provided full funding for the federal government through the end of government fiscal year (GFY) 2021. These bills are funded at levels for defense and non-defense spending based on the August 2019 Bipartisan Budget Act agreement that raises the Budget Control Act spending caps enacted in August 2011 and suspends the Federal debt ceiling until July 31, 2021.
Adverse changes in fiscal and economic conditions could materially impact our business. Some changes that could have an adverse impact on our business include the implementation of future spending reductions (including sequestration) and government shutdowns. Currently, the government is operating under full funding as part of the December 2020 budget deal. It is possible, but unlikely, that there will be a government shutdown in October 2021 when that measure expires.
The U.S. government has increasingly relied on contracts that are subject to a competitive bidding process (including indefinite delivery, indefinite quantity (IDIQ), U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) schedules, and other multi-award contracts), which has resulted in greater competition and increased pricing pressure. We expect
SCIENCE APPLICATIONS INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
that a majority of the business that we seek in the foreseeable future will be awarded through a competitive bidding process.
Despite the budget and competitive pressures affecting the industry, we believe we are well-positioned to protect and expand existing customer relationships and benefit from opportunities that we have not previously pursued. Our scale, size, and prime contractor leadership position are expected to help differentiate us from our competitors, especially on large contract opportunities. We believe our long-term, trusted customer relationships and deep technical expertise provide us with the sophistication to handle highly complex, mission-critical contracts. SAIC’s value proposition is found in the proven ability to serve as a trusted adviser to our customers. In doing so, we leverage our expertise and scale to help them execute their mission.
We succeed as a business based on the solutions we deliver, our past performance, and our ability to compete on price. Our solutions are inspired through innovation based on adoption of best practices and technology integration of the best capabilities available. Our past performance was achieved by employees dedicated to supporting our customers' most challenging missions. Our current cost structure and ongoing efforts to reduce costs by strategic sourcing and developing repeatable offerings sold "as a service" and as managed services in a more commercial business model are expected to allow us to compete effectively on price in an evolving environment. Our ability to be competitive in the future will continue to be driven by our reputation for successful program execution, competitive cost structure, development of new pricing and business models, and efficiencies in assigning the right people, at the right time, in support of our contracts.
On March 13, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Unisys Federal, a former operating unit of Unisys Corporation. The acquisition of Unisys Federal, in alignment with our long-term strategy, positions SAIC as a leading government services technology integrator in digital transformation. The acquisition of Unisys Federal: (1) enhances SAIC’s capabilities in government priority areas, including IT modernization, cloud migration, managed services, and development, security and operations; (2) expands SAIC’s portfolio of intellectual property and technology-driven offerings that enable government-tailored, commercial-based solutions; (3) increases SAIC’s access to current and new customers with a strong pipeline of new business opportunities; and (4) is highly accretive across all key financial metrics.
On January 14, 2019, we completed the acquisition of Engility Holdings, Inc. (collectively with its consolidated subsidiaries, "Engility"). The acquisition of Engility accelerates the execution of our long-term strategy to be the premier technology integrator in the government services market and deliver sustained profitable growth. The acquisition of Engility strengthens the execution of our long-term strategy by: (1) combining two leading government service providers with highly complementary capabilities, customers, and cultures; (2) accelerating both companies' long-term strategies, creating sub-segment scale in strategic business areas of national interest; and (3) enhancing shareholder value through improved cash flow and margin profile driven by cost synergies and increased growth from greater customer access with more competitive and differentiated solutions.
See “Risk Factors” in Part I of this report for additional discussion of our industry and regulatory environment.
Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic
We are continuing to monitor the ongoing outbreak of the coronavirus disease 2019 (“COVID-19”) and we continue to work with our stakeholders to assess further possible implications to our business, supply chain and customers, and to take actions in an effort to mitigate adverse consequences. As travel restrictions and social distancing advisories began to be implemented in early 2020, our workforce began to work remotely to the extent possible. While a majority of our workforce is able to work remotely, some employees must still travel to client or company facilities in order to work.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act, which was passed by Congress and signed by the President on March 27, 2020, provides a mechanism to recover our labor costs where our employees are ready and able to work but unable to access required facilities due to COVID-19. Reduced activity on contracts, including travel and other direct costs, caused revenues to be approximately $248 million lower for fiscal 2021 (net of $147 million of labor recovered under the provisions of the CARES Act described above to maintain our workforce in a stand-ready state).
SCIENCE APPLICATIONS INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
We are generally not able to bill profit on the stand-ready labor costs recovered under the CARES Act and, in some cases, funding limitations and the necessity for contract modifications may cause us not to be able to recover all of the labor costs. As a result, operating income for fiscal 2021 was reduced by approximately $25 million.
In addition, the CARES Act allows for the deferral of certain payroll tax payments and we have deferred payments totaling approximately $103 million as of January 29, 2021. We must begin repaying these deferred taxes in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022.
We have not experienced a significant impact to our liquidity or access to capital as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. As discussed in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” we believe that our existing cash on hand, generation of future operating cash flows, and access to bank financing and capital markets will provide adequate resources to meet our short-term liquidity and long-term capital needs. As of January 29, 2021 we were in compliance with our debt covenants and we have not been required to obtain additional financing, or make significant modifications to our capital deployment strategy, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We continue to work with our customers to implement the related provisions of the CARES Act. We cannot currently estimate the overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The longer the duration of the event the more likely that there may be an adverse impact on our business, financial position, results of operations and/or cash flows.
See “Risk Factors” in Part I of this report for additional discussion of the risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Management of Operating Performance and Reporting
Our business and program management process is directed by professional managers focused on satisfying our customers by providing high quality services in achieving program requirements. These managers carefully monitor contract margin performance by constantly evaluating contract risks and opportunities. Through each contract’s life cycle, program managers review performance and update contract performance estimates to reflect their understanding of the best information available. For performance obligations satisfied over time, updates to estimates are recognized on inception-to-date activity, during the period of adjustment, resulting in either a favorable or unfavorable impact to operating income.
We evaluate our results of operations by considering the drivers causing changes in revenues, operating income and operating cash flows. Given that revenues fluctuate on our contract portfolio over time due to contract awards and completions, changes in customer requirements, and increases or decreases in ordering volume of materials, we evaluate significant trends and fluctuations in these terms. Whether performed by our employees or by our subcontractors, we primarily provide services and, as a result, our cost of revenues are predominantly variable. We also analyze our cost mix (labor, subcontractor or materials) in order to understand operating margin because programs with a higher proportion of SAIC labor are generally more profitable. Changes in costs of revenues as a percentage of revenue other than from revenue volume or cost mix are normally driven by fluctuations in shared or corporate costs, or cumulative revenue adjustments due to changes in estimates.
Changes in operating cash flows are described with regard to changes in cash generated through the delivery of services, significant drivers of fluctuations in assets or liabilities and the impacts of changes in timing of cash receipts or disbursements.
SCIENCE APPLICATIONS INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Results of Operations
The primary financial performance measures we use to manage our business and monitor results of operations are revenues, operating income and cash flows from operating activities. The following table summarizes our results of operations:
Revenues. Revenues increased $677 million from fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2021 due to the acquisition of Unisys Federal ($669 million), revenue on new contracts primarily supporting the intelligence community and U.S. Air Force ($166 million), and increased volume on existing programs ($150 million), partially offset by the impacts of COVID-19 ($248 million) and completion of contracts ($60 million). Adjusting for the impact of acquired revenues, revenues grew 0.6%.
Cost of Revenues. Cost of revenues increased $591 million from fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2021 primarily due to the acquisition of Unisys Federal ($550 million). Cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues decreased due to the acquisition of Unisys Federal and lower indirect costs, partially offset by lower net profit write-ups in the current year.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. SG&A increased $64 million from fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2021 primarily due to increased intangible asset amortization and the acquisition of Unisys Federal.
Operating Income. Operating income as a percentage of revenues decreased to 5.5% for fiscal 2021, compared to 5.8% for fiscal 2020, primarily due to increased intangible asset amortization and the impacts of COVID-19, partially offset by the acquisition of Unisys Federal and gains related to the resolution of certain program contract matters.
Net Income Attributable to Common Stockholders. Net income attributable to common stockholders decreased $17 million from fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2021 primarily due to higher interest expense, partially offset by higher operating income.
Cash Flows Provided by Operating Activities. Cash flows provided by operating activities were $755 million for fiscal 2021, which represented an increase of $297 million from fiscal 2020 primarily due to sales of receivables under the MARPA Facility ($185 million) and benefit from the deferral of payroll tax payments afforded by the CARES Act.
Non-GAAP Measures
Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA), and adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures. While we believe that these non-GAAP financial measures may be useful in evaluating our financial information, they should be considered as supplemental in nature and not as a substitute for financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. Reconciliations, definitions, and how we believe these measures are useful to management and investors are provided below. Other companies may define similar measures differently.
SCIENCE APPLICATIONS INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. The performance measure EBITDA is calculated by taking net income and excluding interest and loss on sale of receivables, provision for income taxes, and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is calculated by taking EBITDA and excluding acquisition and integration costs and restructuring costs. Integration costs excluded are costs to integrate acquired companies and include the costs of strategic consulting services, facility consolidation and employee severance. The acquisition and integration costs relate to the Company’s significant acquisitions of Engility and Unisys Federal. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial Statements contained within this report for description of our restructuring costs. Adjusted EBITDA is a performance measure that excludes costs that we do not consider to be indicative of our ongoing operating performance.
We believe that EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA provide management and investors with useful information in assessing trends in our ongoing operating performance and may provide greater visibility in understanding the long-term financial performance of the Company.
EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA is calculated as follows:
(1) Adjustment to reflect the portion of acquisition and integration costs and restructuring costs recovered through the Company's indirect rates in accordance with Cost Accounting Standards.
Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of revenues increased to 8.9% for fiscal 2021, compared to 8.4% for fiscal 2020, driven by the acquisition of Unisys Federal and gains related to the resolution of certain program contract matters, partially offset by the impacts of COVID-19.
Other Key Performance Measures
In addition to the financial measures described above, we believe that bookings and backlog are useful measures for management and investors to evaluate our potential future revenues. We also consider measures such as contract types and cost of revenues mix to be useful for management and investors to evaluate our operating income and performance.
Net Bookings and Backlog. Net bookings represent the estimated amount of revenues to be earned in the future from funded and negotiated unfunded contract awards that were received during the period, net of adjustments to estimates on previously awarded contracts. We calculate net bookings as the period’s ending backlog plus the period’s revenues less the prior period’s ending backlog and initial backlog obtained through acquisitions.
SCIENCE APPLICATIONS INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Backlog represents the estimated amount of future revenues to be recognized under negotiated contracts as work is performed. We do not include in backlog estimates of revenues to be derived from IDIQ contracts, but rather record backlog and bookings when task orders are awarded on these contracts. Given that much of our revenue is derived from IDIQ contract task orders that renew annually, bookings on these contracts tend to refresh annually as the task orders are renewed. Additionally, we do not include in backlog contract awards that are under protest until the protest is resolved in our favor.
We segregate our backlog into two categories as follows:
•Funded Backlog. Funded backlog for contracts with government agencies primarily represents estimated amounts of revenue to be earned in the future from contracts for which funding is appropriated less revenues previously recognized on these contracts. It does not include the unfunded portion of contracts in which funding is incrementally appropriated or authorized on a quarterly or annual basis by the U.S. government and other customers even though the contract may call for performance over a number of years. Funded backlog for contracts with non-government customers represents the estimated value on contracts, which may cover multiple future years, under which we are obligated to perform, less revenues previously recognized on these contracts.
•Negotiated Unfunded Backlog. Negotiated unfunded backlog represents estimated amounts of revenue to be earned in the future from negotiated contracts for which funding has not been appropriated or otherwise authorized and from unexercised priced contract options. Negotiated unfunded backlog does not include any estimate of future potential task orders expected to be awarded under IDIQ, GSA Schedules or other master agreement contract vehicles.
We expect to recognize revenue from a substantial portion of our funded backlog within the next twelve months. However, the U.S. government can adjust the scope of services of or cancel contracts at any time. Similarly, certain contracts with commercial customers include provisions that allow the customer to cancel prior to contract completion. Most of our contracts have cancellation terms that would permit us to recover all or a portion of our incurred costs and fees (contract profit) for work performed.
The estimated value of our total backlog as of the dates presented was:
We had net bookings worth an estimated $11.9 billion and $7.9 billion during fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. Fiscal 2021 total backlog has increased from the prior year primarily due to several large awards received during the period from the U.S. Army, the intelligence community, and other various federal government customers. In addition, $1.5 billion of acquired backlog from Unisys Federal was recorded as an increase to backlog as of the acquisition date.
As described above, our backlog represents the estimated amount of future revenues to be recognized under negotiated contracts as work is performed and is reduced as revenue is recognized or as our customers take action to close contracts and/or de-obligate funds. Our recent experience indicates that these contract actions have not been timely on certain programs. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, we included a valuation adjustment for open unfulfilled contracts that, in our judgment, may not be converted to future sales, but which have not been closed or de-obligated by the customer. The effect of this reduced backlog by $2.2 billion as of January 29, 2021 and would have had only an immaterial impact as of January 31, 2020.
Contract Types. Our earnings and profitability may vary materially depending on changes in the proportionate amount of revenues derived from each type of contract. For a discussion of the types of contracts under which we
SCIENCE APPLICATIONS INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
generate revenue, see “Business-Contract Types” in Part I of this report. The following table summarizes revenues by contract type as a percentage of revenues for the periods presented:
Our contract mix reflects an increase in firm-fixed price and time and materials type contracts due to the acquisition of Unisys Federal, which historically had a higher proportion of these contracts.
Cost of Revenues Mix. We generate revenues by providing a customized mix of services to our customers. The profit generated from our service contracts is affected by the proportion of cost of revenues incurred from the efforts of our employees (which we refer to below as labor-related cost of revenues), the efforts of our subcontractors and the cost of materials used in the performance of our service obligations under our contracts. Contracts performed with a higher proportion of SAIC labor are generally more profitable. The following table presents changes in cost mix for the periods presented:
Cost of revenues mix for fiscal 2021 reflects an increase in other materials-related content primarily due to the acquisition of Unisys Federal, which historically had a higher proportion of such costs, and a decrease in supply chain materials-related content.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As a services provider, our business generally requires minimal infrastructure investment. We expect to fund our ongoing working capital, commitments and any other discretionary investments with cash on hand, future operating cash flows and, if needed, borrowings under our $400 million Revolving Credit Facility and $300 million receivable factoring facility.
We anticipate that our future cash needs will be for working capital, capital expenditures, and contractual and other commitments. We consider various financial measures when we develop and update our cash deployment strategy, which include evaluating cash provided by operating activities, free cash flow and financial leverage. When our cash generation enables us to exceed our target average minimum cash balance, we intend to deploy excess cash through dividends, share repurchases, debt prepayments or strategic acquisitions.
Upon the acquisition of Unisys Federal, we drew $600 million on our incremental senior secured Term Loan B2 Facility due March 2027 and issued $400 million of Senior Notes due 2028. In addition, in February 2020 we sold $200 million of accounts receivable under our receivable factoring facility. The proceeds were used for the purchase of Unisys Federal.
SCIENCE APPLICATIONS INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Our ability to fund these needs will depend, in part, on our ability to generate cash in the future, which depends on our future financial results. Our future results are subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative and regulatory factors that may be outside of our direct control. Although we believe that the financing arrangements in place will permit us to finance our operations on acceptable terms and conditions for at least the next year, our future access to, and the availability of financing on acceptable terms and conditions will be impacted by many factors (including our credit rating, capital market liquidity and overall economic conditions). Therefore, we cannot ensure that such financing will be available to us on acceptable terms or that such financing will be available at all. Nevertheless, we believe that our existing cash on hand, generation of future operating cash flows, and access to bank financing and capital markets will provide adequate resources to fund our short-term liquidity and long-term capital needs.
Borrowings under our Term Loan Facilities, our receivable factoring facility and, if used in the future, our Revolving Credit Facility incur interest at a variable rate. In accordance with our risk management objectives, we hold fixed interest rate swap agreements to hedge the variability in interest payment cash flows on a substantial portion of our outstanding variable rate debt. These instruments are accounted for as cash flow hedges. Under the swap agreements, we pay the fixed rate and the counterparties to the agreement pay a floating interest rate.
Our Credit Facility contains customary terms and conditions including financial covenants and covenants restricting the Company's ability to merge or consolidate with another entity or undertake other fundamental changes, enter into property sale and leaseback transactions, and incur liens. The Company’s dividends and share repurchases may be limited under certain leverage ratios, and we may be required to make an annual debt prepayment based on our cash flows from operating activities. See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements contained within this report for a more complete understanding of our Credit Facility.
We currently maintain credit ratings from major U.S. rating agencies. Failure to maintain acceptable ratings could have an adverse effect on the Company’s future cost of capital and any significant increase in the level of our borrowings could negatively impact these ratings.
During fiscal 2021 we repurchased approximately 0.2 million shares of our common stock for $19 million from the open market in connection with our existing share repurchase program. Since the program’s inception in December of 2013, we have repurchased 12.0 million shares for $735 million.
Historical Cash Flow Trends
The following table summarizes our cash flows:
Cash Provided by Operating Activities. Refer to “Results of Operations” above for a discussion of the changes in cash provided by operating activities between fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020.
Cash Used in Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities increased in fiscal 2021 compared to the prior year period primarily due to cash paid for the acquisition of Unisys Federal and higher capital expenditures for property, plant, and equipment, partially offset by proceeds from divestiture and lower purchases of marketable securities.
Cash Provided by/Used in Financing Activities. Cash provided by financing activities increased in fiscal 2021 compared to the prior year period primarily due to proceeds from borrowings obtained to finance the Unisys Federal acquisition and lower share repurchases in the current year period. These changes were partially offset by higher voluntary principal payments during the current year period and payments of debt issuance costs related to the additional borrowings.
SCIENCE APPLICATIONS INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
For an understanding of our obligations relating to surety bonds, see Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements contained within this report.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes, as of January 29, 2021, our obligations to make future payments pursuant to certain contracts or arrangements and provides an estimate of the fiscal years in which these obligations are expected to be satisfied:
(1)The amounts presented are based on an anticipated loan repayment schedule. However, we may be required to make certain mandatory prepayments based on our level of cash flow generation and we also have the option to prepay loan principal amounts at any time.
(2)Amounts include an estimate of future variable interest payments on the Term Loan Facilities based on scheduled outstanding principal amounts, current applicable margin and projected 1-month LIBOR as of January 29, 2021. The amounts presented in this table exclude the effects of interest rate swaps used to hedge against changes in 1-month LIBOR.
(3)Includes estimated obligations to transfer funds under legally enforceable agreements for fixed or minimum amounts or quantities of goods or services at fixed or minimum prices. Excludes purchase orders for services or products to be delivered pursuant to U.S. government contracts in which we have full recourse under normal contract termination clauses.
(4)Other long-term liabilities primarily consist of liabilities associated with deferred compensation plan obligations, liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits, the deferral of certain payroll tax payments as permitted by the CARES Act, and expected contributions to fund defined benefit plans for fiscal 2022. Deferred compensation plan obligations have been allocated to fiscal years based on participants’ payment elections on retirement and estimated retirement ages, but is subject to acceleration on participants’ termination of employment prior to retirement. Liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits are allocated to the fiscal years in which the statute of limitations is currently expected to expire. Expected contributions to fund defined benefit plans after fiscal 2022 are not estimable at this time.
Commitments and Contingencies
We are subject to a number of reviews, investigations, claims, lawsuits and other uncertainties related to our business. For a discussion of these items, see Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements contained within this report.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingencies, as well as the reported amounts of revenues, expenses, gains and losses during the reporting periods. Management evaluates these estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates and assumptions have been prepared on the basis of the most current reasonably available information and, in some cases, are our basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Estimates and assumptions may change in the future as more current information is available.
SCIENCE APPLICATIONS INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Management believes that our critical accounting policies are those that are both material to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments. Typically, the circumstances that make these judgments difficult, subjective and complex have to do with making estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. These policies are described below.
Revenue Recognition. We generate our revenues primarily from long-term contracts in which we provide technical, engineering and enterprise IT services directly for the U.S. government and as a subcontractor with other contractors engaged in work for the U.S. government. We evaluate the nature of the contract and the services provided when determining the accounting method utilized for each contract. We recognize a significant portion of our revenues using a cost input measure of progress that requires us to rely on the skill and expertise of our engineers, program managers and business management professionals in the many areas of cost estimation. These estimates of costs can span several years and take into account many factors including the availability, productivity and cost of labor, potential delays in our performance and the level of future indirect cost allocations.
We provide for anticipated losses on long-term production type contracts and service contracts with the U.S. government by recording an expense for the total expected contract loss during the period when the loss is determined. Contract costs incurred for U.S. government contracts (including allocated indirect costs) are subject to audit and adjustment through negotiations with government representatives. Revenues on U.S. government contracts have been recorded in amounts that are expected to be realized on final settlement.
Many of our contracts include forms of variable consideration such as reimbursable costs, award and incentive fees, usage-based pricing, service-level penalties, performance bonuses, and other provisions that can either increase or decrease the transaction price. Variable amounts generally are determined upon our achievement of certain performance metrics, program milestones or cost targets and may be based upon customer discretion. At contract inception, we estimate the transaction price and may include variable consideration in the transaction price only to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. When developing these estimates, we consider the customer, contract terms, the complexity of the work and related risks, the extent of customer discretion, historical experience and the potential of a significant reversal of revenue.
Changes in Estimates on Contracts. Changes in estimates of revenues, cost of revenues or profits related to performance obligations satisfied over time are recognized in operating income in the period in which such changes are made for the inception-to-date effect of the changes. Changes in these estimates can routinely occur over the performance period for a variety of reasons, which include: changes in scope; changes in cost estimates due to unanticipated cost growth or reassessments of risks impacting costs; changes in the estimated transaction price, such as variable amounts for incentive or award fees; and performance being better or worse than previously estimated. In cases when total expected costs exceed total estimated revenues for a performance obligation, the Company recognizes the total estimated loss in the quarter identified. Total estimated losses are inclusive of any unexercised options that are probable of award, only if they increase the amount of the loss. Aggregate net changes in contract estimates increased operating income by $9 million, $22 million, and $17 million for fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. For additional information related to changes in estimates on contracts, including gross favorable and unfavorable adjustments as well as the impact to earnings per share, see Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements contained within this report.
Business Combinations. We record all tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination at fair value as of the acquisition date, which is determined using a cost, market or income approach. The excess amount of the aggregated purchase consideration paid over the fair value of the net of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Acquisition date fair value represents the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants as measured on the acquisition date.
The valuations are based on information that existed as of the acquisition date. During the measurement period that shall not exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may adjust provisional amounts recorded for assets acquired and liabilities assumed to reflect new information that we have subsequently obtained regarding facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date.
Acquisition-related costs that are not part of the purchase price consideration are expensed as incurred, except for certain costs that are deferred in connection with the issuance of debt. These costs typically include transaction-related costs, such as finder’s fees, and legal, accounting and other professional costs.
SCIENCE APPLICATIONS INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Goodwill and Intangible Assets. Goodwill is recorded as the difference between the aggregate consideration paid for an acquisition and the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized, but rather tested for potential impairment annually at the beginning of the fourth quarter, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
The goodwill impairment test is performed at the reporting unit level. The Company estimates and compares the fair value of each reporting unit to its respective carrying value including goodwill. If the fair value is less than the carrying value, the amount of impairment expense is equal to the difference between the reporting unit’s fair value and the reporting unit’s carrying value.
Determining the fair value of each reporting unit involves judgment and the use of estimates and assumptions. We estimate the fair value of our reporting units using either a market approach, income approach, or a combination of both. For our annual impairment analysis, we reconcile the aggregate fair value of all of our reporting units to our market capitalization as of the measurement date.
Under the income approach, we estimate the fair value of a reporting unit using a multi-year discounted cash flow model that involves assumptions about projected future revenue growth, operating margins, income tax rates, capital expenditures, discount rate and terminal value. The discount rate is an estimate of the cost of capital that a market participant would expect for the respective reporting unit. The terminal value represents the present value in the last year of the projection period of all subsequent cash flows into perpetuity.
Under the market approach, we estimate the fair value of a reporting unit based on multiples of earnings derived from observable market data of comparable public companies. We evaluate companies within our industry that have operations with observable and comparable economic characteristics and are similar in nature, scope and size to the reporting unit being compared. We analyze historical acquisitions in our industry to estimate a control premium that we incorporate into the fair value estimate of a reporting unit under the market approach.
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, we completed our annual goodwill impairment testing and determined that each reporting unit's fair value significantly exceeded its carrying value.
In addition, determining the carrying value of each reporting unit requires judgment and involves the assignment of assets and liabilities to the reporting units based on a systematic and rational allocation methodology. Certain assets and liabilities may be specifically identified and assigned to a reporting unit based on the information contained within our financial systems; whereas, other assets and liabilities may be allocated using measurable relationships or other basis for allocation.
Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized using the method that best reflects how their economic benefits are utilized or, if a pattern of economic benefits cannot be reliably determined, on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. Intangible assets with finite lives are assessed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Income Taxes. Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect our best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid and includes judgments related to matters for which ultimate resolution may not become known until the final resolution of an examination by taxing authorities or the statute of limitations lapses.
We record net deferred tax assets to the extent we believe these assets will more likely than not be realized. In making this determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent operating results. If we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred income tax assets in the future in excess of their net recorded amount or would no longer be able to realize our deferred income tax assets in the future as currently recorded, we would make an adjustment to the valuation allowance, which would either decrease or increase, respectively, the provision for income taxes.
Recently Issued But Not Yet Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
For information on recently issued but not yet adopted accounting pronouncements, see Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements contained within this report.
SCIENCE APPLICATIONS INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
Effects of Inflation
For any of the most recent three fiscal years ended January 29, 2021, inflation has not had a significant impact on revenues or costs. Most of our contracts are paid in U.S. dollars and our cost to perform on these contracts are generally paid in U.S. dollars, so inflation risk is generally limited to that which is related to the U.S. dollar. Approximately 54% of our revenues for fiscal 2021 were derived from cost-reimbursement type contracts, which have limited inflation risk because our contracts generally entail the provision of labor on a reimbursable basis, and, when materials are acquired, they provide for billing to the customer during the period in which the materials were received. Bids for longer-term FFP and T&M contracts typically include sufficient provisions for labor and other cost escalations to cover anticipated cost increases over the period of performance. As a result, if we were to experience significant levels of inflation, our revenues and costs for cost-type contracts would generally both increase commensurate with inflation and operating income as a percentage of total revenues would not be significantly affected. Operating income as a percentage of total revenues would not be significantly affected for longer-term FFP and T&M contracts to the extent that bid contract cost escalations are sufficient to cover heightened inflation levels.