Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Statements
In this Form 10-K and in other documents incorporated herein, as well as in oral statements made by the Company, statements that are prefaced with the words “may,” “will,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “continue,” “estimate,” “project,” “intend,” “designed,” and similar expressions, are intended to identify forward-looking statements regarding events, conditions, and financial trends that may affect the Company’s future plans of operations, business strategy, results of operations, and financial position. These statements are based on the Company’s current expectations and estimates as to prospective events and circumstances about which the Company can give no firm assurance. Further, any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which such statement is made, and the Company undertakes no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect future events or circumstances. Forward-looking statements should not be relied upon as a prediction of actual future financial condition or results. These forward-looking statements, like any forward-looking statements, involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected or anticipated. Such risks and uncertainties include the factors set forth above and the other information set forth in this Form 10-K.
Introduction and COVID-19 Pandemic
The Boston Beer Company is engaged in the business of producing and selling alcohol beverages primarily in the domestic market and, to a lesser extent, in selected international markets. The Company’s revenues are primarily derived by selling its hard seltzers, beers and hard ciders to Distributors, who in turn sell the products to retailers and drinkers.
The Company’s hard seltzers, beers and hard ciders are primarily positioned in the market for High End beer occasions. The High End category has seen high single-digit compounded annual growth over the past ten years. The Company believes that the High End category is positioned to increase market share in the total beer category, as drinkers continue to trade up in taste and quality. Boston Beer is one of the largest suppliers in the High End category in the United States. In measured off-premise channels, the Company estimates that in 2020 the High End category percentage volume growth was approximately 25% with the craft beer category volume growth approximately 13% and total beer category volume growth approximately 10%. The Company believes that the High End category volume is over 35% of the United States beer market. Depletions or Distributor sales to retailers of the Company’s hard seltzers, beers and hard ciders for the 52 week fiscal period ended December 26, 2020, increased approximately 37% from the comparable 52 week fiscal period in the prior year, of which 35% is from Boston Beer legacy brands and 2% is from the addition of Dogfish Head brands beginning July 3, 2019.
The Company began seeing the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its business in early March 2020. The direct financial impact of the pandemic has primarily shown in significantly reduced keg demand from the on-premise channel and higher labor and safety-related costs at the Company’s breweries. In the 52-week period ended December 26, 2020, the Company recorded COVID-19 related pre-tax reductions in net revenue and increases in other costs that total $16.0 million, of which $1.8 million was recorded in the fourth quarter. The total amount consists of a $3.3 million reduction in net revenue for estimated keg returns from distributors and retailers and $12.7 million of other COVID-19 related direct costs, of which $8.2 million are recorded in cost of goods sold and $4.5 million are recorded in operating expenses. In addition to these direct financial impacts, COVID-19 related safety measures resulted in a reduction of brewery productivity. This has shifted more volume to third-party breweries, which increased production costs and negatively impacted gross margins. The Company will continue to assess and manage this situation and will provide a further update in each quarterly earnings release, to the extent that the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic are then known more clearly.
Outlook
Year-to-date depletions reported to the Company for the 6 weeks ended February 6, 2021 are estimated by the Company to have increased approximately 53% from the comparable weeks in 2020.
The Company is targeting Non-GAAP earnings per diluted share for 2021 of between $20.00 and $24.00, excluding the impact of ASU 2016-09, Stock Compensation (Topic 718), Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting, but actual results could vary significantly from this target. The Company is forecasting 2021 depletions and shipments percentage increases of between 35% and 45%. The Company is targeting national price increases of between 1% and 2%. Full-year 2021 gross margins are currently expected to be between 45% and 47%, a decrease from the previously communicated estimate of between 46% and 48%. The Company intends to increase advertising, promotional and selling expenses by between $120 million and $140 million for the full year 2021, a decrease from the previously communicated estimate of between $130 million and $150 million, which does not include any increases in freight costs for the shipment of products to its Distributors. The Company intends to increase its investment in its brands in 2021 commensurate with the
opportunities for growth that it sees, but there is no guarantee that such increased investments will result in increased volumes. The Company estimates a full-year 2021 Non-GAAP effective tax rate of approximately 26.5%, excluding the impact of ASU 2016-09. This effective tax rate estimate also, excludes the potential impact of changes to current federal income tax laws and regulations that could occur later in 2021. Non-GAAP earnings per diluted share and Non-GAAP effective tax rate are not defined terms under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). These Non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for diluted earnings per share and effective tax rate data prepared in accordance with GAAP, and may not be comparable to calculations of similarly titled measures by other companies. Management believes these Non-GAAP measures provide meaningful and useful information to investors and analysts regarding our outlook and facilitate period to period comparisons of our forecasted financial performance. Non-GAAP earnings per diluted share and Non-GAAP effective tax rate exclude the potential impact of ASU 2016-09, which could be significant and will depend largely upon unpredictable future events outside the Company’s control, including the timing and value realized upon exercise of stock options versus the fair value of those options when granted. Therefore, because of the uncertainty and variability of the impact of ASU 2016-09, the Company is unable to provide, without unreasonable effort, a reconciliation of these Non-GAAP measures on a forward-looking basis.
The Company is continuing to evaluate 2021 capital expenditures. Its current estimates are between $300 million and $400 million, consisting mostly of continued investments in capacity and efficiency improvements at the Company’s breweries. The actual total amount spent on 2021 capital expenditures may well be different from these estimates. Based on information currently available, the Company believes that its capacity requirements for 2021 can be covered by its Company-owned breweries and contracted capacity at third-party brewers.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 26, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 28, 2019
Net revenue. Net revenue increased by $486.6 million, or 38.9%, to $1,736.4 million for the year ended December 26, 2020, as compared to $1,249.8 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, due primarily to increased shipments.
Volume. Total shipment volume of 7,368,000 barrels for the year ended December 26, 2020 increased by 38.8% over 2019 levels of 5,307,000 barrels, due primarily to increases in shipments of Truly Hard Seltzer and Twisted Tea and the addition of the Dogfish Head brands, partially offset by decreases in its Samuel Adamas and Angry Orchard brands.
Depletions, or sales by Distributors to retailers, of the Company’s products for the year ended December 28, 2019 increased by approximately 37% compared to the prior year, primarily due to increases in depletions of Truly Hard Seltzer and Twisted Tea brands and the addition of the Dogfish Head brands, partially offset by decreases in its Samuel Adams and Angry Orchard brands.
Net Revenue per barrel. The net revenue per barrel increased by 0.1% to $235.67 per barrel for the year ended December 26, 2020, as compared to $235.51 per barrel for the year ended December 28, 2019, primarily due price increases partially offset by unfavorable package mix.
Cost of goods sold. Cost of goods sold was $125.13 per barrel for the year ended December 26, 2020, as compared to $119.78 per barrel for the year ended December 28, 2019. The 2020 increase in cost of goods sold of $5.35 or 4.5% per barrel was primarily the result of higher processing costs due to increased production at third party breweries and higher processing costs and finished goods keg inventory write-offs at Company-owned breweries, partially offset by cost saving initiatives at Company-owned breweries.
Gross profit. Gross profit was $110.54 per barrel for the year ended December 26, 2020, as compared to $115.73 per barrel for the year ended December 28, 2019. Gross margin was 46.9% for the year ended December 26, 2020, as compared to 49.1% for the year ended December 28, 2019.
The Company includes freight charges related to the movement of finished goods from manufacturing locations to Distributor locations in its advertising, promotional and selling expense line item. As such, the Company’s gross margins may not be comparable to other entities that classify costs related to distribution differently.
Advertising, promotional and selling. Advertising, promotional and selling expenses, increased $92.0 million, or 25.9%, to $447.6 million for the year ended December 26, 2020, as compared to $355.6 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. The increase was primarily the result of increased investments in media and production, higher salaries and benefits costs, the addition of Dogfish Head brand related expenses beginning July 3, 2019, and increased freight to distributors due to higher volumes.
Advertising, promotional and selling expenses were 25.8% of net revenue, or $60.74 per barrel, for the year ended December 26, 2020, as compared to 28.5% of net revenue, or $67.01 per barrel, for the year ended December 28, 2019. The Company will invest in advertising and promotional campaigns that it believes are effective, but there is no guarantee that such investment will generate sales growth.
The Company conducts certain advertising and promotional activities in its Distributors’ markets, and the Distributors make contributions to the Company for such efforts. These amounts are included in the Company’s statement of operations as reductions to advertising, promotional and selling expenses. Historically, contributions from Distributors for advertising and promotional activities have amounted to between 2% and 3% of net sales. The Company may adjust its promotional efforts in the Distributors’ markets, if changes occur in these promotional contribution arrangements, depending on the industry and market conditions.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses increased by $5.5 million, or 4.9%, to $118.2 million for the year ended December 26, 2020, as compared to $112.7 million for the comparable period in 2019. The increase was primarily due to increases in salaries and benefits costs and the addition of Dogfish Head general and administrative expenses beginning July 3, 2019, partially offset by the Dogfish Head transaction-related fees of $7.8 million incurred in the comparable 52-week period in 2019.
Impairment of assets. For the year ended December 26, 2020, the Company incurred impairment charges of $4.5 million, based upon its review of the carrying values of its property, plant and equipment. These impairment charges were primarily due to the write-down of brewery equipment at Company-owned breweries.
Stock-based compensation expense. For the year ended December 26, 2020, an aggregate of $15.3 million in stock-based compensation expense is included in advertising, promotional and selling expenses and general and administrative expenses. Stock compensation increased by $3.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to achievement of performance-based awards.
Provision for income taxes. The Company’s effective tax rate decreased to 21.4% for the year ended December 26, 2020 from approximately 23.8% for the year ended December 28, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a higher tax benefit from stock option activity recorded in accordance with ASU 2016-09.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash increased to $163.3 million as of December 26, 2020 from $36.7 million as of December 28, 2019, reflecting cash provided by operating activities and proceeds from exercise of stock options and sale of investment shares, partially offset by purchases of property, plant and equipment.
Cash provided by or used in operating activities consists of net income, adjusted for certain non-cash items, such as depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense and related excess tax benefit, other non-cash items included in operating results, and changes in operating assets and liabilities, such as accounts receivable, inventory, accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Cash provided by operating activities increased from $178.2 million in 2019 to $253.3 million in 2020 principally as a result of increases in shipments and operating income, partially offset by higher investments in working capital, particularly higher inventory and third party brewery prepayments due under production agreements to support increased demand.
Cash used in investing activities decreased from $258.8 million in 2019 to $139.1 million in 2020, primarily as a result of the investment in Dogfish Head in fiscal 2019. Investing activities in 2020 primarily consisted of capital investments made mostly in the Company’s breweries to increase capacity, drive efficiencies and cost reductions, and support product innovation.
Cash provided by financing activities was $12.3 million during 2020, as compared to $8.9 million provided by financing activities during 2019. The $3.4 million increase in cash provided by financing activities in 2020 from 2019 is primarily due to higher proceeds from exercise of stock options and sale of investment shares.
In 1998, the Board of Directors authorized management to implement a stock repurchase program. During the year ended December 26, 2020, the Company did not repurchase any shares of its Class A Common Stock under the stock repurchase program. As of December 26, 2020, the Company had repurchased a cumulative total of approximately 13.8 million shares of its Class A Common Stock for an aggregate purchase price of $840.7 million. From December 27, 2020 through February 12, 2021, the Company did not repurchase any shares of its Class A Common Stock. The Company has approximately $90.3 million remaining on the $931.0 million stock repurchase expenditure limit set by the Board of Directors.
The Company expects that its cash balance as of December 26, 2020 of $163.3 million, along with future operating cash flow and the Company’s unused line of credit of $150.0 million, will be sufficient to fund future cash requirements. The Company’s $150.0 million credit facility has a term not scheduled to expire until March 31, 2023. As of the date of this filing, the Company was not in violation of any of its covenants to the lender under the credit facility and there were no amounts outstanding under the credit facility.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations is based upon its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires the Company to make significant estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. These items are monitored and analyzed by management for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. The more judgmental estimates are summarized below. Changes in estimates are recorded in the period in which they become known. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that the Company believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from the Company’s estimates if past experience or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate.
Provision for Excess or Expired Inventory
The provisions for excess or expired inventory are based on management’s estimates of forecasted usage of inventories on hand and under contract. Forecasting usage involves significant judgments regarding future demand for the Company’s various existing products and products under development as well as the potency and shelf-life of various ingredients. A
significant change in the timing or level of demand for certain products as compared to forecasted amounts may result in recording additional provisions for excess or expired inventory in the future. Provisions for excess inventory are included in cost of goods sold and have historically been adequate to provide for losses on its inventory. Provision for excess or expired inventory included in cost of goods sold was $11.3 million, $8.1 million and $4.2 million in fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Valuation of Property, Plant and Equipment
The carrying value of property, plant and equipment, net of accumulated depreciation, at December 26, 2020 was $623.1 million. For purposes of determining whether there are any impairment losses, as further discussed below, management has historically examined the carrying value of the Company’s identifiable long-lived assets, including their useful lives, semi-annually, or more frequently when indicators of impairment are present. Evaluations of whether indicators of impairment exist involve judgments regarding the current and future business environment and the length of time the Company intends to use the asset. If an impairment loss is identified based on the fair value of the asset, as compared to the carrying value of the asset, such loss would be charged to expense in the period the impairment is identified. Furthermore, if the review of the carrying values of the long-lived assets indicates impairment of such assets, the Company may determine that shorter estimated useful lives are more appropriate. In that event, the Company will be required to record additional depreciation in future periods, which will reduce earnings. Estimating the amount of impairment, if any, requires significant judgments including identification of potential impairments, market comparison to similar assets, estimated cash flows to be generated by the asset, discount rates, and the remaining useful life of the asset. Impairment of assets included in operating expenses was $4.4 million, $0.9 million and $0.7 million in fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Factors generally considered important which could trigger an impairment review on the carrying value of long-lived assets include the following: (1) significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results; (2) significant changes in the manner of use of acquired assets or the strategy for the Company’s overall business; (3) underutilization of assets; and (4) discontinuance of products by the Company or its customers. The Company believes that the carrying value of its long-lived assets was realizable as of December 26, 2020 and December 28, 2019.
Valuation of Goodwill and Indefinite Lived Intangible Assets
The Company has recorded intangible assets with indefinite lives and goodwill for which impairment testing is required at least annually or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that these assets might be impaired. The Company performs its annual impairment tests and re-evaluates the useful lives of other intangible assets with indefinite lives at the annual impairment test measurement date in the third quarter of each fiscal year or when circumstances arise that indicate a possible impairment or change in useful life might exist.
The Company’s annual goodwill impairment evaluation analysis indicated that the fair value of the Company’s goodwill was substantially greater than the carrying value and there was no impairment to record during 2020. The guidance for goodwill impairment testing allows an entity to assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit, of which the Company has one, is less than its carrying amount or to proceed directly to performing a quantitative impairment test. Under the quantitative assessment, the estimated fair value of the Company’s reporting unit is compared to its carrying value, including goodwill. The estimate of fair value of the Company’s reporting unit is generally calculated based on an income approach using the discounted cash flow method supplemented by the market approach which considers the Company’s market capitalization and enterprise value. If the estimated fair value of the Company’s reporting unit is less than the carrying value of its reporting unit, a goodwill impairment will be recognized. In estimating the fair value of the Company’s reporting unit, management must make assumptions and projections regarding such items as future cash flows, future revenues, future earnings, cost of capital, and other factors. The assumptions used in the estimate of fair value are based on historical trends and the projections and assumptions that are used in current strategic operating plans. These assumptions reflect management’s estimates of future economic and competitive conditions and are, therefore, subject to change as a result of changing market conditions. If these estimates or their related assumptions change in the future, the Company may be required to recognize an impairment loss for the Company’s goodwill which could have a material adverse impact on the Company’s financial statements.
The Company’s annual intangible asset impairment evaluation analysis indicated that the fair value of the intangible assets were greater than the carrying value and there was no impairment to record during 2020. The Company’s intangible assets consist primarily of a trademark and customer relationships obtained through the Company’s Dogfish Head acquisition. Customer relationships are amortized over their estimated useful lives. The Dogfish Head trademark which was determined
to have an indefinite useful life is not amortized. The guidance for indefinite lived intangible asset impairment testing allows an entity to assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances indicates that it is more likely than not that the indefinite lived intangible asset is impaired or to proceed directly to performing the quantitative impairment test. Under the quantitative assessment, the trademark is evaluated for impairment by comparing the carrying value of the trademark to its estimated fair value. The estimated fair value of the trademark is calculated based on an income approach using the relief from royalty method. If the estimated fair value is less than the carrying value of the trademark, then an impairment charge is recognized to reduce the carrying value of the trademark to its estimated fair value.
The fair value of the Dogfish Head trademark calculated in the third quarter of 2020 equaled 117.7% of its carrying value. The carrying value of the Dogfish Head trademark was $98.5 million as of December 26, 2020. Significant judgement is required to estimate the fair value the Dogfish Head trademark. Accordingly, the Company obtains the assistance of third-party valuation specialists as part of the impairment evaluation. In estimating the fair value of the trademark, management must make assumptions and projections regarding future cash flows based upon future revenues, the market-based royalty rate, the discount rate, the tax rate and other factors. These assumptions reflect management’s estimates of future economic and competitive conditions and consider many factors including macroeconomic conditions, industry growth rates, competitive activities, as well as the impact the COVID-19 pandemic has had on the Company. The assumptions and projections used in the estimate of fair value are consistent with historical trends and those used in current strategic operating plans and the Company believes they are reasonable and comparable to those that would be used by other marketplace participants. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in the temporary closures of certain on-premise channels of distribution and a corresponding decline in net revenue from those on-premise channels. There is a significant amount of uncertainty relating to how the pandemic will evolve and how governments and consumers will react. The Company’s third quarter 2020 impairment evaluation assumes the pandemic’s impact on revenues will begin to abate during the first half of fiscal 2021 and significantly improve by the second half of the fiscal year. If these estimates or their related assumptions change in the future, the Company may be required to recognize an impairment loss for the Dogfish Head trademark which could have a material adverse impact on the Company’s financial statements.
The Company performed a sensitivity analysis on our significant assumptions used in the Dogfish Head trademark fair value calculation, each of which we determined to be reasonable, and determined the following:
•
A decrease in the revenue growth rates of 26.8% would decrease the fair value calculation from 117.7% of carrying value to 100% of carrying value.
•
A decrease in the discount rate of 1.5% would increase the fair value to 141.2% of carrying value and an increase of the discount rate of 1.5% would decrease the fair value to 100.5% of carrying value.
Business Combinations
On July 3, 2019, the Company completed its acquisition of Dogfish Head Brewery and various related operations (the “Transaction”), through the acquisition of all of the equity interests held by certain private entities in Off-Centered Way LLC, the parent holding company of the Dogfish Head Brewery operations. Dogfish Head results of operations have been included in the Company’s financial results beginning after the closing date of July 3, 2019. Under the acquisition method of accounting, the Company allocated the fair value of purchase consideration transferred to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values on the date of the acquisition. The fair values assigned, defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between willing market participants, are based on estimates and assumptions determined by management. The excess purchase consideration over the aggregate fair value of tangible and intangible assets, net of liabilities assumed, is recorded as goodwill. When determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, the Company makes significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. The Company’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. The fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed is typically determined by using either estimates of replacement costs or discounted cash flow valuation methods. When determining the fair value of tangible assets acquired, the Company must estimate the cost to replace the asset with a new asset taking into consideration such factors as age, condition and the economic useful life of the asset. When determining the fair value of intangible assets acquired, the Company must estimate the applicable discount rate, the royalty rate, and the timing and amount of future expected cash flows. During the measurement period, not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, the Company may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with a corresponding offset to goodwill if new information is obtained related to facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date. After the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are reflected in the consolidated statements of operations. Acquisition costs, such as legal and consulting fees, are expensed as incurred.
Revenue Recognition and Classification of Customer Programs and Incentives
The Company recognizes revenue when obligations under the terms of a contract with its customer are satisfied; generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of its products. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration expected to be received in exchange for transferring products. If the conditions for revenue recognition are not met, the Company defers the revenue until all conditions are met. As of December 26, 2020 and December 28, 2019, the Company has deferred $13.5 million and $7.0 million, respectively in revenue related to product shipped prior to these dates. These amounts are included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
The Company is committed to maintaining the freshness of the product in the market. In certain circumstances and with the Company’s approval, the Company accepts and destroys stale beer that is returned by Distributors. The Company generally credits approximately fifty percent of the distributor’s cost of the beer that has passed its expiration date for freshness when it is returned to the Company or destroyed. The Company reduces revenue and establishes an accrual based upon both historical returns, which is applied to an estimated lag time for receipt of product, and knowledge of specific return transactions. Estimating this reserve involves significant judgments and estimates, including comparability of historical return trends to future trends, lag time from date of sale to date of return, and product mix of returns. Stale beer expense is reflected in the accompanying financial statements as a reduction of revenue. Historically, the cost of actual stale beer returns has been in line with established reserves, however, the cost could differ materially from the estimated reserve which would impact revenue. As of December 26, 2020 and December 28, 2019, the stale beer reserve was $3.1 million and $1.8 million, respectively.
Customer programs and incentives are a common practice in the alcohol beverage industry. Amounts paid in connection with customer programs and incentives are recorded as reductions to net revenue or as advertising, promotional and selling expenses, based on the nature of the expenditure. Customer incentives and other payments made to Distributors are primarily based upon performance of certain marketing and advertising activities. Depending on applicable state laws and regulations, these activities promoting the Company’s products may include, but are not limited to point-of-sale and merchandise placement, samples, product displays, promotional programs at retail locations and meals, travel and entertainment. Amounts paid to customers in connection with these programs that were recorded as reductions to net revenue or as advertising, promotional and selling expenses totaled $85.0 million, $75.2 million and $55.5 million in fiscal year 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Estimates are based on historical and projected experience for each type of program or customer and have historically been in line with actual costs incurred.
Customer promotional discount programs are entered into with Distributors for certain periods of time. Amounts paid to Distributors in connection with these programs in fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $59.3 million, $43.9 million and $34.5 million, respectively. The reimbursements for discounts to Distributors are recorded as reductions to net revenue. The agreed-upon discount rates are applied to certain Distributors’ sales to retailers, based on volume metrics, in order to determine the total discounted amount. The computation of the discount allowance requires that management make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the timing and amounts of revenue and liabilities recorded. Actual promotional discounts owed and paid have historically been in line with allowances recorded by the Company, however, the amounts could differ from the estimated allowance.
Customer incentives and other payments are made primarily to Distributors based upon performance of certain marketing and advertising activities. Depending on applicable state laws and regulations, these activities promoting the Company’s products may include, but are not limited to point-of-sale and merchandise placement, samples, product displays, promotional programs at retail locations and meals, travel and entertainment. Amounts paid to customers in connection with these programs in fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $25.7 million, $31.2 million and $21.0 million, respectively. In fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company recorded certain of these costs in the total amount of $23.1 million, $21.6 million, and $13.9 million, respectively, as reductions to net revenue. Costs recognized in net revenues include, but are not limited to, promotional discounts, sales incentives and certain other promotional activities. Costs recognized in advertising, promotional and selling expenses include point of sale materials, samples and media advertising expenditures in local markets. These costs are recorded as incurred, generally when invoices are received; however certain estimates are required at period end. Estimates are based on historical and projected experience for each type of program or customer and have historically been in line with actual costs incurred.
In connection with its preparation of financial statements and other financial reporting, management is required to make certain estimates and assumptions regarding the amount, timing and classification of expenditures resulting from these activities. Actual expenditures incurred could differ from management’s estimates and assumptions.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for share-based awards in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”), which generally requires recognition of share-based compensation costs in financial statements based on fair value. Compensation cost is recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide services in exchange for the award (the requisite service period). The amount of compensation cost recognized in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income is based on the awards ultimately expected to vest, and therefore, reduced for estimated forfeitures. Stock-based compensation was $15.3 million, $12.3 million and $10.0 million in fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
As permitted by ASC 718, the Company elected to use a lattice model, such as the trinomial option-pricing model, to estimate the fair values of stock options. All option-pricing models require the input of subjective assumptions. These assumptions include the estimated volatility of the Company’s common stock price over the expected term, the expected dividend rate, the estimated post-vesting forfeiture rate, the risk-free interest rate and expected exercise behavior. See Note N of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of the application of the option-pricing models.
In addition, an estimated pre-vesting forfeiture rate is applied in the recognition of the compensation charge. Periodically, the Company grants performance-based stock options, related to which it only recognizes compensation expense if it is probable that performance targets will be met. Consequently, at the end of each reporting period, the Company estimates whether it is probable that performance targets will be met. Changes in the subjective assumptions and estimates can materially affect the amount of stock-based compensation expense recognized in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income.
Business Environment
The alcoholic beverage industry is highly regulated at the federal, state and local levels. The TTB and the Justice Department’s Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives enforce laws under the Federal Alcohol Administration Act. The TTB is responsible for administering and enforcing excise tax laws that directly affect the Company’s results of operations. State and regulatory authorities have the ability to suspend or revoke the Company’s licenses and permits or impose substantial fines for violations. The Company has established strict policies, procedures and guidelines in efforts to ensure compliance with all applicable state and federal laws. However, the loss or revocation of any existing license or permit could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s business, results of operations, cash flows and financial position.
The High End category within the United States is highly competitive due to large domestic and international brewers and the increasing number of craft brewers in this category who distribute similar products that have similar pricing and target drinkers. The Company believes that its pricing is appropriate given the quality and reputation of its brands, while realizing that economic pricing pressures may affect future pricing levels. Large domestic and international brewers are able to compete more aggressively than the Company, as they have substantially greater resources, marketing strength and distribution networks than the Company. The Company anticipates competition among domestic craft brewers will remain strong, as the number of craft brewers continues to grow. The Company also increasingly competes with wine and spirits companies, some of which have significantly greater resources than the Company. This competitive environment may affect the Company’s overall performance within the High End category. As the market matures and the High End category continues to consolidate, the Company believes that companies that are well-positioned in terms of brand equity, marketing and distribution will have greater success than those who do not. With its over 400 Distributors nationwide and the Company’s sales force of approximately 515 people, as well as a commitment to maintaining its innovation capability, brand equity and quality, the Company believes it is well positioned to compete in the High End Beer category.
The Potential Impact of Known Facts, Commitments, Events and Uncertainties
Contractual Obligations
See Note L of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note B of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has not entered into any material off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 26, 2020.