Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to our historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as referred to on page 2 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
Executive Overview
We are a global multi-crop, middle-market agricultural company. We are market leaders in the breeding, production and sale of alfalfa seed and sorghum seed. We also have a growing commercial market presence in sunflower, wheat and pasture seed and maintain an active stevia development program.
Our seed platform develops and supplies high quality germplasm designed to produce higher yields for farmers worldwide. We sell over 500 seed products in more than 40 countries. We maintain an active product pipeline and expect to introduce more than 25 new products during the 2021-2022 fiscal years.
Founded in 1980, we began our operations as a limited producer of non-dormant alfalfa seed varieties bred for warm climates and high-yields, including varieties that can thrive in poor, saline soils. Over the years we have built a diversified, global agricultural platform through a combination of organic growth and strategic acquisitions and collaborations, including:
•
Our 2012 acquisition of Imperial Valley Seeds, Inc., which enabled us to expand production of non-GMO alfalfa seed into California's Imperial Valley, thereby ensuring a non-GMO uncontaminated source of alfalfa seed due to the prohibition on growing GMO crops in the Imperial Valley, as well as enabling us to diversify our production areas and distribution channels;
•
Our 2012 acquisition of a portfolio of dormant alfalfa germplasm, which launched our entry into the dormant alfalfa market;
•
Our 2013 acquisition of Seed Genetics International Pty Ltd (now S&W Seed Company Australia Pty Ltd, or S&W Australia), the leading producer of non-dormant alfalfa seed in South Australia, which made us the largest non-dormant alfalfa seed company in the world, with production capabilities in both hemispheres;
•
Our 2014 acquisition of alfalfa production and research facility assets and conventional (non-GMO) alfalfa germplasm from Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Inc., or Pioneer, now a subsidiary of Corteva Agriscience, Inc., which we jointly refer to as Corteva, which substantially broadened and improved our dormant alfalfa germplasm portfolio and deepened our production, research and product development capabilities;
•
Our 2016 acquisition of the business and assets of SV Genetics Pty Ltd, a developer of proprietary hybrid sorghum and sunflower seed germplasm, which expanded our crop focus into two areas which we believe have global growth potential;
•
Our 2018 acquisition of the assets of Chromatin, Inc. and related companies, which positioned us to become a global leader in the hybrid sorghum seed market and enhanced our distribution channels both internationally and within a U.S.-based farmer-dealer network;
•
Our 2018 joint venture with AGT Foods Africa Proprietary Limited and 2019 joint venture with Zaad Holdings Limited, both based in South Africa, each of which were formed to produce our hybrid sunflower, grain sorghum and forage sorghum seed in Africa for sale in Africa, the Middle East and Europe;
•
Our 2019 license of commercialized and developmental wheat germplasm from Corteva, through which we entered the largest grain crop market in Australia;
•
Our 2020 acquisition of Pasture Genetics Ltd., or Pasture Genetics, the third largest pasture seed company in Australia, which further diversified our product offerings in Australia and strengthened our Australian sales team and distribution relationships;
•
Our 2020 collaboration with ADAMA Ltd., or ADAMA, a subsidiary of China National Chemical Engineering Co Ltd., or ChemChina, to bring to the U.S. sorghum market the DoubleTeam™ grassy weed management system, consisting of ADAMA’s proprietary herbicides and our non-GMO, herbicide tolerant sorghum hybrids; and
•
Our 2020 licensing agreement with The Agricultural Alumni Seed Improvement Association, Inc., an affiliate of Purdue University in West Lafayette, IN, to develop and commercialize worldwide a non-GMO, dhurrin-free trait in sorghum species, which essentially eliminates potential livestock death from hydrogen cyanide poisoning when grazing sorghum
In 2019, we restructured our relationship with Corteva (parent company of Pioneer), under which, among other things:
•
We received $45.0 million in fiscal 2019, approximately $16.7 million in fiscal 2020 and approximately $8.3 million in fiscal 2021.
•
Corteva received a fully pre-paid, exclusive license to produce and distribute certain of our alfalfa varieties world-wide (except South America). The licensed varieties include certain of our existing commercial conventional (non-GMO) alfalfa varieties and six pre-commercial dormant alfalfa varieties. Corteva received no license to our other commercial alfalfa varieties or pre-commercial alfalfa pipeline products and no rights to any future products developed by us.
•
We assigned to Corteva grower production contract rights, and Corteva assumed grower production contract obligations, related to the licensed and certain other alfalfa varieties.
•
Our prior Distribution Agreement, related to conventional (non-GMO) alfalfa varieties, and Contract Alfalfa Production Services Agreement, related to GMO-traited alfalfa varieties, with Corteva both terminated. Under the Distribution Agreement, Corteva was obligated to make minimum annual purchases from us.
As a result of the 2018 Chromatin acquisition, the 2019 restructuring of our relationship with Corteva and our February 2020 acquisition of Pasture Genetics, we expect that our results of operations for fiscal 2022 and future periods will differ significantly from prior periods as the mix of our product portfolio rebalances away from a reliance on alfalfa sales (sales of alfalfa seed to Corteva totaled $14.2 million and $19.7 million during the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively) to a more diverse product mix. We do not expect any other significant revenue from sales to Corteva in the future.
COVID-19 Update
We are closely monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 global pandemic on our business and have implemented measures designed to protect the health and safety of our workforce, including a voluntary work-from-home policy for employees who can perform their jobs offsite. We are continuing our activities and are taking precautionary measures to protect our employees working in our facilities.
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to affect the areas in which we operate, we believe the outbreak has and will continue to have a negative impact on our sales, operating results and financial condition. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our sales, operating results and financial condition will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, impact on our customers, employees and vendors, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Our sales efforts historically involved significant in-person interaction with potential customers and distributors. Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, many national, state and local governments in our target markets
implemented various stat-at-home, shelter-in-place and other quarantine measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, we have shifted our sales activities to video conferencing and similar customer interaction models. We continue to evaluate our sales approach, but we have found these alternative approaches to generally be less effective than in-person sales efforts. In particular, our sales cycle is highly seasonal, and the majority of our sales season activities for the United States and Australia are typically concentrated between March and June each year. If ongoing measures designed to protect against COVID-19 remain in effect throughout the 2022 sales season, we may experience similar negative impacts that we experienced during the 2020 and 2021 sales seasons.
In addition, our product revenue is predicated on our ability to timely fulfill customer orders, which depends in large part upon the consistent availability and operation of shipping and distribution networks operated by third parties. Farmers typically have a limited window during which they can plant seed, and their buying decisions can be shaped by actual or perceived disruptions in our distribution and supply channels. If our customers delay or decrease their orders due to potential disruptions in our distribution and supply channels, this will adversely affect our product revenue. During the twelve months ended June 30, 2021, we experienced numerous logistical challenges due to limited availability of trucks for product deliveries, congestion at the ports, and overall rising costs of shipping and transportation costs. We expect these logistical challenges to persist throughout fiscal 2022.
Given these uncertainties, at this time we cannot reasonably estimate the overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operating results and financial condition.
Components of Our Statements of Operations Data
Revenue and Cost of Revenue
Product and Other Revenue
We derive most of our revenue from the sale of our proprietary seed varieties and hybrids. We expect that over the next several years, a substantial majority of our revenue will be generated from the sale of alfalfa, sorghum and pasture seed, although we are continually assessing other possible product offerings or means to increase revenue, including expanding into other, higher margin crops.
The mix of our product offerings will continue to change over time with the introduction of new seed varieties and hybrids resulting from our robust research and development efforts, including our potential expansion into gene-edited products in future periods, and our strategic acquisitions.
Our revenue will fluctuate depending on the timing of orders from our customers and distributors. Because some of our large customers and distributors order in bulk only one or two times per year, our product revenue may fluctuate significantly from period to period. However, some of this fluctuation is offset by having operations in both the northern and southern hemispheres.
Our stevia breeding program has yet to generate any meaningful revenue. However, management continues to evaluate this portion of our business and assess various means to monetize the results of our effort to breed new, better tasting stevia varieties. Such potential opportunities include possible licensing agreements and royalty-based agreements.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue relates to sale of our seed products and consists of the cost of procuring seed, plant conditioning and packaging costs, direct labor and raw materials and overhead costs.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred in the discovery, development, breeding and testing of new products incorporating the traits we have specifically selected. These expenses consist primarily of employee salaries and benefits, consultant services, land leased for field trials, chemicals and supplies and other external expenses.
Overall, we have been focused on controlling research and development expenses, while balancing that objective against the recognition that continued advancement in product development is an important part of our strategic planning. We intend to focus our resources on high value activities. For alfalfa seed, we plan to invest in further development of differentiating forage quality traits. For sorghum, we plan to invest in higher value grain products, proprietary herbicide tolerance traits and improved safety and palatability in forage products. We expect our research and development expenses will fluctuate from period to period as a result of the timing of various research and development projects.
Our internal research and development costs are expensed as incurred, while third-party research and developments costs are expensed when the contracted work has been performed or as milestone results have been achieved. The costs associated with equipment or facilities acquired or construed for research and development activities that have alternative future uses are capitalized and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the asset.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee costs, including salaries, employee benefits and share-based compensation, as well as professional service fees, insurance, marketing, travel and entertainment expense, public company expense and other overhead costs. We proactively take steps on an ongoing basis to control selling, general and administrative expense as much as is reasonably possible.
Depreciation and Amortization
We amortize intangible assets, including those acquired from Pasture Genetics in 2020, Chromatin in 2018 and from SV Genetics in May 2016, using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the asset, consisting of periods of 3-30 years for technology/IP/germplasm, 5-20 years for customer relationships and trade names and 3-20 years for other intangible assets. Property, plant and equipment is depreciated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the asset, consisting of periods of 5-35 years for buildings, 2-20 years for machinery and equipment and 2-5 years for vehicles.
Other (Income) Expense
Other expense consists primarily of foreign currency gains and losses, change in contingent consideration obligation, government grant income, changes in the estimated fair value of assets held for sale and interest expense in connection with amortization of debt discount. Interest expense primarily consists of interest costs related to outstanding borrowings on our working capital credit facilities and our financing with Conterra Agricultural Capital, LLC, or Conterra.
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate is based on income, statutory tax rates, differences in the deductibility of certain expenses and inclusion of certain income items between financial statement and tax return purposes, and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Under U.S. GAAP, if we determine that a tax position is more likely than not of being sustained upon audit, based solely on the technical merits of the position, we recognize the benefit. Tax regulations require certain items to be included in the tax return at different times than when those items are required to be recorded in the consolidated financial statements. As a result, our effective tax rate reflected in our consolidated financial statements is different from that reported in our tax returns. Some of these differences are permanent, such as meals and entertainment expenses that are not fully deductible on our tax return, and some are temporary differences, such as depreciation expense. Temporary differences create deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets generally represent items that can be used as a tax deduction or
credit in our tax return in future years for which we have already recorded the tax benefit in our consolidated statements of operations. In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2017, we recorded a valuation allowance against all of our deferred tax assets. The full valuation allowance was recorded during the fiscal year 2017 as a result of changes to our operating results and future projections, resulting from a decline in export sales to Saudi Arabia. As a result, we don’t believe that it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will be realized.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2021 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2020
Revenue and Cost of Revenue
Revenue for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $84.0 million compared to $79.6 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The $4.4 million increase in revenue for the year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily due to a $9.9 million increase in core product revenue offset by a $5.5 million decrease in product revenue received from Pioneer (subsidiary of Corteva). In May 2019, we terminated the production and distribution agreements with Pioneer, and entered into a new license agreement with Corteva. As of June 30, 2021, we have fully recorded all revenue from Pioneer under its agreement announced in May 2019.
Core Revenue (which we define as total revenue, excluding product revenue attributable to Pioneer) for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $69.8 million compared to Core Revenue for the year ended June 30, 2020 of $59.9 million, representing an increase of $9.9 million or 16.6%. Due to the revised agreements with Pioneer in May 2019, we plan to provide Core Revenue as a metric to track performance of our business until product revenue attributable to our revised agreements with Pioneer is no longer reflected in comparisons between fiscal periods. The increase in Core Revenue for the year ended June 30, 2021 can be primarily attributed to our Pasture Genetics operation, which was acquired in February 2020. Excluding contributions from Pasture Genetics, Core Revenue was flat year over year.
Sales into international markets represented 56% and 54% of our total revenue during the year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Domestic revenue accounted for 44% and 46% of our total revenue for the year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in domestic revenue as a percentage of total revenue was primarily attributable to the termination of the Pioneer and Corteva agreement mentioned above and our Pasture Genetics acquisition in February 2020.
The following table shows revenue from external sources by destination country:
Cost of revenue of $70.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 was equal to 83.7% of total revenue for the year ended June 30, 2021, while the cost of revenue of $64.6 million for the year ended June 30, 2020 was equal to
81.2% of total revenue for the year ended June 30, 2020. Cost of revenue for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 included inventory write-downs of $1.4 million and $2.3 million, respectively. The write-down of inventory during the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 related to certain inventory lots that deteriorated in quality and germination rates during the year.
Gross profit margin for the year ended June 30, 2021 was 16.3% compared to 18.8% in the prior year. The decrease in gross profit margin was primarily driven by compressed gross margins in Australia due to sales mix as we had a higher concentration of lower margin forage cereal products. During the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company experienced numerous logistical challenges due to limited availability of trucks for product deliveries, congestion at the ports, and overall rising costs increases of shipping and transportation costs. The Company expects these logistical challenges to persist throughout fiscal 2022.
Excluding the $1.4 million of inventory write-downs, gross margin would have been 18.0% for the year ended June 30, 2021. Excluding the $2.3 million of inventory write-downs in the prior year, gross margin would have been 21.7% for the year ended June 30, 2020. We believe it’s useful to exclude inventory write-downs in calculating adjusted gross margins in order to provide investors with a method to compare our operating results to prior periods and to peer companies.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, General and Administrative, or SG&A expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 totaled $21.9 million compared to $21.3 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The $0.6 million increase in SG&A expense versus the prior year was primarily due to $2.4 million from our Pasture Genetics operations acquired in February 2020 partially offset by various other cost reductions. As a percentage of revenue, SG&A expenses were 26.0% for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to 26.8% for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 totaled $8.5 million compared to $7.3 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The $1.2 million increase in research and development expense versus the prior year is driven by additional investment in wheat, hybrid sunflower and our hybrid sorghum programs.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $5.5 million compared to $5.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. Included in the amount was amortization expense for intangible assets, which totaled $2.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 and $2.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The $0.5 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense over the comparable period of the prior year was primarily driven by $0.5 million of expense associated with our February 2020 acquisition of Pasture Genetics and $0.2 million of additional expense following our August 2019 acquisition of a wheat breeding program in Australia from Dow AgroScience, or the Dow Wheat Acquisition, partially offset by the decrease of $0.1 million in depreciation due to sale of Five Points in January 2021.
Gain on disposal of property, plant and equipment
We recorded a gain on disposal of property, plant and equipment during the year ended June 30, 2021. This gain is primarily related to the sale of our Five Points facility and other assets located in California.
Change in contingent consideration obligation
The contingent consideration obligation is considered a level 3 fair value financial instrument and will be measured at each reporting period. The $4.0 million benefit to non-cash change in contingent consideration for the year ended
June 30, 2021 represents the decrease in the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration obligation associated with the February 2020 Pasture Genetics acquisition.
Interest Expense - Amortization of Debt Discount
Non-cash amortization of debt discount expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $0.7 million compared to $0.6 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The expense in both years represents the amortization of the debt issuance costs associated with our working capital facilities, our secured property note and our equipment finance leases.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 totaled $2.3 million compared to $2.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. Interest expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 primarily consisted of interest incurred on the working capital credit facilities, the secured property loan entered into in November 2017, and equipment finance leases. Interest expense for the year ended June 30, 2020 primarily consisted of interest incurred on the working capital credit facilities, the secured property loan entered into in November 2017, and equipment finance leases. The $0.3 million increase in interest expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily driven by higher interest resulting from increased levels of borrowing on the working capital credit facilities.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our income tax benefit totaled $(24,358) for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to an income tax expense of $0.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. Our effective tax rate was 0.1% for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to (2.0%) for the year ended June 30, 2020. Our effective tax rate was relatively consistent year over year. The slight increase in our effective tax rate for the year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily attributable to a decrease in our non-US income tax expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. Our tax expense is substantially driven by our full valuation allowance. Due to the valuation allowance, we do not record the income tax expense or benefit related to substantially all of our current year operating results, as such results are generally incorporated in our net operating loss deferred tax asset position, which has a full valuation allowance against it. However, we do record certain tax expenses and benefits related to some of our activity in our non-US locations. For example, we recorded income tax benefit related to the current year activity and prior year tax return filings of our subsidiary located in Australia. We also recorded minor tax expense related to current year activity and prior tax return filings of our subsidiaries in South Africa and Hungary, as well as related to our state tax return liabilities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our working capital and working capital requirements fluctuate from quarter to quarter depending on the phase of the growing and sales cycle that falls during a particular quarter. Our need for cash has historically been highest in the second and third fiscal quarters (October through March) because we historically have paid our North American contracted growers progressively, starting in the second fiscal quarter. In fiscal year 2021, we paid our North American growers approximately 50% of amounts due in the fall of 2020 and the balance was paid in the spring of 2021. This payment cycle to our growers was similar in fiscal year 2020, and we expect it to be similar for fiscal year 2022. S&W Australia and Pasture Genetics, our Australian-based subsidiaries, have production cycles that are counter-cyclical to North America; however, this also puts a greater demand on our working capital and working capital requirements during the second, third and fourth fiscal quarters based on timing of payments to growers in the second through fourth quarters.
Historically, due to the concentration of sales to certain distributors, our month-to-month and quarter-to-quarter sales and associated cash receipts are highly dependent upon the timing of deliveries to and payments from these distributors, which varies significantly from year to year.
We continuously monitor and evaluate our credit policies with all of our customers based on historical collection experience, current economic and market conditions and a review of the current status of the respective trade accounts receivable balance. Our principal working capital components include cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid expense and other current assets, accounts payable and our working capital lines of credit.
On February 24, 2020, S&W Australia acquired all of the issued and outstanding shares of Pasture Genetics, the PG Acquisition, for an initial consideration that consisted of an upfront cash payment at closing of USD $7.5 million (AUD $11.4 million). A potential earn-out payment of up to USD $5.3 million (AUD $8.0 million), or the Earn-Out, is payable on September 30, 2022, or the Earn-Out Date. The amount of any Earn-Out will be equal to the excess, if any, of (a) 7.5, multiplied by the average of an agreed-upon calculation of Pasture Genetics’ earnings over fiscal years 2021 and 2022, above (b) USD $7.5 million (AUD $11.4 million). At S&W Australia’s election, up to 50% of the Earn-Out may be paid in shares of our common stock at a per share purchase price equal to the volume-weighted average purchase price of our common stock during the 10-day period ending immediately prior to the Earn-Out Date.
In addition to funding our business with cash from operations, we have historically relied upon sales of our debt and equity securities and credit facilities from financial institutions, both in the United States and Australia.
Capital Resources and Funding Requirements
We are not profitable and have had negative cash flow from operations for the last several years. To help fund our operations, we have in part relied on equity and debt financings. We currently anticipate that our cash and cash equivalents may be sufficient to enable us to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. However, we will need to obtain additional funds to finance our operations in the future, and we could spend our available financial resources much faster than we currently expect. Our loan and security agreement with CIBC Bank USA, or CIBC, and our secured promissory notes with Conterra Agriculture Capital, LLC contain various operating and financial covenants, and the COVID-19 pandemic has increased the risk of our inability to comply with these covenants, which could result in acceleration of our repayment obligations and foreclosure on our pledged assets. For example, we were not in compliance with certain of these covenants as of June 30, 2021 and we were required to obtain waivers and/or amendments from CIBC and Conterra. We believe it is uncertain the Company will be able to generate sufficient cash flow from operations or maintain sufficient liquidity to meet these covenants. These factors raise substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern. If we are unable to meet these covenants, we will need to raise additional capital in the future to enhance our working capital. This may include, for example, the need to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity and debt financings, as well as potentially entering into collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements.
Our future liquidity and capital requirements will be influenced by numerous factors, including:
•
the extent and duration of future operating income;
•
the level and timing of future sales and expenditures;
•
working capital required to support our growth;
•
investment capital for plant and equipment;
•
our sales and marketing programs;
•
investment capital for potential acquisitions;
•
our ability to renew and/or refinance our debt on acceptable terms;
•
competition;
•
market developments; and
•
developments related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
There can be no assurance that we will be successful in raising additional capital or securing future waivers and/or amendments from CIBC or our other lenders. If we are unable to raise sufficient additional capital or secure future waivers and/or amendments, we may need to reduce the scope of our operations, repay amounts owing to our lenders or sell certain assets. If we are required or desire to raise additional capital in the future, such additional financing may not be available on favorable terms, or available at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, your ownership interest could be diluted and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends and may be secured by all or a portion of our assets. If we fail to obtain additional capital as and when required, such failure could have a material impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Below is a summary of our material sources of capital in recent periods:
Debt Financings
Loan and Security Agreement with CIBC
On December 26, 2019, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with CIBC, or the Loan Agreement, which we amended on September 22, 2020, December 30, 2020, May 12, 2021 and September 27, 2021. As amended, the Loan Agreement provides for a $25.0 million credit facility, or the CIBC Credit Facility. The key terms of the amended Loan Agreement include the following:
•
Advances under the CIBC Credit Facility are to be used: (i) to finance our ongoing working capital requirements; and (ii) for general corporate purposes. We may also use a portion of the CIBC Credit Facility to finance permitted acquisitions and related costs.
•
All amounts due and owing, including, but not limited to, accrued and unpaid principal and interest due under the CIBC Credit Facility, will be payable in full on December 23, 2022.
•
The Credit Facility generally establishes a borrowing base of up to 85% of eligible domestic accounts receivable (90% of eligible foreign accounts receivable) plus up to the lesser of (i) 65% of eligible inventory, (ii) 85% of the appraised net orderly liquidation value of eligible inventory, and (iii) an eligible inventory sublimit as more fully set forth in the Loan Agreement, in each case, subject to lender reserves.
•
Loans may be based on (i) a Base Rate plus 1.0% per annum or (ii) LIBOR Rate plus 3.0% per annum (both as defined in the Loan Agreement), generally at our option. Pursuant to the September 27, 2021 amendment, the Loans will now be based on Prime plus 2.0% per annum. In the event of a default, at the option of CIBC, the interest rate on all obligations owing will increase by 2% per annum over the rate otherwise applicable.
•
The CIBC Credit Facility is secured by a first priority perfected security interest in substantially all of our assets (subject to certain exceptions), including intellectual property.
•
The Loan Agreement contains customary representations and warranties, affirmative and negative covenants and customary events of default that permit CIBC to accelerate our outstanding obligations under the Credit Facility, all as set forth in the Loan Agreement and related documents. The CIBC Credit Facility also contains customary and usual financial covenants imposed by CIBC.
Pursuant to the September 2021 amendment to the Loan Agreement, CIBC waived noncompliance with our fixed charge coverage ratio as of June 30, 2021, and suspended our fixed charge coverage ratio financial covenants for the fiscal quarters ended September 30, 2021 and December 31, 2021 and replaced that financial covenant with the minimum EBITDA threshold tested quarterly for the quarters ending September 30, 2021 and December 31, 2021. Pursuant to the September 2021 amendment, we revert back to our previous financial covenant to require that we maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio equal to or greater than (i) 1.00 to 1.00, beginning with the fiscal quarters ending March 31, 2022 and (ii) 1.15 to 1.00 for each fiscal quarter thereafter. In addition, pursuant to the September 2021 amendment, we are required to maintain liquidity of no less than $3,000,000 at all times for the remainder of the term of the Loan Agreement. After giving effect to the September 2021 amendment, we were in compliance with the Loan Agreement for the year ended June 30, 2021.
We cannot guarantee that we will be able to comply with our covenants in the Loan Agreement in the future, or secure additional waivers if or when required. If we are unable to comply with or obtain a waiver of any noncompliance under the Loan Agreement, CIBC could declare an event of default or require us to further renegotiate the Loan Agreement on terms that may be significantly less favorable to us, or we may be required to seek additional or alternative financing. If we were to seek additional or alternative financing, any such financing may not be available to us on commercially reasonable terms or at all. Any declaration by CIBC of an event of default could significantly harm our liquidity, financial condition, operating results, business, and prospects and cause the price of our securities to decline.
Australian Facilities
At June 30, 2021, S&W Australia has debt facilities with NAB, all of which are guaranteed by S&W Seed Company up to a maximum of AUD $15,000,000 (USD $11,247,000 at June 30, 2021) and cross-guaranteed by S&W Australia.
In June 2020, S&W Australia executed documentation to consolidate the Pasture Genetics debt facility with NAB into its debt facilities with NAB. The documentation became effective in July 2020. The consolidated debt facilities with NAB provide up to an aggregate of AUD $35,500,000 (USD $26,617,900) of credit as of June 30, 2021, and include the following:
•
S&W Australia finances the purchase of most of its seed inventory from growers pursuant to a seasonal credit facility comprised of two facility lines: (i) an overdraft line having a credit limit of AUD $3,000,000 (USD $2,249,400 at June 30, 2021) and (ii) a borrowing base line having a credit limit of AUD $26,000,000 (USD $19,494,800 at June 30, 2021). In March 2021, S&W Australia entered into an amendment with NAB which temporarily increased the Overdraft Facility to AUD $3,000,000 (USD 2,249,400) for a three-month period and extended the maturity date of the seasonal credit facility to June 30, 2022. As of June 30, 2021, the Borrowing Base Line accrued interest on Australian dollar drawings at approximately 3.5% per annum calculated daily. The Overdraft Facility permits S&W Australia to borrow funds on a revolving line of credit up to the credit limit. Interest accrues daily and is calculated by applying the daily interest rate to the balance owing at the end of the day and is payable monthly in arrears. As of June 30, 2021, the Overdraft Facility accrued interest at approximately 5.47% per annum calculated daily. As of June 30, 2021, AUD $26,823,515 (USD $20,112,272) was outstanding under S&W Australia’s seasonal credit facility with NAB. The seasonal credit facility is secured by a fixed and floating lien over all the present and future rights, property and undertakings of S&W Australia.
•
S&W Australia has a flexible rate loan, or the Term Loan, in the amount of AUD $4,500,000 (USD $3,374,100) at June 30, 2021. Required annual principal payments of AUD $500,000 on the Term Loan commenced on November 30, 2020, with the remainder of any unpaid balance becoming due on March 31, 2025. Monthly interest amounts outstanding under the Term Loan will be payable in arrears at a floating rate quoted by NAB for the applicable pricing period, plus 2.6%. The Term Loan is secured by a lien on all the present and future rights, property and undertakings of S&W Australia.
•
S&W Australia finances certain equipment purchases under a master asset finance facility with NAB. The master asset finance facility has various maturity dates through June 2026 and have interest rates ranging from 2.86% to 5.31%. The credit limit under the facility is AUD $2,000,000 (USD $1,499,600) at June 30, 2021. As of June 30, 2021, AUD $892,602 (USD $669,273) was outstanding under S&W Australia’s master asset finance facility.
S&W Australia was in compliance with all debt covenants under its debt facilities with NAB at June 30, 2021.
Paycheck Protection Program
On April 14, 2020, we received loan proceeds of $1,958,600, or the Loan, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the recently enacted Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration, or the SBA. If the loan proceeds are fully utilized to pay qualified expenses, the full principal amount of the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP, loan, along with any accrued interest, may qualify for loan forgiveness, subject to potential reduction based on the level of full-time employees maintained by the organization.
When we applied for the loan, we believed we would qualify to have the loan forgiven under the terms of PPP, and therefore considered the loan to be substantively a conditional government grant.
In March 2021, the PPP loan was forgiven in full.
Equity Issuances
On September 23, 2020, we entered into an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement, or the ATM Agreement, with B. Riley Securities, Inc., or B Riley, under which we may offer and sell from time to time, at our sole discretion, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $14.0 million through B. Riley as our sales agent. For the year ended June 30, 2021, we received gross proceeds of approximately $10.9 million from the sale of 3,008,015 shares of its common stock pursuant to the ATM Agreement.
As of September 27, 2021, we have $3.1 million remaining available for sale under the ATM Agreement.
Summary of Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities
For the year ended June 30, 2021, operating activities used $14.2 million in cash. Net loss plus and minus the adjustments for non-cash items as detailed on the statement of cash flows used $15.8 million in cash, and changes in operating assets and liabilities as detailed on the statement of cash flows provided $1.6 million in cash. The decrease in cash from changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by an increase in accounts payable of $7.3 million, partially offset by a decrease in deferred revenue of $5.8 million and a decrease in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $1.0 million.
For the year ended June 30, 2020, operating activities used $5.8 million in cash. Net loss plus and minus the adjustments for non-cash items as detailed on the statement of cash flows used $11.0 million in cash, and changes in operating assets and liabilities as detailed on the statement of cash flows provided $5.2 million in cash. The decrease in cash from changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by a decrease in inventory of $11.1 million, partially offset by a decrease in accounts payable of $2.9 million, a decrease in deferred revenue of $2.9 million, and an increase in accounts receivable of $1.8 million.
Investing Activities
Investing activities during the year ended June 30, 2021 provided $2.5 million in cash. Proceeds from the disposal of property, plant and equipment of $0.8 million and net proceeds from the sale of properties in California provided $2.8 million. Net proceeds were partially offset by additions to property, plant and equipment of $1.1 million consisting primarily of equipment purchases for our distribution facility in Keith, Australia, and research and development facilities in Tamworth, Australia.
Investing activities during the year ended June 30, 2020 used $10.3 million in cash. The Dow Wheat acquisition accounted for $2.6 million of the cash used in investing activities and the Pasture Genetics acquisition accounted for $7.5 million. We also had additions to property, plant and equipment of $2.0 million consisting primarily of equipment purchases for our distribution facility in Keith, Australia, research and development facilities in Tamworth, Australia and leasehold improvements to our new corporate headquarters in Longmont, Colorado; partially offset by $1.8 million of net proceeds from the sale of properties in Arlington Wisconsin and Plainview Texas.
Financing Activities
Financing activities during the year ended June 30, 2021 provided $10.9 million in cash. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we had net proceeds from the sale of our common stock of $10.2 million, net borrowings on the working capital lines of credit of $5.0 million, borrowings of long-term debt of $0.4 million and repayments of long-term debt of $4.4 million and debt issuance costs of $0.2 million.
Financing activities during the year ended June 30, 2020 provided $17.0 million in cash. During the year ended June 30, 2020, we had net borrowings on the working capital lines of credit of $16.8 million, borrowings of long-term debt of $3.9 million and repayments of long-term debt of $2.6 million and debt issuance costs of $0.9 million.
Inflation Risk
We do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations, including our revenue and income from continuing operations. However, if our costs were to become subject to significant inflationary pressures, we may not be able to fully offset such higher costs through price increases. Our inability or failure to do so could harm our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies
The accounting policies and the use of accounting estimates are set forth in the footnotes to our consolidated financial statements.
In preparing our financial statements, we must select and apply various accounting policies. Our most significant policies are described in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the footnotes to the consolidated financial statements. In order to apply our accounting policies, we often need to make estimates based on judgments about future events. In making such estimates, we rely on historical experience, market and other conditions, and on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable. However, the estimation process is by its nature uncertain given that estimates depend on events over which we may not have control. If market and other conditions change from those that we anticipate, our results of operations, financial condition and changes in financial condition may be materially affected. In addition, if our assumptions change, we may need to revise our estimates, or to take other corrective actions, either of which may also have a material effect on our results of operations, financial condition or changes in financial condition. Members of our senior management have discussed the development and selection of our critical accounting estimates, and our disclosure regarding them, with the audit committee of our board of directors, and do so on a regular basis.
We believe that the following estimates have a higher degree of inherent uncertainty and require our most significant judgments. In addition, had we used estimates different from any of these, our results of operations, financial condition or changes in financial condition for the current period could have been materially different from those presented.
Goodwill
Goodwill is assessed annually for impairment or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit. We adopted Accounting Standards Update No. 2017-04, Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment, or ASU 2017-04, effective July 1, 2018. This standard eliminates Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. Instead, we perform our annual or interim goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of our one reporting unit with its carrying amount and recognizes an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
The goodwill balance at June 30, 2021 and 2020 relates to our February 2020 acquisition of Pasture Genetics. Upon completing the impairment test on our one reporting unit, there was no impairment for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Intangible Assets
All amortizable intangible assets are assessed for impairment whenever events indicate a possible loss. Such an assessment involves estimating undiscounted cash flows over the remaining useful life of the intangible. If the review indicates that undiscounted cash flows are less than the recorded value of the intangible asset, the carrying amount of the intangible is compared to its fair value, with an impairment loss recognized if the fair value is below carrying value. Fair values are typically estimated using discounted cash flow techniques. Significant changes in key assumptions about the business, market conditions and prospects for which the intangible asset is currently utilized or expected to be utilized could result in an impairment charge.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification Topic 718 Stock Compensation, which establishes accounting for equity instruments exchanged for employee services. Under such provisions, stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date, based on the calculated fair value of the award, and is recognized as an expense, under the straight-line method, over the employee’s requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the equity grant).
We account for equity instruments, including stock options issued to non-employees, in accordance with authoritative guidance for equity-based payments to non-employees (FASB ASC 505-50). Stock options issued to non-employees are accounted for at their estimated fair value. The fair value of options granted to non-employees is re-measured as they vest.
We utilize the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to estimate the fair value of options granted under share-based compensation plans. The Black-Scholes-Merton model requires us to estimate a variety of factors including, but not limited to, the expected term of the award, stock price volatility, dividend rate, risk-free interest rate. The input factors to use in the valuation model are based on subjective future expectations combined with management judgment. The expected term used represents the weighted-average period that the stock options are expected to be outstanding. We have used the historical volatility for our stock for the expected volatility assumption required in the model, as it is more representative of future stock price trends. We use a risk-free interest rate that is based on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury issued with an equivalent remaining term at the time of grant. We have not paid dividends in the past and currently do not plan to pay any dividends in the foreseeable future, and as such, dividend yield is assumed to be zero for the purposes of valuing the stock options granted. We evaluate the assumptions used to value stock awards on a quarterly basis. If factors change, and we employ different assumptions, share-based compensation expense may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the past. When there are any modifications or cancellations of the underlying unvested securities, we may be required to accelerate, increase or cancel any remaining unearned share-based compensation expense. To the extent that we grant additional equity securities to employees, our share-based compensation expense will be increased by the additional unearned compensation resulting from those additional grants.
Income Taxes
We regularly assess the likelihood that deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income. To the extent management believes that it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will not be realized, a valuation allowance is established. When a valuation allowance is established or increased, an income tax charge is included in the consolidated financial statements and net deferred tax assets are adjusted accordingly. Changes in tax laws, statutory tax rates and estimates of our future taxable income levels could result in actual realization of the deferred tax assets being materially different from the amounts provided for in the consolidated financial statements. If the actual recovery amount of the deferred tax asset is less than anticipated, we would be required to write-off the remaining deferred tax asset and increase the tax provision, resulting in a reduction of earnings and stockholders’ equity.
Inventories
All inventories are accounted for on a lower of cost or net realizable value. Inventories consist of raw materials and finished goods. Depending on market conditions, the actual amount received on sale could differ from our estimated value of inventory. In order to determine the value of inventory at the balance sheet date, we evaluate a number of factors to determine the adequacy of provisions for inventory. The factors include the age of inventory, the amount of inventory held by type, future demand for products and the expected future selling price we expect to realize by selling the inventory. Our estimates are judgmental in nature and are made at a point in time, using available information, expected business plans and expected market conditions. We perform a review of our inventory by product line on a quarterly basis.
During the year ended June 30, 2021, we recognized a write-down of inventory in the amount of $1.4 million which is included in Cost of Revenue in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. The write-down of inventory during the year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily related to certain inventory lots that deteriorated in quality and germination rates during the year.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We regularly assess the collectability of receivables and provide an allowance for doubtful trade receivables equal to the estimated uncollectible amounts. That estimate is based on historical collection experience, current economic and market conditions and a review of the current status of each customer’s trade accounts receivable. Our estimates are judgmental in nature and are made at a point in time. Management believes the allowance for doubtful accounts is appropriate to cover anticipated losses in our accounts receivable under current conditions; however, unexpected, significant deterioration in any of the factors mentioned above or in general economic conditions could materially change these expectations.