Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
Net income for Sandy Spring Bancorp, Inc. and subsidiaries (the “Company”) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $97.0 million ($2.18 per diluted common share) compared to $116.4 million ($3.25 per diluted common share) for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a 17% decrease in net income and a 33% decrease in earnings per diluted common share. The results from 2020 included the effect on the provision for credit losses from the adoption of the expected credit loss accounting standard ("CECL standard"), merger and acquisition expense and the operational impact of the Revere Bank ("Revere") and Rembert Pendleton Jackson ("RPJ') acquisitions in 2020. The RPJ transaction occurred in the first quarter of 2020 with the subsequent acquisition of Revere in the second quarter of 2020. The Company's participation in the Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP" or "PPP program") contributed to the year-over-year net interest income growth. The combination of the significant adverse impact on the provision for credit losses due to the pandemic, in addition to the supplemental provisioning tied to the Revere acquisition and the recognition of the majority of the merger and acquisition expense, all being recognized in the second quarter of 2020, resulted in a net loss for that quarter. Subsequent quarter's net earnings for 2020 reflected improved operating results, as the provision for credit losses moderated due to improved economic forecasts.
Operating earnings for the current year, which exclude the impact of the provision for credit losses, the effects from the PPP program and merger and acquisition expense, each on an after-tax basis, were $165.4 million ($3.75 per diluted common share), compared to $120.9 million ($3.39 per diluted common share) for the year ended December 31, 2019. Pre-tax, pre-provision, pre-merger income was $235.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $158.9 million for the prior year.
These results reflect the following events:
•Total assets at December 31, 2020, grew 48% to $12.8 billion, compared to December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of the Revere acquisition and participation in the PPP. On the date of acquisition, Revere’s loans and deposits were $2.5 billion and $2.3 billion, respectively. The Company originated $1.1 billion in commercial business loans through its participation in the PPP program.
•During the past year, loans grew by 55% to $10.4 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $6.7 billion at December 31, 2019. Excluding PPP loans, total loans grew 39% to $9.3 billion at December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. The acquisition of Revere drove the majority of the increase in commercial loans, which, excluding PPP loans, grew 52% or $2.6 billion. The residential mortgage loan portfolio remained stable year-over-year as the vast majority of loan originations during the past year were sold in the secondary market. Consumer loan growth during the year was 11%, also a result of the acquisition.
•Total deposits grew 56% to $10.0 billion, compared to $6.4 billion at the end of 2019. The loan-to-deposit ratio remained at 104% at the end of 2020 compared to 2019. The year-over-year deposit growth included a 76% increase in noninterest-bearing deposits and a 47% growth in interest-bearing deposits. This growth was driven primarily by the Revere acquisition and, to a lesser extent, the PPP program.
•The net interest margin was 3.35% in 2020, compared to 3.51% in 2019. Excluding the amortization of the fair value marks, the net interest margin for the current year would have been 3.23% compared to 3.46% for the prior year.
•The provision for credit losses was $85.7 million for 2020, compared to $4.7 million for 2019. The significant increase was a result of the adoption of the CECL standard combined with the results of the impact of deteriorated economic forecasts during the year, in addition to the initial allowance on acquired Revere non-purchased credit deteriorated loans.
•Non-interest income increased 44% to $102.7 million for 2020, compared to $71.3 million for 2019, driven by income from mortgage banking activities as refinancing and new mortgage origination grew to historically high levels and income from wealth management increased as a result of the acquisition of RPJ in the first quarter of 2020.
•Non-interest expense increased $76.7 million or 43% to $255.8 million for 2020, compared to $179.1 million for the prior year. The prior year included $1.3 million in merger and acquisition expense compared to $25.2 million for the current year. The current year's growth also included $5.9 million in prepayment penalties from the liquidation of acquired Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlantic ("FHLB") advances. Excluding merger and acquisition expense and the prepayment penalties, non-interest expense rose 26%, driven primarily by increases in operational and compensation costs associated with the acquisitions, incentive expense related to mortgage loan originations, intangible asset amortization and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC") insurance premiums.
•The non-GAAP efficiency ratio improved to 46.53% for 2020 compared to 51.52% for 2019 as a result of the growth in non-GAAP revenue outpacing the growth in non-GAAP non-interest expense.
The Company’s non-performing assets represented 0.91% of total assets at December 31, 2020, compared to 0.50% at December 31, 2019. The ratio of net charge-offs to average loans was 0.01% for 2020, compared to 0.03% for the prior year.
Customer funding sources at year-end 2020, which include deposits plus other short-term borrowings from core customers, increased 55% compared to year end 2019. Deposit growth was 56% during the past twelve months, as noninterest-bearing deposits experienced growth of 76% and interest-bearing deposits grew 47%. This growth was driven primarily by the Revere acquisition and, to a lesser extent, the PPP program. Borrowings increased by 23% during the year driven by the federal funds purchased during December 2020 as a result of funding requirements at the end of 2020. Liquidity continues to remain strong due to borrowing lines with the FHLB and the Federal Reserve Bank and the size and composition of the investment portfolio.
Stockholders’ equity at December 31, 2020 increased 30% to $1.5 billion, as compared to $1.1 billion at December 31, 2019 as a result of the equity issuance in the Revere acquisition, in addition to net earnings during 2020. The year-over-year increase is net of the repurchase of $25.7 million of common stock, which occurred in the first quarter of the current year. At December 31, 2020, the Bank remained above all “well-capitalized” regulatory requirement levels. Tangible book value per common share remained relatively stable at $22.28 at December 31, 2020, compared to $22.37 at December 31, 2019, despite the two acquisitions executed in the current year.
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $97.0 million, compared to $116.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The results from 2020 included the effect on the provision for credit losses from the adoption of the expected credit loss accounting standard, merger and acquisition expense and the operational impact of the Revere Bank and RPJ acquisitions in 2020. Operating earnings for the current year, which exclude the after-tax impact of the provision for credit losses, the effects from the PPP program and merger and acquisition expense, were $165.4 million compared to $120.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net interest income increased 37% to $363.2 million compared to $265.3 million in 2019. The income generated by the PPP program, net of its associated funding costs, contributed a net of $19.0 million to the growth in net interest income year-over-year. The net interest margin declined to 3.35% for the ended December 31, 2020, compared to 3.51% for the prior year. Excluding the net $12.7 million impact of the amortization of the fair value marks derived from acquisitions, the net interest margin for the current year would have been 3.23%. The amortization of the fair value marks recognized during the current year included a benefit realized from the accelerated amortization of the $5.9 million purchase premium on acquired FHLB advances, as a result of the prepayment of those borrowings. The net interest margin for 2019, excluding the fair value marks, would have been 3.46%.
Non-interest income increased 44% to $102.7 million for 2020, compared to $71.3 million for 2019. During the current year, income from mortgage banking activities increased $25.3 million as favorable residential lending rates during the year resulted in a significant increase in mortgage loan originations, and wealth management income increased $7.9 million as a result of the first quarter acquisition of RPJ. These increases more than exceeded the declines in deposit service fees and income from bank owned life insurance ("BOLI").
Non-interest expense increased 43% to $255.8 million for 2020, compared to $179.1 million for 2019. Merger and acquisition expense accounted for $23.9 million of the growth of non-interest expense. Non-interest expense growth also included $5.9 million in prepayment penalties resulting from the liquidation of acquired FHLB advances. Excluding the impact of these items results in a year-over-year expense growth rate of 26%. This growth rate was driven by operational and compensation costs associated with the Revere and RPJ acquisitions, increased incentive expense related to the significant level of mortgage loan originations, intangible asset amortization, FDIC insurance premiums and annual employee salary increases.
Acquisition of Revere Bank
Revere was acquired on April 1, 2020 ("Acquisition Date") and had assets of $2.8 billion, loans of $2.5 billion and deposits of $2.3 billion. This acquisition resulted in the growth of the balance sheet, net interest income, and non-interest income and expense from the prior year. The Company identified $974.8 million of acquired loans that were classified as purchased credit deteriorated loans (“PCD” or “PCD loans”). An initial allowance for credit losses of $18.6 million was recorded through a gross up adjustment to fair values of PCD loans. A fair value premium related to other factors totaled $4.5 million and will amortize to interest income over the remaining life of each loan. As a result of these fair value marks, total fair value of PCD loans as of the Acquisition Date was $960.7 million. Of the PCD loans, $11.3 million were non-accruing at the time of acquisition. The amount of PCD loans was directly attributable to the existing market conditions in the economy as of the Acquisition Date. Refer to Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more details on factors considered in the PCD assessment. Acquired loans that had not experienced a more-than-insignificant credit deterioration since origination totaled $1.5 billion. The Company recorded a net fair value premium of $2.1 million on non-PCD loans, which will amortize to interest income over the remaining life of each loan. In addition, the acquired assets included a core deposit intangible asset valued at approximately $18.4 million. The
determination of the fair value of interest-bearing liabilities resulted in a $20.8 million premium. The provisional amount of goodwill recognized as of the Acquisition Date was approximately $0.8 million. After immaterial adjustments to the provisional amount, goodwill recognized as of December 31, 2020 was $0.5 million. See Note 2 - Acquisition of Revere Bank in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
The change in estimated goodwill from the time of announcement to the provisional amount at December 31, 2020 is presented in the following table:
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and follow general practices within the banking industry. Application of these principles requires management to make estimates, assumptions, and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. These estimates, assumptions, and judgments are based on information available as of the date of the financial statements; accordingly, as this information changes, the financial statements may reflect different estimates, assumptions, and judgments. Certain policies inherently rely more extensively on the use of estimates, assumptions, and judgments and as such may have a greater possibility of producing results that could be materially different than originally reported. Estimates, assumptions, and judgments are necessary for assets and liabilities that are required to be recorded at fair value. A decline in the value of assets required
to be recorded at fair value may warrant an impairment write-down or valuation allowance to be established. Carrying assets and liabilities at fair value inherently results in greater financial statement volatility. The fair values and the information used to record valuation adjustments for certain assets and liabilities are based either on quoted market prices or are provided by other third-party sources, when readily available.
Management believes the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating the reported financial results:
•Allowance for credit losses;
•Goodwill and other intangible asset impairment;
•Accounting for income taxes;
•Fair value measurements;
•Defined benefit pension plan.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses (“allowance” or “ACL”) represents an amount which, in management's judgment, represents the lifetime expected losses that may be sustained on outstanding loans at the balance sheet date based on the evaluation of the size and current risk characteristics of the loan portfolio, past events, current conditions, reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions and prepayment experience. The allowance is measured and recorded upon the initial recognition of a financial asset. The allowance is reduced by charge-offs, net of recoveries of previous losses, and is increased or decreased by a provision or credit for credit losses, which is recorded as a current period expense.
Determination of the appropriateness of the allowance is inherently complex and requires the use of significant and highly subjective estimates. The reasonableness of the allowance is reviewed periodically by the Risk Committee of the board of directors and formally approved quarterly by that same committee of the Board.
The Company’s methodology for estimating the allowance includes: (1) a collective quantified reserve that reflects the Company’s historical default and loss experience adjusted for expected economic conditions throughout a reasonable and supportable period and the Company’s prepayment and curtailment rates; (2) collective qualitative factors that consider concentrations of the loan portfolio, expected changes to the economic forecasts, large relationships, early delinquencies, and factors related to credit administrations, including, among others, loan-to-value ratios, borrowers’ risk rating and credit score migrations; and (3) individual allowances on collateral-dependent loans where borrowers are experiencing financial difficulty or when the Company determines that the foreclosure is probable. The Company excludes accrued interest receivable from the measurement of the allowance as the Company has a non-accrual policy to reverse any accrued, uncollected interest income as loans are moved to non-accrual status.
Loans are pooled into segments based on the similar risk characteristics of the underlying borrowers, in addition to consideration of collateral type, industry and business purpose of the loans. Portfolio segments used to estimate the allowance are the same as portfolio segments used for general credit risk management purposes. Refer to Note 5 - Loans in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more details on the Company’s portfolio segments.
The Company applies two calculation methodologies to estimate the collective quantified component of the allowance: discounted cash flows method and weighted average remaining life method. Allowance estimates on commercial acquisition, development and construction (“AD&C”) and residential construction segments are based on the weighted average remaining life method. Allowance estimates on all other portfolio segments are based on the discounted cash flows method. Segments utilizing the discounted cash flows method are further sub-segmented into risk level pools, determined either by risk rating for commercial loans or Beacon score ranges for residential and consumer loans. To better manage risk and reasonably determine the sufficiency of reserves, this segregation allows the Company to monitor the allowance component applicable to higher risk loans separate from the remainder of the portfolio. Collective calculation methodologies utilize the Company’s historical default and loss experience adjusted for economic forecasts. The reasonable and supportable forecast period represents a two-year economic outlook for the applicable economic variables. Following the end of the reasonable and supportable forecast period, expected losses revert back to the historical mean over the next two years on a straight-line basis. Economic variables that have the most significant impact on the allowance include: unemployment rate, house price index and number of business bankruptcies. Contractual loan level cash flows within the discounted cash flows methodology are adjusted for the Company’s historical prepayment and curtailment rate experience.
The individual reserve assessment is applied to collateral dependent loans where borrowers are experiencing financial difficulty or when the Company determines that a foreclosure is probable. The determination of the fair value of the collateral depends on whether a repayment of the loan is expected to be from the sale or the operation of the collateral. When a repayment is expected from the operation of the collateral, the Company uses the present value of expected cash flows from the operation of the collateral as the fair value. When the repayment of the loan is expected from the sale of the collateral the fair value of the collateral is based on an observable market price or the collateral’s appraised value adjusted for the estimated costs to sell. Third-party appraisals used in the individual reserve assessment are conducted at least annually with underlying assumptions that are reviewed by management. Third party appraisals may be obtained on a more frequent basis if deemed necessary. Internal evaluations of collateral value are conducted quarterly to ensure any further deterioration of the collateral value is recognized on a timely basis. During the individual reserve assessment, management also considers the potential future changes in the value of the collateral over the remainder of the loan’s remaining life. The Company may receive updated appraisals which contradict the preliminary determination of fair value used to establish an individual allowance on a loan. In these instances the individual allowance is adjusted to reflect the Company’s evaluation of the updated appraised fair value. In the event a loss was previously confirmed and the loan was charged down to the estimated fair value based on a previous appraisal, the balance of partially charged-off loans are not subsequently increased, but could be further decreased depending on the direction of the change in fair value. Payments on fully or partially charged-off loans are accounted for under the cost-recovery method. Under this method, all payments received are applied on a cash basis to reduce the entire outstanding principal balance, then to recognize a recovery of all previously charged-off amounts before any interest income may be recognized. Based on the individual reserve assessment, if the Company determines that the fair value of the collateral is less than the amortized cost basis of the loan, an individual allowance will be established measured as the difference between the fair value of the collateral (less estimated costs to sell) and the amortized cost basis of the loan. Once a loss has been confirmed, the loan is charged-down to its estimated fair value.
Large groups of smaller non-accrual homogeneous loans are not individually evaluated for allowance and include residential permanent and construction mortgages and consumer installment loans. These portfolios are reserved for on a collective basis using historical loss rates of similar loans over the weighted average life of each pool.
Management believes it uses relevant information available to make determinations about the allowance and that it has established the existing allowance in accordance with GAAP. However, the determination of the allowance requires significant judgment, and estimates of expected lifetime losses in the loan portfolio can vary significantly from the amounts actually observed. While management uses available information to recognize expected losses, future additions to the allowance may be necessary based on changes in the loans comprising the portfolio, changes in the current and forecasted economic conditions, changes to the interest rate environment which may directly impact prepayment and curtailment rate assumptions, and changes in the financial condition of borrowers.
The adoption of the CECL standard did not result in a significant change to any other credit risk management and monitoring processes, including identification of past due or delinquent borrowers, non-accrual practices, assessment of troubled debt restructurings or charge-off policies.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Asset Impairment
Goodwill represents the excess purchase price paid over the fair value of the net assets acquired in a business combination. Goodwill is not amortized but is assessed for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. Impairment assessment requires that the fair value of each of the Company’s reporting units be compared to the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s net assets, including goodwill. The Company’s reporting units were identified based upon an analysis of each of its individual operating segments. If the fair values of the reporting units exceed their book values, no write-down of recorded goodwill is required. If the fair value of a reporting unit is less than book value, an expense may be required to write-down the related goodwill to the proper carrying value. The Company performs an annual impairment test of goodwill as of September 30 of each year, and again at any quarter-end if any triggering events occur during a quarter that may affect goodwill. Examples of such events include, but are not limited to, adverse action by a regulator or a loss of key personnel. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit requires the Company to use a degree of subjectivity. The Company concluded that its annual impairment test of goodwill, and other intangible assets, did not result in an impairment. Additionally, the Company determined that there were no triggering events and as a result no evidence of impairment between the annual impairment test and December 31, 2020. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit requires the Company to use a degree of subjectivity.
Current accounting guidance provides the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. The Company assesses qualitative factors on a quarterly basis. Based on the assessment of these qualitative factors, if it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is not less than the carrying value, then performing the impairment process is not necessary. However, if it is determined that it is more likely than not that the carrying value exceeds the fair value a quantified analysis is required to determine whether an impairment exists. The Company has elected this accounting guidance with respect to its Community Banking, Investment Management and Insurance segments.
Other intangible assets represent purchased assets that lack physical substance but can be distinguished from goodwill because of contractual or other legal rights or because the asset is capable of being sold or exchanged either on its own or in combination with a related contract, asset, or liability. Examples of such assets include core deposit intangibles, acquired customer lists and other identifiable intangibles. Other intangible assets have finite lives and are reviewed for impairment annually. These assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives on a straight-line or sum-of-the-years basis over varying periods that initially did not exceed 15 years.
Accounting for Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes by recording deferred income taxes that reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. Management exercises significant judgment in the evaluation of the amount and timing of the recognition of the resulting tax assets and liabilities. The judgments and estimates required for the evaluation are updated based upon changes in business factors and the tax laws. If actual results differ from the assumptions and other considerations used in estimating the amount and timing of tax recognized, there can be no assurance that additional expenses will not be required in future periods. The Company’s accounting policy follows the prescribed authoritative guidance that a minimal probability threshold of a tax position must be met before a financial statement benefit is recognized. The Company recognized, when applicable, interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in other non-interest expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Income. Assessment of uncertain tax positions requires careful consideration of the technical merits of a position based on management’s analysis of tax regulations and interpretations. Significant judgment may be involved in applying the applicable reporting and accounting requirements.
Management expects that the Company’s adherence to the required accounting guidance may result in volatility in quarterly and annual effective income tax rates due to the requirement that any change in judgment or measurement taken in a prior period be recognized as a discrete event in the period in which it occurs. Factors that could impact management’s judgment include changes in income, tax laws and regulations, and tax planning strategies.
Fair Value Measurements
The Company measures certain financial assets and liabilities at fair value in accordance with GAAP. Significant financial instruments measured at fair value on a recurring basis are investment securities available-for-sale, residential mortgages held for sale and commercial loan interest rate swap agreements.
The Company conducts a quarterly review for all investment securities that have potential impairment to determine whether an allowance for credit losses is required. Valuations for the investment portfolio are determined using quoted market prices, where available. If quoted market prices are not available, valuations are based on pricing models, quotes for similar investment securities, and, where necessary, an income valuation approach based on the present value of expected cash flows. In addition, the Company considers the financial condition of the issuer, the receipt of principal and interest according to the contractual terms and the intent and ability of the Company to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for any anticipated recovery in fair value.
The above accounting policies with respect to fair value are discussed in further detail in Note 22 - Fair Value in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Defined Benefit Pension Plan
The Company has a qualified, noncontributory, defined benefit pension plan. The plan was frozen for existing entrants after December 31, 2007 and all benefit accruals for employees were frozen as of December 31, 2007 based on past service. Future salary increases and additional years of service will no longer affect the defined benefit provided by the plan although additional vesting may continue to occur.
Several factors affect the net periodic benefit cost of the plan, including (1) the size and characteristics of the plan population, (2) the discount rate, (3) the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets and (4) other actuarial assumptions. Pension cost is directly related to the number of employees covered by the plan and other factors including salary, age, years of employment, and the terms of the plan. As a result of the plan freeze, the characteristics of the plan population should not have a materially different effect in future years. The discount rate is used to determine the present value of future benefit obligations. The discount rate is determined by matching the expected cash flows of the plan to a yield curve based on long term, high quality fixed income debt instruments available as of the measurement date, which is December 31 of each year. The discount rate is adjusted each year on the measurement date to reflect current market conditions. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is based on a number of factors that include expectations of market performance and the target asset allocation adopted in the plan investment policy. Should actual asset returns deviate from the projected returns, this can affect the benefit plan expense recognized in the financial statements.
Accounting Pronouncements Adopted During the Current Year
For further information regarding accounting pronouncements adopted during the current year, refer to Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Pending Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more details regarding pending accounting pronouncements.
Net Interest Income
The largest source of the Company’s operating revenue is net interest income, which is the difference between the interest earned on interest-earning assets and the interest paid on interest-bearing liabilities. For purposes of this discussion and analysis, the interest earned on tax-advantaged loans and tax-exempt investment securities has been adjusted to an amount comparable to interest subject to normal income taxes. The result is referred to as tax-equivalent interest income and tax-equivalent net interest income. The following discussion of net interest income should be considered in conjunction with the impact of the acquisitions of Revere in the second quarter of 2020 and WashingtonFirst Bankshares, Inc. ("WashingtonFirst") in the first quarter of 2018 and a review of the information provided in the table that provides yields and rates on average balances.
2020 vs. 2019
Net interest income for 2020 was $363.2 million, compared to $265.3 million for 2019, a 37% increase. On a tax-equivalent basis, net interest income for 2020 was $367.3 million, compared to $270.1 million for 2019. The growth in net interest income during the current year from the prior year primarily reflects the effects of the Revere acquisition. While this growth was tempered by the impact of the 68 basis point decrease in the yield on interest-earning assets, which grew 42%, it was partially mitigated by the 74 basis point decline in the rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities, which grew 39%. Overall, the net interest margin decreased to 3.35% for 2020 compared to 3.51% for 2019. An analysis of the net interest income performance is presented in the following tables.
Excluding the net $12.7 million impact of the amortization of the fair value marks derived from acquisitions, the net interest margin for the current year would have been 3.23%. The amortization of the fair value marks recognized during the current year included a benefit realized from the accelerated amortization of the $5.9 million purchase premium on acquired FHLB advances as a result of the prepayment of those borrowings. The net interest margin for 2019, excluding the fair value marks, would have been 3.46%. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the income generated by the PPP program, net of its associated funding costs, was $19.0 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net interest income included $1.8 million in recovered interest income on acquired credit impaired loans.
2019 vs. 2018
Net interest income for 2019 was $265.3 million compared to $260.4 million for 2018, a 2% increase. On a tax-equivalent basis, net interest income for 2019 was $270.1 million compared to $265.2 million for 2018. The net interest income growth during 2019 as compared to 2018 reflects the effects of the 11 basis point increase in the yield on interest-earning assets, which grew 5%, which was largely offset by the 32 basis point growth in the rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities. Overall, the net interest margin decreased to 3.51% for 2019 compared to 3.60% for 2018. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net interest income included $1.8 million in recovered interest income on acquired credit impaired loans compared to $2.4 million for 2018. Exclusive of these recoveries the net interest margin would have been 3.48% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 3.58% for the year ended December 31, 2018. Additionally, the amortization of the fair value adjustments in 2019 associated with the acquisition of WashingtonFirst was estimated to be a 5 basis point positive impact on the net interest margin for 2019, compared to a 13 basis point impact for 2018.
Consolidated Average Balances, Yields and Rates
(1)Tax-equivalent income has been adjusted using the combined marginal federal and state rate of 25.54% for 2020, and 26.13% for both 2019 and 2018. The annualized taxable-equivalent adjustments utilized in the above table to compute yields aggregated to $4.1 million, $4.7 million and $4.7 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(2)The calculation of the respective yield or rate for each asset or liability category is based on the underlying interest accrual methodology for the individual products in accordance with their contractual terms.
(3)Non-accrual loans are included in the average balances.
(4)Includes only investments that are exempt from federal taxes.
(5)Available-for-sale investments are presented at amortized cost.
Effect of Volume and Rate Changes on Tax-Equivalent Net Interest Income
The following table analyzes the reasons for the changes from year-to-year in the principal elements that comprise net tax-equivalent interest income:
* Variances that are the combined effect of volume and rate, but cannot be separately identified, are allocated to the volume and rate variances based on their respective relative amounts.
Interest Income
2020 vs. 2019
The Company's total tax-equivalent interest income increased 21% during 2020 compared to the prior year driven by the Revere acquisition in the second quarter of 2020, as average loans and investments grew 42% and 38%, respectively. The average yield on loans decreased 60 basis points while the average yield on investments decreased 88 basis points, both driven by the interest rate environment that prevailed during the current year, a resultant effect of the pandemic. The increase in the average loan balances was the result of growth of the commercial loan portfolio. Consumer loans increased modestly while mortgage loans decreased, both reflecting the impact of the loan refinance and origination activity during the current year. The vast majority of mortgage loans originated during the year were sold in the secondary market while customers took advantage of the opportunity to eliminate their home equity lines and loans by including those balances in their newly underwritten loans. In addition, the Company's participation in the PPP program resulted in interest income of $20.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2019, included $1.8 million in recovered interest income on acquired credit impaired loans.
2019 vs. 2018
The Company's total tax-equivalent interest income increased 7% during 2019 compared to 2018, driven by the increase in average loans and the increase in their associated yields during the year. In 2019, the average balance of the loan portfolio increased 6% while the average yield increased 11 basis points. The increase in average loan balances was primarily the result of growth in all of the loan portfolio categories with the exception of consumer loans. Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2019, included $1.8 million in recovered interest income on acquired credit impaired loans. This amount compares to interest recoveries of $2.4 million for 2018. Exclusive of these recoveries, the yield on loans would have increased 13 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018.
The average yield on total investment securities remained stable during 2019 while the average balance of the portfolio decreased 4% in 2019 compared to 2018. The decline in the average balance of the portfolio during 2019 was the result of the application of funds from the cash flows of the investment portfolio to reduce high rate borrowings rather than purchasing replacement investments, as investment rates declined during 2019.
Interest Expense
2020 vs. 2019
Interest expense decreased by $22.2 million or 27% in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease in interest expense was driven by declining interest rates during the current year offset by the 39% increase in average interest-bearing liabilities resulting from the Revere acquisition. The significant decline in interest rates during 2020 resulted in a 100 basis point decline in the average rate paid on money market accounts while the average rate paid on time deposits decreased 70 basis points and the average rate paid on borrowings fell 95 basis points compared to the prior year. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company's interest expense incurred for the use of Payroll Protection Program Liquidity Facility ("PPPLF") as a result of its participation in the PPP program was $1.1 million. During the year, average noninterest-bearing deposits increased 57%. The funding provided to customers under the PPP program contributed to the increase in noninterest-bearing deposits, which benefited the Company's overall funding costs and net interest margin.
2019 vs. 2018
Interest expense increased by $18.9 million or 30% in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase in interest expense was driven by the combination of deposit growth and higher rates paid on deposits. This increase in interest expense was partially offset by a combination of the decline in the interest expense on average FHLB advances, which declined 34%, and the benefit realized from an increase in noninterest-bearing deposits and a reduction in wholesale deposits. Average interest-bearing liabilities grew 3% due to the 13% growth in average interest-bearing deposits while total average borrowings decreased 28% during 2019. Average deposit growth was primarily the result of the 14% growth in average money market deposits and 24% growth in average time deposits. The overall increase in the rate paid on deposits increased 39 basis points, and the rate paid on borrowings increased 36 basis points during 2019 compared to 2018.
Interest Rate Performance
2020 vs. 2019
The Company’s net interest margin decreased to 3.35% for 2020 compared to 3.51% for 2019 while the net interest spread increased to 3.08% in 2020 compared to 3.02% in 2019. The increase in the spread was the result of the decrease in the rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities exceeding the decrease in the yields earned on interest-earning assets. The decrease in the net interest margin from
the prior year is the result of the impact of the declining interest rate environment as the yield on interest-earning assets decreased 68 basis points while being partially offset by the 74 basis point decrease in the rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities. The growth of both interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities as a result of the Revere acquisition, in combination with yield and rate declines, resulted in interest expense decreasing 27% while tax-equivalent interest income increased 21% during the year. However, as a result of interest-earning asset growth exceeding the growth in interest-bearing liabilities, the declines in yields/rates resulted in the overall compression of the net interest margin for the current year. Excluding the impact of the amortization of the fair value marks derived from acquisitions, the net interest margin for the current year would have been 3.23% compared to 3.46% for 2019.
2019 vs. 2018
The Company’s net interest margin decreased to 3.51% for 2019 compared to 3.60% for 2018 while the net interest spread decreased to 3.02% in 2019 compared to 3.23% in 2018. The decrease in the spread was the result of the increase in the rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities exceeding the increase in the yields earned on interest-earning assets. The decrease in the margin reflects the impact of the 5% growth in average interest-earning assets as that average yield grew 11 basis but was more than offset by the 32 basis point increase in the rates paid on average interest-bearing liabilities which grew 3% during the year. As a result of these changes during 2019, interest expense grew 30% while interest income grew 7% which caused compression of the margin during 2019 as compared to 2018.
Non-interest Income
Non-interest income amounts and trends are presented in the following table for the years indicated:
2020 vs. 2019
Total non-interest income increased 44% to $102.7 million for 2020, compared to $71.3 million for 2019. The year ended December 31, 2020, included gains of $0.5 million on sales of investment securities compared to $0.1 million in 2019. Additionally, non-interest income in 2019 included life insurance mortality proceeds of $0.6 million. The increase in non-interest income was driven by increases in income from mortgage banking activities, wealth management income and credit related fees from customers. These increases more than exceeded the declines in deposit services fees.
Service charges on deposits decreased 27% in 2020 compared to 2019 due to a decline in consumer activity and the Company's decision to temporarily waive certain transaction fees to ease the burden of the pandemic on customers. Wealth management income is comprised of income from trust and estate services provided by the Bank and investment management fees earned by West Financial Services, Inc. ("West Financial") and RPJ, the Company’s investment management subsidiaries. Wealth management income grew 35% during 2020 from 2019 driven primarily by the RPJ acquisition, which occurred in the first quarter of 2020. Trust services fees increased 3% compared to the prior year, due to an increase in recurring fiduciary and trust management fees. Investment management fees from West Financial and RPJ increased 73% during 2020 compared to 2019. Overall total assets under management by trust and wealth management grew to $5.2 billion at December 31, 2020 compared to $3.3 billion at December 31, 2019. Insurance agency commissions for the year ended December 31, 2020 grew 3% compared to the prior year as a result of increased contingent income and growth in physician's professional liability insurance. Income from BOLI decreased 9% in 2020 compared to the prior year primarily as a result of the lack of mortality proceeds in 2020 compared to the $0.6 million in proceeds that were received in 2019.
The Company invests in BOLI products in order to manage the cost of employee benefit plans. At December 31, 2020, BOLI investments increased to $126.9 million as compared to $113.2 million at December 31, 2019 as a result of the addition of policies held by Revere. These policies are diversified by carrier in accordance with defined policies and practices. The average tax-equivalent yield on these insurance contract assets declined to 3.09% for 2020 compared to 3.80% for the prior year due to the declining interest rate environment during the current year. Bank card fees remained level from the prior year due to diminished activity related to the impact of the pandemic. Other non-interest income comprised of commercial loan portfolio sourced fees and miscellaneous income increased 5% during the current year compared to the prior year as a result of fees related to the commercial portfolio.
2019 vs. 2018
Total non-interest income increased 17% to $71.3 million for 2019, compared to $61.0 million for 2018. The year ended December 31, 2019, included gains of $0.1 million on sales of investment securities compared to $0.2 million in 2018. Additionally, 2019 included life insurance mortality proceeds of $0.6 million as compared to $1.6 million for 2018. Excluding security gains and mortality proceeds from each year, non-interest income increased 19% in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily driven by increases in income from mortgage banking activities, wealth management income and fees from customer level commercial loan swaps during the prior year.
Service charges on deposits increased 4% in 2019 compared to 2018 due to increases in commercial analysis fees and net commercial returned item fees. Wealth management income is comprised of income from trust and estate services and investment management fees earned by West Financial, the Company’s investment management subsidiary. Trust services fees during 2019 increased 6% compared to 2018, due to a combination of estate settlement fees and higher recurring fees. Investment management fees in West Financial increased 7% for 2019 compared to 2018, as assets under management grew 16% due to market activity and new client additions. Overall total assets under management grew to $3.3 billion at December 31, 2019 compared to $2.8 billion at December 31, 2018. Insurance agency commissions at December 31, 2019 grew 7% compared to 2018 as a result of increased income from commercial lines and physicians liability insurance. Income from BOLI decreased 27% in 2019 compared to 2018 primarily as a result of lower mortality proceeds that were received in 2019 compared to 2018. At December 31, 2019 BOLI investments totaled $113.2 million as compared to $110.8 million at December 31, 2018. The average tax-equivalent yield on these insurance contract assets declined to 3.80% for 2019 compared to 5.32% for 2018, as death proceeds declined during 2019 versus 2018. Other non-interest income increased 26% during 2019 compared to 2018 as a result of fees from customer level commercial loan swaps and fees related to the commercial portfolio.
Non-interest Expense
Non-interest expense amounts and trends are presented in the following table for the years indicated:
2020 vs. 2019
Non-interest expenses increased $76.7 million to $255.8 million in 2020 compared to $179.1 million in 2019. The current year included the operational impact of the Revere and RPJ acquisitions, in addition to $25.2 million in merger and acquisition expense compared to $1.3 million for the prior year, and the $5.9 million loss on the FHLB redemption. The loss on the redemption was offset by the accelerated amortization of the purchase premium on the acquired FHLB advances, which is included in interest income. Excluding merger and acquisition expense and the loss on the FHLB redemption, non-interest expense rose 26%, primarily as a result operational costs associated with the Revere acquisition.
Salaries and employee benefits, the largest component of non-interest expenses, increased 29% in 2020 due principally to increased salary expense derived from the two acquisitions, commissions associated with the significant level of mortgage loan originations and incentive payments based on the achievement of volume or revenue targets. The average number of full-time equivalent employees increased to 1080 in 2020 compared to 913 for 2019. Benefit expense increased 19% during the current year due to an increase in the matching contribution expense for the employee 401(k) plan and FICA taxes on salaries, both as a result of the increased number of employees during 2020, in addition to increases in various other employee benefit programs.
Both occupancy and equipment expenses increased in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to an increase in rental and depreciation expense driven by the additional facilities from the Revere and RPJ acquisitions. This increase was net of the impact of the Company's consolidation of six redundant branches during the second half of 2020 as a result of the Revere acquisition. The Company has announced that it intends to close another three legacy branches during 2021. Equipment expenses also increased in 2020 compared to 2019, due to an increase in software costs. Marketing expense for 2020 decreased by 4% compared to 2019 as a result of decreased advertising initiatives during the current year. Outside data services expense increased 16% in 2020 compared to 2019, due to the increased cost of contractual services with volume-based components, in addition to the necessity of maintaining both the Company's and Revere's data systems for a portion of the current year until the systems were fully integrated. FDIC insurance expense increased 109% in 2020 compared to 2019, as a result of an assessment credit received during the prior year due to the industry deposit insurance fund reaching a stipulated benchmark level. Merger and acquisition expense associated with the Revere acquisition totaled $25.2 million in 2020 as compared to merger and acquisition expense of $1.3 million in the prior year. Amortization of intangibles increased from the prior year as a result of the increase in the various intangible assets recognized as part of the RPJ and Revere acquisitions. The loss on the redemption of the FHLB advances was the result of the prepayment of the acquired advances. This loss was offset by the accelerated amortization of the $5.9 million purchase premium associated with those acquired advances and was is included in interest income. The remaining other non-interest expenses increased in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by the reserve for lending commitments, processing costs and legacy branch closing costs.
2019 vs. 2018
Non-interest expenses decreased $0.7 million to $179.1 million in 2019 compared to $179.8 million in 2018. Included in 2018 non-interest expense is $11.8 million in merger and acquisition expense compared to $1.3 million for the prior year. Excluding merger and acquisition expense, non-interest expense rose 6% during 2019, primarily as a result of the increase in salaries and benefit expense.
Salaries and employee benefits, the largest component of non-interest expenses, increased 7% in 2019 due principally to higher salary expense and increased compensation derived from volume based commissions or the achievement of revenue targets. The average number of full-time equivalent employees decreased to 913 in 2019 compared to 922 for 2018. Benefit expense increased 16% during the current year due to the increase to the matching contribution for the employee 401(k) plan and in addition to increases in various employee benefit programs.
Occupancy expenses increased in 2019 compared to 2018 due to an increase in rental expense. Equipment expenses also increased in 2019 compared to 2018 due to an increase in software costs. Marketing expense for 2019 increased 14% compared to 2018 as a result of advertising campaigns initiated during the prior year. Outside data services expense increased 15% in 2019 compared to 2018 due to the increased cost of contractual services with volume-based components. FDIC insurance expense decreased 56% in 2019 compared to 2018 as a result of an assessment credit received during the prior year due to the industry deposit insurance fund reaching stipulated benchmark levels. Merger and acquisition expense associated with the Revere acquisition totaled $1.3 million in 2019 as compared to merger and acquisition expense of $11.8 million in 2018 related to the WashingtonFirst acquisition. Amortization of intangible assets decreased in 2019 as a result of the lower amortization of the core deposit intangible asset that was recognized in the WashingtonFirst acquisition. Other non-interest expenses increased in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily driven by increased professional and consulting fees.
Income Taxes
The Company’s income tax expense in 2020 was $27.5 million, compared to $36.4 million in 2019 and $31.8 million in 2018. The resulting effective rates for each year were 22% for 2020, 24% for 2019 and 24% for 2018. The decrease in the effective rate from 2019 to 2020 was the result of recent changes to tax laws that expanded the time permitted to utilize previous net operating losses. The Company applied this change in the current year to utilize the net operating losses acquired as part of the 2018 WashingtonFirst acquisition, to realize a tax benefit of $1.8 million.
Operating Expense Performance
Management views the GAAP efficiency ratio as an important financial measure of expense performance and cost management. The ratio expresses the level of non-interest expenses as a percentage of total revenue (net interest income plus total non-interest income). Lower ratios indicate improved productivity.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The Company also uses a traditional efficiency ratio that is a non-GAAP financial measure of operating expense control and efficiency of operations. Management believes that its traditional ratio better focuses attention on the operating performance of the Company over time than does a GAAP ratio, and is highly useful in comparing period-to-period operating performance of the Company’s core business operations. The non-GAAP efficiency ratio is used by management as part of its assessment of its performance in managing non-interest expenses. However, this measure is supplemental, and is not a substitute for an analysis of performance based on GAAP measures. The reader is cautioned that the non-GAAP efficiency ratio used by the Company may not be comparable to GAAP or non-GAAP efficiency ratios reported by other financial institutions.
In general, the efficiency ratio is non-interest expenses as a percentage of net interest income plus non-interest income. Non-interest expenses used in the calculation of the non-GAAP efficiency ratio exclude merger and acquisition expense, the amortization of intangibles, and other non-recurring expenses, such as early prepayment penalties on FHLB advances. Income for the non-GAAP ratio includes the favorable effect of tax-exempt income, and excludes investment securities gains and losses, which may vary widely from period to period without appreciably affecting operating expenses, and non-recurring gains. The measure is different from the GAAP efficiency ratio, which also is presented in this report. The GAAP measure is calculated using non-interest expense and income amounts as shown on the face of the Consolidated Statements of Income. The GAAP and non-GAAP efficiency ratios are reconciled and provided in the following table. The GAAP efficiency ratio rose in 2020 compared to the prior year as the 43% increase in non-interest expense exceeded the 38% growth in revenues. The increase in the GAAP efficiency ratio during 2020 is a direct result of the intangible asset amortization, merger and acquisition expense and the loss on the FHLB redemption, which combined to raise the growth rate of non-interest expense which surpassed the growth rate in revenue. The non-GAAP efficiency ratio improved in 2020, compared to the prior year, as a result of the 38% growth in non-GAAP revenue exceeding the 24% growth in non-GAAP non-interest expense.
In addition, the Company uses pre-tax, pre-provision income, adjusted for merger and acquisition expense, as a measure of the level of certain recurring income before taxes. Management believes this provides financial statement users with a useful metric of the run-rate of revenues and expenses that is readily comparable to other financial institutions. This measure is calculated by adding/ (subtracting) the provision/ (credit) for credit losses, the provision for income taxes, merger and acquisition expense back to/ from net income. This metric increased 48% during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the net core operational impact of the Revere acquisition and the year-over-year increase in non-interest income.
The Company has also presented operating earnings, operating earnings per share, operating return on average assets and operating return on average tangible common equity in order to present metrics that are more comparable to prior periods to provide an indication of the core performance of the Company year-over-year. Operating earnings reflect net income exclusive of the provision/(credit) for credit losses, merger and acquisition expense and the income and expense associated with the PPP program, in each case net of tax. Adjusted average assets represents average assets to exclude average PPP loans outstanding. Average tangible common equity represents average stockholders’ equity adjusted for average accumulated other comprehensive income/ (loss), average goodwill, and average intangible assets, net.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
GAAP and Non-GAAP Performance Ratios
(1)Tax adjustments have been adjusted using the combined marginal federal and state rate of 25.54% for 2020, 26.13% for both 2019 and 2018, and 39.55% for both 2017 and 2016.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
The Company’s total assets amounted to $12.8 billion at December 31, 2020 compared to $8.6 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily as a result of the Revere acquisition during the year. The Company's participation in the PPP program had a further positive impact on the year-over-year growth.
Total loans at December 31, 2020 were $10.4 billion compared to $6.7 billion at December 31, 2019. At year end 2020, investment securities had increased 26% to $1.4 billion compared to year end 2019. At December 31, 2020, total deposits were $10.0 billion compared to $6.4 billion at the end of 2019, a 56% increase during the period. Total borrowings were $1.1 billion at December 31, 2020 compared to $936.8 million at December 31, 2019.
Loans
A comparison of the loan portfolio for the years indicated is presented in the following table:
Total loans increased $3.7 billion or 55% at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. Excluding PPP loans, total loans grew 39% to $9.3 billion at December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. During this period, the Company experienced 74% growth in total commercial loans primarily due to the acquisition of Revere and to a lesser extent participation in the PPP. Excluding PPP loans, the commercial loan portfolio grew 52% or $2.6 billion. The residential mortgage loan portfolio declined 4% as a result of conventional loan run-off, coupled with the strategic decision to sell the majority of new mortgage loan production in the secondary market. Residential construction loans increased by $36.3 million or 25% at December 31, 2020 compared to the balance at December 31, 2019 due to a rise in lending volume as a result of the favorable interest rate environment. Consumer loan growth during the year was 11%, as a result of the acquisition.
Analysis of Loans
The trends in the composition of the loan portfolio over the previous five years are presented in following table:
Loan Maturities and Interest Rate Sensitivity
Loan maturities and interest rate characteristics for specific lending portfolios is presented in the following table:
(1)Loans not secured by real estate.
Composition of Investment Securities
The composition of investment securities for the periods indicated is presented in the following table:
(1)At estimated fair value.
(2)Issued by a U.S. Government Agency or secured by U.S. Government Agency collateral.
(3)The outstanding balance of no single issuer, except for U.S. Government Agency securities, exceeded ten percent of stockholders' equity at December 31, 2020, 2019 or 2018.
The investment portfolio consists primarily of U.S. Treasuries, U.S. Agency securities, U.S. Agency mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations and state and municipal securities. As a direct result of the Revere acquisition, the investment portfolio increased 26% to $1.4 billion at December 31, 2020, from $1.1 billion at December 31, 2019. In addition to the growth of the portfolio during 2020, the composition of the portfolio migrated from U.S. treasuries and government agencies securities to state and municipal securities and mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities to provide for greater cash flow from the investment portfolio. As a combined result of the acquisition and the strategic migration, at December 31, 2020, mortgage and asset-backed securities comprised 64% of the investment portfolio compared to 51% at December 31, 2019.
At December 31, 2020, 93% of the investment portfolio was invested in Aa/AA or Aaa/AAA rated securities. The duration of the portfolio increased to 4.2 years at December 31, 2020 compared to 3.5 years at December 31, 2019, as a result of the re-investing cash flows from the portfolio in the lower interest rate environment experienced in 2020. The composition and duration of the investment portfolio has resulted in a portfolio with low credit risk that is expected to provide the liquidity needed to meet lending and other funding demands. The portfolio is monitored on a continual basis with consideration given to interest rate trends and the structure of the yield curve and with constant assessment of economic projections and analysis.
Maturity of Investment Securities
Maturities and weighted average yields for investment securities available-for-sale at December 31, 2020 are presented in the following table. Amounts appear in the table at amortized cost, without market value adjustments, by stated maturity.
(1)At cost, adjusted for amortization and accretion of purchase premiums and discounts, respectively.
(2)Yields on state and municipal securities have been calculated on a tax-equivalent basis using the applicable federal income tax rate of 21%.
Other Earning Assets
Residential mortgage loans held for sale increased $24.6 million to $78.3 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $53.7 million as of December 31, 2019, due to the significant increase in volume of originations, which was a result of the favorable interest rate environment and the timing of sales of those mortgages. Interest-bearing deposits with banks increased by $139.6 million to $203.1 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $63.4 million at December 31, 2019, as a result of an increase in the timing of anticipated funding requirements, in addition to the Company maintaining a higher liquidity position in light of the continued economic uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Deposits
The composition of deposits for the periods indicated is presented in the following table:
Deposits and Borrowings
Total deposits at December 31, 2020 were $10.0 billion compared to $6.4 billion at December 31, 2019, a 56% increase during the period. This growth was driven principally from the Revere acquisition during the current year, and to a lesser extent, the PPP program. The loan-to-deposit ratio remained at 104% at the end of 2020 compared to the end of 2019. The deposit increase from year-end 2019 was driven by increases in the non-interest bearing demand (76%), interest-bearing demand (54%) and money market deposit (82%) categories. A portion of the deposit growth is the result of the funds from the PPP program, which were placed in deposit accounts at the Bank until utilized by the respective borrowers. The increase in the money market deposit products can be attributed to the addition of $830 million in brokered and network sourced money market deposits, in addition to the portion
attributable to the Revere acquisition. The lower cost of brokered money market accounts permitted the Company to reduce balances in the more expensive brokered time deposits and FHLB advances. Interest-bearing deposits represented 67% of total deposits with the remaining 33% in noninterest-bearing balances at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2019, interest-bearing deposits represented 71% of total deposits while 29% represented noninterest-bearing deposits.
Total borrowings increased 23% at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. A large portion of the year-over-year increase in borrowings was driven by the federal funds purchased during December 2020. This temporary occurrence was caused by the client funding requirements at the end of 2020. Excluding the federal funds purchased balances, borrowings decreased 12% year over year as FHLB advances declined 26% due to prepayments while subordinated debt rose 8% mainly from the acquired debt.
Capital Management
Management monitors historical and projected earnings, dividends and asset growth, as well as risks associated with the various types of on and off-balance sheet assets and liabilities, in order to determine appropriate capital levels. Stockholders’ equity at December 31, 2020 was $1.5 billion compared $1.1 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase in stockholders’ equity was primarily the result of the capital issued to complete the acquisition of Revere, in addition to the net income after dividends paid during the year. During 2020, the Company repurchased approximately 820,000 shares of common stock resulting in a $25.7 million reduction in stockholders’ equity. The ratio of average equity to average assets was 11.38% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 13.25% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Risk-Based Capital Ratios
Bank holding companies and banks are required to maintain capital ratios in accordance with guidelines adopted by the federal bank regulators. These guidelines are commonly known as Risk-Based Capital guidelines. The actual regulatory ratios and required ratios for capital adequacy are summarized for the Company in the following table.
Regulatory capital at December 31, 2020 was comprised of tier 1 capital of $1.1 billion and total qualifying capital of $1.4 billion. As of December 31, 2020, the most recent notification from the Bank’s primary regulator categorized the Bank as a "well-capitalized" institution under the prompt corrective action rules of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act. Designation as a well-capitalized institution under these regulations is not a recommendation or endorsement of the Company or the Bank by federal bank regulators.
The minimum capital level requirements applicable to the Company and the Bank are: (1) a Tier 1 leverage ratio of 4%; (2) a common equity Tier 1 capital ratio of 4.5%; (3) a Tier 1 capital ratio of 6%; and (4) a total capital ratio of 8%. Covered financial institutions must also maintain a “capital conservation buffer” of 2.5% above the regulatory minimum capital requirements, which must consist entirely of common equity Tier 1 capital. An institution would be subject to limitations on paying dividends, engaging in share repurchases, and paying discretionary bonuses to executive officers if its capital level falls below the buffer amount. These limitations establish a maximum percentage of eligible retained income that could be utilized for such actions.
The main drivers of the decline in the ratios at December 31, 2020 from December 31, 2019 were the impact that the Revere transaction had on total risk-based assets, as well as the previously mentioned stock repurchase program. During the year, the Company elected to apply the provisions of the CECL deferral transition in the determination of its risk-based capital ratios. At December 31, 2020, the impact of the application of this deferral transition provided an additional $22.5 million in Tier 1 capital and resulted in raising the common equity Tier 1 ratio by 22 basis points.
Tangible Common Equity
Tangible common equity, tangible assets and tangible book value per common share are non-GAAP financial measures calculated using GAAP amounts. Tangible common equity excludes the balances of goodwill, other intangible assets and accumulated other comprehensive income/ (loss) from total stockholders’ equity. Tangible assets excludes the balances of goodwill and other intangible assets. Management believes that this non-GAAP financial measure provides information to investors that may be useful in understanding the Company's financial condition. Because not all companies use the same calculation of tangible common equity and tangible assets, this presentation may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures calculated by other companies.
Tangible common equity totaled $1.0 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $782.3 million at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, the ratio of tangible common equity to tangible assets has decreased to 8.46% compared to 9.46% at December 31, 2019. The contraction in tangible common equity in 2020 from 2019 is primarily the result of the 50% growth in tangible assets exceeding the 34% growth in tangible common equity, primarily due to the Revere acquisition. In addition, tangible common equity during 2020 was reduced by the impact of the Company's stock repurchase program in addition to the growth in goodwill and intangible assets resulting from the RPJ and Revere acquisitions. Excluding the impact of the PPP program from tangible assets at December 31, 2020, the tangible common equity ratio would be 9.25%.
Non-GAAP Tangible Common Equity Ratios
A reconciliation of the non-GAAP ratio of tangible common equity to tangible assets and tangible book value per common share are provided in the following table.
Credit Risk
The fundamental lending business of the Company is based on understanding, measuring and controlling the credit risk inherent in the loan portfolio. The Company’s loan portfolio is subject to varying degrees of credit risk. Credit risk entails both general risks, which are inherent in the process of lending, and risk specific to individual borrowers. The Company’s credit risk is mitigated through portfolio diversification, which limits exposure to any single customer, industry or collateral type. Typically, each consumer and residential lending product has a generally predictable level of credit losses based on historical loss experience. Residential mortgage and home equity loans and lines generally have the lowest credit loss experience. Loans secured by personal property, such as auto loans, generally experience medium credit losses. Unsecured loan products, such as personal revolving credit, have the highest credit loss experience and, for that reason, the Company has chosen not to engage in a significant amount of this type of lending. Credit risk in commercial lending can vary significantly, as losses as a percentage of outstanding loans can shift widely during economic cycles
and are particularly sensitive to changing economic conditions. Generally, improving economic conditions result in improved operating results on the part of commercial customers, enhancing their ability to meet their particular debt service requirements. Improvements, if any, in operating cash flows can be offset by the impact of rising interest rates that may occur during improved economic times. Inconsistent economic conditions may have an adverse effect on the operating results of commercial customers, reducing their ability to meet debt service obligations.
Loans acquired as a part of an acquisition transaction with evidence of more-than-insignificant credit deterioration since their origination as of the date of the acquisition are considered “purchased credit deteriorated” or “PCD” loans and are recorded at their initial fair values. The identification of loans that have experienced a more-than-insignificant deterioration in credit quality since their origination requires judgment and an assessment of a number of factors. For further discussion regarding the acquired loans, including PCD loans, refer to that section of Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
To control and manage credit risk, management has a credit process in place to reasonably ensure that credit standards are maintained along with an in-house loan administration, accompanied by oversight and review procedures. The primary purpose of loan underwriting is the evaluation of specific lending risks and involves the analysis of the borrower’s ability to service the debt as well as the assessment of the value of the underlying collateral. Oversight and review procedures include monitoring the credit quality of the portfolio, providing early identification of potential problem credits and proactive management of problem credits.
The Company recognizes a lending relationship as non-performing when either the loan becomes 90 days delinquent or as a result of factors, such as bankruptcy, interruption of cash flows, etc., considered at the monthly credit committee meeting. Classification as a non-accrual loan is based on a determination that the Company may not collect all principal and/or interest payments according to contractual terms. When a loan is placed on non-accrual status all accrued but unpaid interest is reversed from interest income. Typically, all payments received on non-accrual loans are first applied to the remaining principal balance of the loans. Any additional recoveries are credited to the allowance up to the amount of all previous charge-offs.
The level of non-performing loans to total loans increased to 1.11% at December 31, 2020 compared to 0.62% at December 31, 2019. Non-performing loans totaled $115.5 million at December 31, 2020 in comparison to $41.3 million at December 31, 2019. The growth in non-performing loans over the prior year was driven by three major components: loans placed on non-accrual status, acquired Revere non-accrual loans, and loans previously accounted for as purchased credit impaired loans that have been designated as non-accrual loans as a result of the Company's adoption of the accounting standard for expected credit losses at the beginning of 2020. During 2020, non-accrual commercial business loans increased $14.5 million, while non-accrual commercial real estate loans increased $58.4 million. These increases were net of payments or settlements of $21.2 million during the year, which contained one significant settlement of $9.3 million that occurred without any credit loss. Combined residential and consumer non-accrual lending portfolio remained fairly stable. The increase in non-accrual commercial and commercial real estate loans related primarily to a limited number of large borrowing relationships within the hospitality sector. These large relationships are collateral dependent and required no individual reserves due to sufficient values of their underlying collateral.
While the diversification of the lending portfolio among different commercial, residential and consumer product lines along with different market conditions of the D.C. suburbs, Northern Virginia and Baltimore metropolitan area has mitigated some of the risks in the portfolio, local economic conditions and levels of non-performing loans may continue to be influenced by the conditions being experienced in various business sectors of the economy on both a regional and national level. As noted, risks, uncertainties and various other factors related to the COVID-19 pandemic include the impact on the economy and the businesses of the Company's borrowers and their ability to remit contractual payments on their obligations to the Company in a timely manner. The current ability to predict the outcome or impact of the remedial actions and stimulus measures adopted by the government on the economic well-being of the Company's borrowers and the manifestations of all these factors including the future performance aspect of the credit portfolio remains uncertain.
The Company’s methodology for evaluating whether a loan shall be placed on non-accrual status begins with risk-rating credits on an individual basis and includes consideration of the borrower’s overall financial condition, payment record and available cash resources that may include the sufficiency of collateral value and, in a select few cases, verifiable support from financial guarantors. In measuring a specific allowance, the Company looks primarily to the value of the collateral (adjusted for estimated costs to sell) or projected cash flows generated by the operation of the collateral as the primary sources of repayment of the loan. The Company may consider the existence of guarantees and the financial strength and wherewithal of the guarantors involved in any loan relationship. Guarantees may be considered as a source of repayment based on the guarantor’s financial condition and payment capacity.
Accordingly, absent a verifiable payment capacity, a guarantee alone would not be sufficient to avoid classifying the loan as non-accrual.
Management has established a credit process that dictates that structured procedures be performed to monitor these loans between the receipt of an original appraisal and the updated appraisal. These procedures include the following:
•An internal evaluation is updated periodically to include borrower financial statements and/or cash flow projections.
•The borrower may be contacted for a meeting to discuss an updated or revised action plan which may include a request for additional collateral.
•Re-verification of the documentation supporting the Company’s position with respect to the collateral securing the loan.
•At the monthly credit committee meeting the loan may be downgraded and an individual allowance may be decided upon in advance of the receipt of the appraisal.
•Upon receipt of the updated appraisal (or based on an updated internal financial evaluation) the loan balance is compared to the appraisal and an individual allowance is decided upon for the particular loan, typically for the amount of the difference between the appraised value (adjusted for estimated costs to sell) and the loan balance.
•Evaluation of whether adverse changes in the value of the collateral are expected over the remainder of the loan’s expected life.
•The Company will individually assess the allowance for credit losses based on the fair value of the collateral for any collateral dependent loans where the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty or when the Company determines that the foreclosure is probable. The Company will charge-off the excess of the loan amount over the fair value of the collateral adjusted for the estimated selling costs.
Loans considered to be troubled debt restructurings (“TDRs”) are loans that have their terms restructured (e.g., interest rates, loan maturity date, payment and amortization period, etc.) in circumstances that provide payment relief to a borrower experiencing financial difficulty. All restructured collateral-dependent loans are individually assessed for allowance for credit losses and may either be in accruing or non-accruing status. Non-accruing restructured loans may return to accruing status provided doubt has been removed concerning the collectability of principal and interest as evidenced by a sufficient period of payment performance in accordance with the restructured terms. Loans may be removed from the restructured category if the borrower is no longer experiencing financial difficulty, a re-underwriting event took place and the revised loan terms of the subsequent restructuring agreement are considered to be consistent with terms that can be obtained in the credit market for loans with comparable risk.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security ("CARES") Act, which was signed into law in March 2020, provided financial institutions the option to temporarily suspend certain requirements under GAAP related to TDRs for a limited period of time during the COVID-19 pandemic. In April 2020, the federal regulatory agencies issued a joint statement that provided further guidance on loan modifications related to COVID-19. Loans that receive a payment forbearance need not be classified as a TDR if the borrower meets certain criteria, such as they were in good standing and not more than 30 days past due prior to the pandemic, as well as other requirements noted in the regulatory agencies’ revised statement. Based on the guidance noted above, the Company does not classify the COVID-19 loan modifications as TDRs, nor are the customers considered past due with regards to their delayed payments. Upon exiting the loan modification deferral program, the measurement of loan delinquency will resume where it left off upon entry into the program.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company developed a set of guidelines to provide relief to qualified commercial and mortgage/consumer loans customers. These guidelines provide for deferment of certain loan payments of up to 180 days to provide relief to qualified commercial, mortgage and consumer loan customers. Initial deferrals of 90 days were granted to qualified customers with the option to request further deferrals, each for an additional 90 days. During 2020, the Company granted payment modifications/deferrals on over 2,500 loans with an aggregate balance of $2.1 billion, of which 203 loans with an aggregate balance of $217 million remain in deferral status. Currently, the vast majority of loans that had been granted modifications/deferrals have returned to their original payment plans without a significant impact on payment delinquencies.
During 2020, the Company approved and funded over 5,400 PPP loans for a total of $1.1 billion. Loans originated under the program are 100% guaranteed by the Small Business Administration under the CARES Act. In the later part of 2020, the Company began accepting digital PPP forgiveness applications. This process was paused pending updates to reflect amendments to the PPP program and to focus efforts on accepting loan applications for both first and second draw loans under the program that was restarted in January 2021.
The Company may extend the maturity of a performing or current loan that may have some inherent weakness associated with the loan. However, the Company generally follows a policy of not extending maturities on non-performing loans under existing terms. Maturity date extensions only occur under revised terms that clearly place the Company in a position to increase the likelihood of or assure full collection of the loan under the contractual terms and/or terms at the time of the extension that may eliminate or mitigate the inherent weakness in the loan. These terms may incorporate, but are not limited to additional assignment of collateral, significant balance curtailments/liquidations and assignments of additional project cash flows. Guarantees may be a consideration in the extension of loan maturities. As a general matter, the Company does not view the extension of a loan to be a satisfactory approach to resolving non-performing credits. On an exception basis, certain performing loans that have displayed some inherent weakness in the underlying collateral values, an inability to comply with certain loan covenants which are not affecting the performance of the credit or other identified weakness may be extended.
The Company typically sells a portion of its fixed-rate residential mortgage originations in the secondary mortgage market. Concurrent with such sales, the Company is required to make customary representations and warranties to the purchasers about the mortgage loans and the manner in which they were originated. The related sale agreements grant the purchasers recourse back to the Company, which could require the Company to repurchase loans or to share in any losses incurred by the purchasers. This recourse exposure typically extends for a period of nine to eighteen months after the sale of the loan although the time frame for repurchase requests can extend for an indefinite period. Such transactions could be due to a number of causes including borrower fraud or early payment default. The Company has seen a very limited number of repurchase and indemnity demands from purchasers for such events and routinely monitors its exposure in this regard. The Company maintains a liability of $0.6 million for probable losses due to repurchases. The Company believes that this reserve is appropriate.
The Company periodically engages in whole loan sale transactions of its residential mortgage loans as a part its interest rate risk management strategy. Neither the servicing assets associated with mortgage loan sales during 2018 or prior years, nor the income earned by the Company on its loan servicing rights during such periods, was significant. The Company did not engage in any whole loan sales during 2020.
Mortgage loan servicing rights are accounted for at amortized cost and are monitored for impairment on an ongoing basis. At December 31, 2020, the amortized cost of the Company's mortgage loan servicing rights was $0.6 million compared to $1.1 million at December 31, 2019. The decline in the year-over-year balance was the result of the loan pay-offs. The Company did not incur any impairment losses during 2020.
Analysis of Credit Risk
The following table presents information with respect to non-performing assets and 90-day delinquencies for the years indicated:
(1)Gross interest income that would have been recorded in 2020 if non-accrual loans shown above had been current and in accordance with their original terms was $18.3 million. No interest income was accrued on these loans during the year while on non-accrual status. Please see Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of the Company’s policy for placing loans on non-accrual status.
(2)Performing loans considered potential problem loans, as defined and identified by management, amounted to $15.8 million at December 31, 2020. Although these are loans where known information about the borrowers' possible credit problems causes management to have concerns as to the borrowers' ability to comply with the loan repayment terms, most are current as to payment terms, well collateralized and are not believed to present significant risk of loss. Loans classified for regulatory purposes not included in either non-performing or potential problem loans consist only of "other loans especially mentioned" and do not, in management's opinion, represent or result from trends or uncertainties reasonably expected to materially impact future operating results, liquidity or capital resources, or represent material credits where known information about the borrowers' possible credit problems causes management to have doubts as to the borrowers' ability to comply with the loan repayment terms.
The following table discloses information on the credit quality of originated loans, acquired Revere loans and total loans:
Allowance for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses represents management’s estimate of the portion of the Company’s loans’ amortized cost basis not expected to be collected over the loans’ contractual life. As a part of the credit oversight and review process, the Company maintains an allowance for credit losses (the “allowance”). The following allowance section should be read in conjunction with the “Allowance for Credit Losses” section in Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company excludes accrued interest receivable from the measurement of the allowance as the Company has a non-accrual policy to reverse any accrued, uncollected interest income when loans are placed on non-accrual status.
The appropriateness of the allowance is determined through ongoing evaluation of the credit portfolio, and involves consideration of a number of factors. Determination of the allowance is inherently subjective and requires significant estimates, including consideration of current conditions and economic forecasts, which may be susceptible to significant volatility. The amount of expected losses can vary significantly from the amounts actually observed. Loans deemed uncollectible are charged-off against the allowance, while recoveries are credited to the allowance when received. Management adjusts the level of the allowance through the provision for credit losses in the Consolidated Statements of Income.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company adopted Accounting Standard Codification ("ASC") 326 “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses.” At the adoption date, the allowance for credit losses increased by $5.7 million or 10%. Included in this transition adjustment is the reclassification of $2.8 million to the allowance for credit losses of amounts related to the previously acquired impaired loans. The after-tax transition impact to retained earnings as a result of adopting the new standard was $2.2 million.
The provision for credit losses was $85.7 million in 2020 and $4.7 million in 2019. During the current year, the provision for credit losses was significantly impacted by the negative projected impact of COVID-19 on specific forecasted economic metrics utilized in the Company’s CECL model. The forecasted economic metrics with the greatest impact in order of magnitude were, the expected level of business bankruptcies, the expected future unemployment rate and, to a lesser degree, the house price index. These expectations were based on the assessment of the impact on the Company’s market area caused by the economic disruption. The portion of the $85.7 million provision directly attributable to the significant deterioration in the economic forecast amounted to approximately $44.1 million. In addition, as required by GAAP, the initial allowance for credit losses on Revere’s acquired non-PCD loans was recognized through provision for credit losses in the amount of $17.5 million. The remainder of the provision reflects the impact of changes in interest rates, existing terms, qualitative factors, portfolio composition and portfolio maturities. The acquisition of Revere’s PCD loans resulted in an increase to the allowance for credit losses of $18.6 million, which did not affect the current year’s provision expense.
At December 31, 2020, the allowance for credit losses was $165.4 million as compared to $56.1 million at December 31, 2019. The allowance for credit losses as a percent of total loans was 1.59% and 0.84% at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The allowance for credit losses represented 143% of non-performing loans at December 31, 2020 as compared to 136% at December 31, 2019. The allowance attributable to the commercial portfolio represented 1.70% of total commercial loans while the portion attributable to total combined consumer and mortgage loans was 1.05%. With respect to the total commercial portion of the allowance, 32% of this portion is allocated to the commercial business loan portfolio, resulting in the ratio of the allowance for commercial business loans to total commercial business loans of 2.06%. A similar ratio with respect to AD&C loans was 2.11% at the end of the current year. Excluding the PPP loans, which do not have an associated allowance, the allowance for credit losses as a percentage of total loans outstanding would be 1.77% and the ratio of the allowance for commercial business loans to total commercial business loans would be 3.87%.
The current methodology for assessing the appropriate allowance includes: (1) a collective quantified reserve that reflects the Company’s historical default and loss experience adjusted for expected economic conditions over a reasonable and supportable forecast period and the Company’s prepayment and curtailment rates, (2) collective qualitative factors that consider concentrations of the loan portfolio, expected changes to the economic forecasts, large lending relationships, early delinquencies, and factors related to credit administration, including, among others, loan-to-value ratios, borrowers’ risk rating and credit score migrations, and (3) individual allowances on collateral-dependent loans where borrowers are experiencing financial difficulty or where the Company determined that foreclosure is probable. Under the current methodology, the impact of the utilization of the historical default and loss experience results in 84% of the total allowance being attributable to the historical performance of the portfolio while 16% of the allowance is attributable to the collective qualitative factors applied to determine the allowance. The methodology used under previous accounting guidance in prior periods was dependent to a large degree on the application of qualitative factors which resulted in 85% of the total allowance being attributable to those qualitative factors with the remaining portion of the prior period’s allowance being dependent on historical loss experience.
The quantified collective portion of the allowance is determined by pooling loans into segments based on the similar risk characteristics of the underlying borrowers, in addition to consideration of collateral type, industry and business purpose of the loans. The Company selected two collective methodologies, the discounted cash flows and weighted average remaining life methodologies. Segments utilizing the discounted cash flow method are further sub-segmented based on the risk level (determined either by internal risk ratings or Beacon Scores). Collective calculation methodologies use the Company’s historical default and loss experience adjusted for economic forecasts. The reasonable and supportable forecast period represents a two year economic outlook for the applicable economic variables. Following the end of the reasonable and supportable forecast period expected losses revert back to the historical mean over the next two years on a straight-line basis.
Economic variables which have the most significant impact on the allowance include:
•unemployment rate;
•number of business bankruptcies; and
•house price index.
The collective quantified component of the allowance is supplemented by a qualitative component to address various risk characteristics of the Company’s loan portfolio including:
•trends in early delinquencies;
•changes in the risk profile related to large loans in the portfolio;
•concentrations of loans to specific industry segments;
•expected changes in economic conditions;
•changes in the Company’s credit administration and loan portfolio management processes; and
•the quality of the Company’s credit risk identification processes.
The individual reserve assessment is applied to collateral dependent loans where borrowers are experiencing financial difficulty or when the Company determined that foreclosure is probable. The determination of the fair value of the collateral depends on whether a repayment of the loan is expected to be from the sale or the operation of the collateral. When repayment is expected from the operation of the collateral, the Company uses the present value of expected cash flows from the operation of the collateral as the fair value. When repayment of the loan is expected from the sale of the collateral the fair value of the collateral is based on an observable market
price or the appraised value less estimated cost to sell. During the individual reserve assessment, management also considers the potential future changes in the value of the collateral over the remainder of the loan’s life. The balance of collateral-dependent loans individually assessed for the allowance was $97.7 million, with individual allowances of $11.4 million against those loans at December 31, 2020.
If an updated appraisal is received subsequent to the preliminary determination of an individual allowance or partial charge-off, and it is less than the initial appraisal used in the initial assessment, an additional individual allowance or charge-off is taken on the related credit. Partially charged-off loans are not written back up based on updated appraisals and always remain on non-accrual with any and all subsequent payments first applied to the remaining balance of the loan as principal reductions. No interest income is recognized on loans that have been partially charged-off.
A current appraisal on large loans is usually obtained if the appraisal on file is more than 12 months old and there has been a material change in market conditions, zoning, physical use or the appropriateness of the collateral based on an internal evaluation. The Company’s policy is to strictly adhere to regulatory appraisal standards. If an appraisal is ordered, no more than a 30 day turnaround is requested from the appraiser, who is selected by Credit Administration from an approved appraiser list. After receipt of the updated appraisal, the assigned credit officer will recommend to the Chief Credit Officer whether an individual allowance or a charge-off should be taken. The Chief Credit Officer has the authority to approve an individual allowance or charge-off between monthly credit committee meetings to ensure that there are no significant time lapses during this process. The Company's borrowers are concentrated in nine counties in Maryland, three counties in Virginia and in Washington D.C. Excluding the PPP loans, commercial and residential mortgages, including home equity loans and lines, represented 88% of total loans at December 31, 2020 and 87% of total loans at December 31, 2019. Certain loan terms may create concentrations of credit risk and increase the Company’s exposure to loss. These include terms that permit the deferral of principal payments or payments that are smaller than normal interest accruals (negative amortization); loans with high loan-to-value ratios; loans, such as option adjustable-rate mortgages, that may expose the borrower to future increases in repayments that are in excess of increases that would result solely from increases in market interest rates; and interest-only loans. The Company does not make loans that provide for negative amortization or option adjustable-rate mortgages.
The following table presents a five-year history for the allocation of the allowance for credit losses. The allowance is allocated in the following table to various loan categories based on the methodology used to estimate credit losses; however, the allocation does not restrict the usage of the allowance for any specific loan category.
Summary of Credit Loss Experience
The following table presents the activity in the allowance for credit losses for the periods indicated:
The following table discloses information on allowance for credit losses and allowance ratios for originated loans and Revere acquired non-PCD and PCD loans:
Market Risk Management
The Company's net income is largely dependent on its net interest income. Net interest income is susceptible to interest rate risk to the extent that interest-bearing liabilities mature or re-price on a different basis than interest-earning assets. When interest-bearing liabilities mature or re-price more quickly than interest-earning assets in a given period, a significant increase in market rates of interest could adversely affect net interest income. Similarly, when interest-earning assets mature or re-price more quickly than interest-bearing liabilities, falling interest rates could result in a decrease in net interest income. Net interest income is also affected by changes in the portion of interest-earning assets that are funded by interest-bearing liabilities rather than by other sources of funds, such as noninterest-bearing deposits and stockholders' equity.
The Company’s interest rate risk management goals are (1) to increase net interest income at a growth rate consistent with the growth rate of total assets, and (2) to minimize fluctuations in net interest income as a percentage of interest-earning assets. Management attempts to achieve these goals by balancing, within policy limits, the volume of floating-rate liabilities with a similar volume of floating-rate assets; by keeping the average maturity of fixed-rate asset and liability contracts reasonably matched; by maintaining a pool of administered core deposits; and by adjusting pricing rates to market conditions on a continuing basis.
The Company’s board of directors has established a comprehensive interest rate risk management policy, which is administered by management’s Asset/Liability Committee (“ALCO”). The policy establishes limits on risk, which are quantitative measures of the percentage change in net interest income (a measure of net interest income at risk) and the fair value of equity capital (a measure of economic value of equity or “EVE” at risk) resulting from a hypothetical change in U.S. Treasury interest rates for maturities from one day to thirty years. The Company measures the potential adverse impacts that changing interest rates may have on its short-term earnings, long-term value, and liquidity by employing simulation analysis through the use of computer modeling. The simulation model captures optional factors such as call features and interest rate caps and floors embedded in investment and loan portfolio contracts. As with any method of gauging interest rate risk, there are certain shortcomings inherent in the interest rate modeling methodology used by the Company. When interest rates change, actual movements in different categories of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, loan prepayments, and withdrawals of time and other deposits, may deviate significantly from assumptions used in the model. As an example, certain money market deposit accounts are assumed to reprice at 40% to 100% of the interest rate change in each of the up rate shock scenarios even though this is not a contractual requirement. As a practical matter, management would likely lag the impact of any upward movement in market rates on these accounts as a mechanism to manage the Bank’s net interest margin. Finally, the methodology does not measure or reflect the impact that higher rates may have on adjustable-rate loan customers’ ability to service their debts, or the impact of rate changes on demand for loan, lease, and deposit products.
The Company prepares a current base case and eight alternative simulations at least once per quarter and reports the analysis to the board of directors. In addition, more frequent forecasts are produced when interest rates are particularly uncertain or when other business conditions so dictate.
The statement of condition is subject to quarterly testing for eight alternative interest rate shock possibilities to indicate the inherent interest rate risk. Projected interest rates are shocked by +/- 100, 200, 300, and 400 basis points (“bp”), although the Company may elect not to use particular scenarios that it determines are impractical in a current rate environment. It is management’s goal to structure the balance sheet so that net interest earnings at risk over a twelve-month period and the economic value of equity at risk do not exceed policy guidelines at the various interest rate shock levels.
The Company augments its quarterly interest rate shock analysis with alternative external interest rate scenarios on a monthly basis. These alternative interest rate scenarios may include non-parallel rate ramps and non-parallel yield curve twists. If a measure of risk produced by the alternative simulations of the entire statement of condition violates policy guidelines, ALCO is required to develop a plan to restore the measure of risk to a level that complies with policy limits within two quarters.
Measures of net interest income at risk produced by simulation analysis are indicators of an institution’s short-term performance in alternative rate environments. These measures are typically based upon a relatively brief period, usually one year. They do not necessarily indicate the long-term prospects or economic value of the institution.
As shown above, measures of net interest income at risk at December 31, 2020 had declined in every rising interest rate change scenario from December 31, 2019. All measures remained well within prescribed policy limits. As indicated in the table, in a rising interest rate environment, net interest income sensitivity decreased compared to the prior year-end as a result of decreased asset sensitivity due to the repricing down of deposits and the increased level of brokered money market deposits along with the large federal funds purchased position at December 31, 2020. The level of wholesale funding at the end of the current year was temporary in nature and its impact on the estimated changes in net interest income.
The measures of equity value at risk indicate the ongoing economic value of the Company by considering the effects of changes in interest rates on all of the Company’s cash flows, and by discounting the cash flows to estimate the present value of assets and liabilities. The difference between these discounted values of the assets and liabilities is the economic value of equity, which, in theory, approximates the fair value of the Company's net assets.
Overall, the measure of the economic value of equity ("EVE") at risk improved in the +200bp/ +100bp scenarios from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, while the measure of the EVE at risk increased in the +300bp/400bp scenarios during the same period. The improvement in EVE in the +200/+100 scenarios was the result of shorter loan durations that declined with the inclusion of Revere's portfolio and the inclusion of the PPP program. The improvements in the +200/+100 EVE scenario positions were partially offset by the impact of shorter deposit durations and the increase in the brokered money market position with a 100% beta which resulted in an increase in the risk in the +300/+400bp scenarios.
Liquidity Management
Liquidity is measured by a financial institution's ability to raise funds through loan repayments, maturing investments, deposit growth, borrowed funds, capital and the sale of highly marketable assets such as investment securities and residential mortgage loans. The Company's liquidity position, considering both internal and external sources available, exceeded anticipated short-term and long-term needs at December 31, 2020. Management considers core deposits, defined to include all deposits other than brokered and outsourced deposits and certain time deposits of $250 thousand or more, to be a relatively stable funding source. Core deposits equaled 75% of total interest-earning assets at December 31, 2020. In addition, loan payments, maturities, calls and pay downs of securities, deposit
growth and earnings contribute a flow of funds available to meet liquidity requirements. In assessing liquidity, management considers operating requirements, the seasonality of deposit flows, investment, loan and deposit maturities and calls, expected funding of loans and deposit withdrawals, and the market values of available-for-sale investments, so that sufficient funds are available on short notice to meet obligations as they arise and to ensure that the Company is able to pursue new business opportunities.
In addition to factors discussed above that can affect liquidity, the Company’s growth, mortgage banking activities and changes in the liquidity of the investment portfolio due to fluctuations in interest rates are also taken into consideration. Under this approach, implemented by the Funds Management Subcommittee of ALCO under formal policy guidelines, the Company’s liquidity position is measured weekly, looking forward at thirty day intervals from 30 to 360 days. The measurement is based upon the projection of funds sold or purchased position, along with ratios and trends developed to measure dependence on purchased funds and core growth. Resulting projections as of December 31, 2020, provides an indication of liquidity versus requirements that the Company utilizes to determine how it will fund loans and other earning assets.
The Company has external sources of funds that can be drawn upon when required. The main sources of external liquidity are available lines of credit with the FHLB and the Federal Reserve Bank. Based on pledged collateral, the available line of credit with the FHLB totaled $3.0 billion with $379.1 million borrowed against it as of December 31, 2020. The Company also had secured lines of credit available from the Federal Reserve Bank and correspondent banks of $276.2 million at December 31, 2020 collateralized by portfolio loans. In addition, the Company had unsecured lines of credit with correspondent banks of $1.1 billion at December 31, 2020. Outstanding borrowings against these lines of credit amounted to $390.0 million. Based upon its liquidity analysis, including external sources of liquidity available, management believes the liquidity position was appropriate at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020 the Company has no borrowings outstanding of the $1.1 billion available under the PPPLF program.
Sandy Spring Bancorp, Inc., as a standalone entity (“Bancorp”) is a separate legal entity from the Bank and must provide for its own liquidity. In addition to its operating expenses, Bancorp is responsible for paying any dividends declared to its common stockholders and interest and principal on outstanding debt. Bancorp’s primary source of income is dividends received from the Bank. The amount of dividends that the Bank may declare and pay to Bancorp in any calendar year, without the receipt of prior approval from the Federal Reserve Bank, cannot exceed net income for that year to date plus retained net income (as defined) for the preceding two calendar years. Based on this requirement, as of December 31, 2020, the Bank could have declared a dividend of $145 million to Bancorp. At December 31, 2020, Bancorp had liquid assets of $63.9 million.
The Company has various contractual obligations that affect its cash flows and liquidity. For information regarding material contractual obligations, please see Market Risk Management previously discussed, Contractual Obligations below, and Note 7 - Premises and Equipment, Note 11 - Borrowings, Note 14 - Pension, Profit Sharing and Other Employee Benefit Plans, Note 19 - Derivatives, Note 20 - Financial Instruments with Off-Balance Sheet Risk, and Note 22 - Fair Value in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
With the exception of the Company’s obligations in connection with its irrevocable letters of credit and loan commitments, the Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the Company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources, that is material to investors. Arrangements to fund credit products or guarantee financing take the form of loan commitments (including lines of credit on revolving credit structures) and letters of credit. Approval for these arrangements are obtained in the same manner as loans. Generally, cash flows, collateral value and risk assessments are considered when determining the amount and structure of credit arrangements. Commitments to extend credit are agreements to provide financing to a customer with the provision that there are no violations of any condition established in the agreement. Commitments generally have interest rates determined by current market rates, expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Lines of credit typically represent unused portions of lines of credit that were provided and remain available as long as customers comply with the requisite contractual conditions. Commitments to extend credit are evaluated, processed and/or renewed regularly on a case by case basis, as part of the credit management process. The total commitment amount or line of credit amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements, as it is highly unlikely that all customers would draw on their lines of credit in full at one time. For additional information on off-balance sheet arrangements, please see Note 20 - Financial Instruments with Off-Balance Sheet Risk and Note 11 - Borrowings in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, and Capital Management above.
Contractual Obligations
The Company enters into contractual obligations in the normal course of business. Among these obligations are FHLB advances, operating leases related to branch and administrative facilities and a long-term contract with a data processing provider. Payments required under these obligations, are set forth in the table following as of December 31, 2020.
(1)Assumed a seven year term for purposes of this table.
(2)Represents payments required under contract, based on average monthly charges for 2020 with the Company’s current data processing service provider that expires in September 2024.