ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of our Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“Management’s Discussion and Analysis”) should be read in conjunction with our Accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis is intended to help provide an understanding of our financial condition, changes in our financial condition and our results of operations. Many of the statements in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis are forward-looking statements that involve assumptions and are subject to risks and uncertainties that are often difficult to predict and beyond our control. Actual results could differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. See Disclosure Regarding Forward-Looking Statements in this Form 10-K for further discussion. For a discussion of additional risks, uncertainties and other factors that could impact our results of operations or financial condition, see Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K. Further, such forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this Form 10-K and we undertake no obligation to update them.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
We are a global provider of broadband satellite technologies, broadband internet services for consumer customers, which include home and small to medium-sized businesses, and satellite services. We also deliver innovative network technologies, managed services and communications solutions for enterprise customers, which include aeronautical and government enterprises.
We currently operate in two business segments: Hughes and ESS. These segments are consistent with the way we make decisions regarding the allocation of resources, as well as how operating results are reviewed by our chief operating decision maker, who is the Company’s Chief Executive Officer.
Our operations also include various corporate departments (primarily Executive, Treasury, Strategic Development, Human Resources, IT, Finance, Accounting, Real Estate and Legal) and other activities, such as costs incurred in certain satellite development programs and other business development activities, and gains or losses from certain of our investments, that have not been assigned to our business segments. These activities, costs and income, as well as eliminations of intersegment transactions, are accounted for in Corporate and Other in our segment reporting.
In September 2019, pursuant to a master transaction agreement (the “Master Transaction Agreement”) with DISH and a wholly-owned subsidiary of DISH (“Merger Sub”), (i) we transferred certain real property and the various businesses, products, licenses, technology, revenues, billings, operating activities, assets and liabilities primarily related to the former portion of our ESS segment that managed, marketed and provided (1) broadcast satellite services primarily to DISH and its subsidiaries (together with DISH, “DISH Network”) and our joint venture Dish Mexico, S. de R.L. de C.V. (“Dish Mexico”) and its subsidiaries, and (2) telemetry, tracking and control (“TT&C”) services for satellites owned by DISH Network and a portion of our other businesses (collectively, the “BSS Business”) to one of our former subsidiaries, EchoStar BSS Corporation (“BSS Corp.”), (ii) we distributed to each holder of shares of our Class A or Class B common stock entitled to receive consideration in the transaction an amount of shares of common stock of BSS Corp., par value $0.001 per share (“BSS Common Stock”), equal to one share of BSS Common Stock for each share of our Class A or Class B common stock owned by such stockholder (the “Distribution”); and (iii) immediately after the Distribution, (1) Merger Sub merged with and into BSS Corp. (the “Merger”), such that BSS Corp. became a wholly-owned subsidiary of DISH and with DISH then owning and operating the BSS Business, and (2) each issued and outstanding share of BSS Common Stock owned by EchoStar stockholders was converted into the right to receive 0.23523769 shares of DISH Class A common stock, par value $0.001 per share (“DISH Common Stock”) ((i) - (iii) collectively, the “BSS Transaction”).
In connection with the BSS Transaction, we and DISH Network agreed to indemnify each other against certain losses with respect to breaches of certain representations and covenants and certain retained and assumed liabilities, respectively. Additionally, we and DISH and certain of our and their subsidiaries (i) entered into certain customary agreements covering, among other things, matters relating to taxes, employees, intellectual property and the provision of transitional services; (ii) terminated certain previously existing agreements; and (iii) amended certain existing agreements and entered into certain new agreements pursuant to which we and DISH Network will obtain and provide certain products, services and rights from and to each other.
The BSS Transaction was structured in a manner intended to be tax-free to us and our stockholders for U.S. federal income tax purposes and was accounted for as a spin-off to our shareholders as we did not receive any
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
consideration. Following the consummation of the BSS Transaction, we no longer operate the BSS Business, which was a substantial portion of our ESS segment. As a result of the BSS Transaction, the financial results of the BSS Business, except for certain real estate that transferred in the transaction, are presented as discontinued operations and, as such, excluded from continuing operations and segment results for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, in our Accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note 5 in our Accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of our discontinued operations.
Highlights from our financial results are as follows:
Consolidated Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020
• Revenue of $1.9 billion
•Operating income (loss) of $112.5 million
•Net income (loss) from continuing operations of $(51.9) million
• Net income (loss) attributable to EchoStar common stock of $(40.2) million and basic earnings (losses) per share of common stock of $(0.41)
•Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, net income (loss) from discontinued operations and net income (loss) attributable to non-controlling interests (“EBITDA”) of $616.9 million (see reconciliation of this non-GAAP measure in Results of Operations)
Consolidated Financial Condition as of December 31, 2020
•Total assets of $7.1 billion
•Total liabilities of $3.5 billion
•Total stockholders’ equity of $3.6 billion
•Cash and cash equivalents and marketable investment securities of $2.5 billion
Hughes Segment
Our Hughes segment is a global provider of broadband satellite technologies and broadband internet services to consumer customers and broadband network technologies, managed services, equipment, hardware, satellite services and communications solutions to consumer and enterprise customers. The Hughes segment also designs, provides and installs gateway and terminal equipment to customers for other satellite systems. In addition, our Hughes segment designs, develops, constructs and provides telecommunication networks comprising satellite ground segment systems and terminals to mobile system operators and our enterprise customers.
We incorporate advances in technology to reduce costs and to increase the functionality and reliability of our products and services. Through advanced and proprietary methodologies, technologies, software and techniques, we continue to improve the efficiency of our networks. We invest in technologies to enhance our system and network management capabilities, specifically our managed services for enterprises. We also continue to invest in next generation technologies that can be applied to our future products and services.
We continue to focus our efforts on growing our consumer revenue by maximizing utilization of our existing satellites while planning for new satellites to be launched or acquired. Our consumer revenue growth depends on our success in adding new and retaining existing subscribers across wholesale and retail channels, as well as increasing our ARPU. Service costs related to ongoing support for our direct and indirect customers and partners are typically impacted most significantly by our growth. The growth of our enterprise businesses relies heavily on global economic conditions and the competitive landscape for pricing relative to competitors and alternative technologies. We have seen a limited number of our enterprise customers file for bankruptcy protection. We have reserved an amount related to pre-petition receivables and are working closely with these customers on providing post-petition services and products, as well as working with the customer regarding collection of pre-petition amounts.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
Our Hughes segment currently uses capacity from three of our satellites (the SPACEWAY 3 satellite, the EchoStar XVII satellite and the EchoStar XIX satellite), our Al Yah 3 Brazilian payload and additional satellite capacity acquired from third-party providers to provide services to our customers. Growth of our consumer subscriber base in the U.S. continues to be constrained where we are nearing or have reached maximum capacity in most areas. While these constraints are not expected to be resolved until we launch new satellites, we continue to focus on revenue growth in all areas and consumer subscriber growth in the areas where we have available capacity.
In May 2019, we entered into an agreement with Yahsat pursuant to which, in November 2019, Yahsat contributed its satellite communications services business in Brazil to one of our Brazilian subsidiaries in exchange for a 20% ownership interest in that subsidiary. The combined business provides broadband internet services and enterprise solutions in Brazil using the Telesat T19V satellite, the Eutelsat 65W satellite and Yahsat’s Al Yah 3 satellite. Under the terms of the agreement, Yahsat may also acquire, for further cash investments, additional minority ownership interests in the business in the future provided certain conditions are met.
In May 2019, we also entered into an agreement with Bharti, pursuant to which Bharti will contribute its VSAT telecommunications services and hardware business in India to our two existing Indian subsidiaries that conduct our VSAT services and hardware business. The combined entities will provide broadband satellite and hybrid solutions for enterprise networks. Upon consummation of the transaction, Bharti will have a 33% ownership interest in the combined business. The completion of the transaction is subject to customary regulatory approvals and closing conditions. No assurance can be given that the transaction will be consummated on the terms agreed to or at all.
In August 2018, we entered into an agreement with Yahsat to establish a new entity, BCS, to provide commercial Ka-band satellite broadband services across Africa, the Middle East and southwest Asia operating over Yahsat's Al Yah 2 and Al Yah 3 Ka-band satellites. The transaction was consummated in December 2018 when we invested $100.0 million in cash in exchange for a 20% interest in BCS. Under the terms of the agreement, we may also acquire, for further cash investments, additional ownership interests in BCS in the future provided certain conditions are met. We supply network operations and management services and equipment to BCS.
In August 2017, we entered into a long-term contract for the design and construction of the EchoStar XXIV satellite, a new, next-generation, high throughput geostationary satellite. The EchoStar XXIV satellite is primarily intended to provide additional capacity for our HughesNet service in North, Central and South America as well as enterprise broadband services. Maxar Space, LLC (formerly Space Systems/Loral, LLC), the manufacturer of our EchoStar XXIV satellite, has notified us of a delay in completion of the satellite. The EchoStar XXIV satellite is expected to be launched in the second half of 2022. Further delays or impediments could have a material adverse impact on our business operations, future revenues, financial position and prospects, the completion of manufacture of the EchoStar XXIV satellite and our planned expansion of satellite broadband services throughout North, South and Central America. In December 2020, we entered into an agreement with a launch provider for the launch of EchoStar XXIV. Capital expenditures associated with the construction and launch of the EchoStar XXIV satellite are included in Corporate and Other in our segment reporting.
We continue our efforts to expand our consumer satellite services business outside of the U.S. We have been delivering high-speed consumer satellite broadband services in Brazil since July 2016 and are also providing satellite broadband internet service in several other Latin American countries. Additionally, in September 2015, we entered into 15-year agreements with affiliates of Telesat Canada for Ka-band capacity on the Telesat T19V satellite located at the 63 degree west longitude orbital location, which was launched in July 2018. Telesat T19V was placed in service during the fourth quarter of 2018 and augmented the capacity being provided by the EUTELSAT 65 West A satellite and the EchoStar XIX satellite in South America.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
Our broadband subscribers include customers that subscribe to our HughesNet services in the U.S. and Latin America through retail, wholesale and small/medium enterprise service channels.
The following table presents our approximate number of broadband subscribers:
The following table presents the approximate number of net subscriber additions for each quarter in 2020:
Net subscriber additions in the U.S. decreased in the fourth quarter compared to the third quarter of 2020. Growth of our U.S. consumer subscriber base in certain areas continues to be capacity constrained and we are managing the available capacity to maintain service quality to our existing subscribers. While the balancing of total subscribers relative to capacity utilization in the fourth quarter resulted in lower total subscribers, ARPU increased.
In Latin America, we continued to see growth in our subscriber base and ARPU. However, we experienced a decrease in our net subscriber additions in the fourth quarter compared to the third quarter of 2020. This was partly due to fewer subscriber activations, as potential customers reacted to the easing of COVID-19 pandemic restrictions. In addition, net subscriber additions were adversely impacted by a temporary increase in churn due to various factors, including changes we made to our collections processes.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our Hughes segment had $1.3 billion and $1.4 billion of contracted revenue backlog, respectively. We define Hughes contracted revenue backlog as our expected future revenue under enterprise customer contracts that are non-cancelable, including lease revenue. Our contracted revenue backlog as of December 31, 2020 decreased primarily due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including lengthened or delayed sales cycles with some of our enterprise customers.
ESS Segment
Our ESS segment provides satellite services on a full-time and/or occasional-use basis to U.S. government service providers, internet service providers, broadcast news organizations, content providers and private enterprise customers. We operate our ESS business using primarily the EchoStar IX satellite and the EchoStar 105/SES-11 satellite and related infrastructure. Revenue in our ESS segment depends largely on our ability to continuously make use of our available satellite capacity with existing customers and our ability to enter into commercial relationships with new customers. Our ESS segment, like others in the fixed satellite services industry, has encountered, and may continue to encounter, negative pressure on transponder rates and demand.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our ESS segment had contracted revenue backlog of $6.7 million and $11.4 million, respectively. We define contracted revenue backlog for our ESS segment as contracted future satellite lease revenue. Of the total ESS contracted revenue backlog as of December 31, 2020, we expect to recognize $5.4 million of revenue in 2021.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
Other Business Opportunities
Our industry continues to evolve with the increasing worldwide demand for broadband internet access for information, entertainment and commerce. The current COVID-19 pandemic has made even more evident the worldwide need and demand for connectivity and communications to facilitate an ever-increasing virtual global community and workplace. In addition to fiber and wireless systems, technologies such as geostationary high throughput satellites, LEO networks, MEO systems, balloons and High Altitude Platform Systems are expected to continue to play significant roles in enabling global broadband access, networks and services. We intend to use our expertise, technologies, capital, investments, global presence, relationships and other capabilities to continue to provide broadband internet systems, equipment, networks and services for information, the internet-of-things, entertainment, education, remote-connectivity and commerce across industries and communities globally for consumer and enterprise customers. We are closely tracking the developments in next-generation satellite businesses, and we are seeking to utilize our services, technologies, licenses and expertise to find new commercial opportunities for our business.
We intend to continue to selectively explore opportunities to pursue investments, commercial alliances, partnerships, joint ventures, acquisitions, dispositions and other strategic initiatives and transactions, domestically and internationally, that we believe may allow us to increase our existing market share, increase our satellite capacity, expand into new satellite and other technologies, markets and customers, broaden our portfolio of services, products and intellectual property, make our business more valuable, align us for future growth and expansion, maximize the return on our investments and strengthen our business and relationships with our customers. We may allocate or dispose of significant resources for long-term value that may not have a short or medium-term or any positive impact on our revenue, results of operations, or cash flow.
S-Band Strategy
We intend to continue to explore the development and deployment of S-band technologies that we expect will reduce the cost of satellite communications for internet of things, machine-to-machine communications, public protection, disaster relief and other end-to-end services worldwide and the integration of our products and services into new global, hybrid networks that leverage multiple satellites and terrestrial technologies. We believe we remain in a unique position to deploy a MSS and CGC network in the E.U., the U.K. and other European countries through our EchoStar XXI satellite, which was placed into service in November 2017, and the EUTELSAT 10A payload. We have positioned ourselves to continue to develop the S-band spectrum globally by acquiring Sirion Global Pty Ltd., which we have renamed EchoStar Global which holds global S-band non-geostationary satellite spectrum rights for MSS. Additionally, we entered into a contract with Tyvak Nano-Satellite Systems, Inc. for the design and construction of S-band nano-satellites. We launched two nano-satellites in the third quarter of 2020. Following launch, both nano-satellites experienced technical anomalies that precluded them from fulfilling their intended regulatory milestone missions. We intend to seek milestone relief due to these force majeure events. We expect to launch our third nano-satellite in 2021. Our nano-satellites are designed to facilitate our continued growth in the global S-band market and enable us to leverage our acquisition of EchoStar Global. In addition, in Mexico we hold licenses for S-band MSS and terrestrial services.
Cybersecurity
As a global provider of satellite technologies and services, internet services and communications equipment and networks, we may be prone to more targeted and persistent levels of cyber-attacks than other businesses. These risks may be more prevalent as we continue to expand and grow our business into other areas of the world outside of North America, some of which are still developing their cybersecurity infrastructure maturity. Detecting, deterring, preventing and mitigating incidents caused by hackers and other parties may result in significant costs to us and may expose our customers to financial or other harm that have the potential to significantly increase our liability.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, a large portion of our workforce has been working remotely and we expect certain portions of our workforce to continue to do so from time to time. While we have cybersecurity risk management tools to help protect our technology, information and networks that our employees access remotely, we cannot guarantee the security of the network that they will be using, the security status of the other non-company managed devices that might be on the network to which they are connected or the devices or networks used by third parties with whom our employees conduct business, such as customers, suppliers, vendors and other persons. Additionally, there continues to be a significant amount of COVID-19 related cyber-fraud and phishing attacks that continue to target our employees, vendors, suppliers, customers and others. Accordingly, we increased our cybersecurity efforts and resources as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We treat cybersecurity risk seriously and are focused on maintaining the security of our and our partners’ systems, networks, technologies and data. We regularly review and revise our relevant policies and procedures, invest in and maintain internal resources, personnel and systems and review, modify and supplement our defenses through the use of various services, programs and outside vendors. Additionally, we provide resources to assist employees in better securing their home networks and remote connections. We also maintain agreements with third party vendors and experts to assist in our remediation and mitigation efforts if we experience or identify a material incident or threat. In addition, senior management and the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors are regularly briefed on cybersecurity matters.
On December 8, 2020, the cyber security company FireEye announced that they detected a sophisticated nation state level cyber campaign that targeted FireEye, other public and private companies, and government organizations. FireEye reported that the attack against them was facilitated through the Orion IT management software owned by a company called SolarWinds. Based on information from FireEye, we reviewed all instances of SolarWinds software in use at the Company and have determined that the version we are using is not susceptible to the malware within the version that is compromised. We continue to receive information about these breaches from the U.S. government and private security firms, and we use this data to update our defense systems and to investigate our own networks for compromise. We will continue to update our systems as more information comes to light in reference to this adversary and their actions.
We are not aware of any additional cyber-incidents with respect to our owned or leased satellites or other networks, equipment or systems that have had a material adverse effect on our business, costs, operations, prospects, results of operation or financial position during the year ended December 31, 2020 and through February 23, 2021. There can be no assurance, however, that any such incident can be detected or thwarted or will not have such a material adverse effect in the future.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table presents our consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019:
* Percentage is not meaningful.
(1) An explanation of our key metrics is included in Explanation of Key Metrics and Other Items.
(2) A reconciliation of EBITDA to Net income (loss), the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure in our Accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements, is included in Results of Operations. For further information on our use of EBITDA, see Explanation of Key Metrics and Other Items.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
The following discussion relates to our continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 unless otherwise stated.
Services and other revenue. Services and other revenue totaled $1.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $63.0 million, or 3.9%, as compared to 2019.
•Services and other revenue from our Hughes segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $69.2 million, or 4.4%, to $1.7 billion compared to 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to increases in sales of broadband services to our consumer customers of $109.3 million, partially offset by a decrease in sales of services to our enterprise customers of $35.9 million. These variances reflect the negative impact of exchange rate fluctuations of $35.6 million, primarily attributable to our consumer customers.
•Services and other revenue from our Corporate and Other segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $7.3 million, or 43.0%, to $9.7 million compared to 2019, primarily attributable to a decrease in income from certain real estate previously leased to DISH Network and transferred as part of the BSS Transaction.
Equipment revenue. Equipment revenue totaled $205.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $61.2 million, or 22.9%, as compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to $43.2 million related to the bankruptcy of a certain customer and $38.9 million decreased sales to our international enterprise customers, partially offset by $24.7 million increased sales to our domestic enterprise customers. These variances reflect the negative impact of exchange rate fluctuations of $3.5 million, primarily attributable to our enterprise customers.
Cost of sales - services and other. Cost of sales - services and other totaled $577.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $16.6 million, or 3.0%, as compared to 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to the corresponding increase in services and other revenue.
Cost of sales - equipment. Cost of sales - equipment totaled $166.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $59.6 million, or 26.4%, as compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to the corresponding reduction in equipment revenue.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses totaled $474.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $34.2 million, or 6.7%, as compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to expenses related to the license fee dispute in India of $9.4 million in 2019, certain legal proceedings of $25.7 million in 2019, and decreased sales and marketing expenses of $6.4 million in 2020, partially offset by increases in other general and administrative expenses of $7.3 million in 2020.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expenses totaled $525.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $34.2 million, or 7.0%, as compared to 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to increases in depreciation expense of $21.8 million relating to our customer premises equipment and $13.4 million relating to the depreciation of assets acquired in the Yahsat Brazil JV Transaction of which $7.9 million are related to non-recurring accelerated depreciation of assets that were scheduled for replacement after the Yahsat Brazil JV Transaction.
Impairment of long-lived assets. Impairment of long-lived assets totaled $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, attributable to an impairment loss related to our nano-satellites which experienced technical anomalies following launch.
Interest income, net. Interest income, net totaled $40.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $42.4 million, or 51.4%, as compared to 2019, primarily attributable to decreases in the yield on our marketable investment securities and lower cash balances.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized. Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized totaled $147.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $103.1 million, or 41.1%, as compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease of $29.0 million in interest expense and in amortization of deferred financing cost as a result of the purchase and maturity in June 2019 of our 6 1/2% Senior Secured Notes due in 2019, a decrease of $66.1 million of interest expense related to the license fee dispute in India, a decrease of $4.1 million related to a certain legal proceeding in 2019 and an increase of $4.8 million in capitalized interest in 2020 relating to the construction of the EchoStar XXIV satellite and its related infrastructure.
Gains (losses) on investments, net. Gains (losses) on investments, net were $31.3 million in losses for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $28.9 million in gains for the year ended December 31, 2019, a negative change of $60.2 million. The change was primarily attributable to $69.0 million of net negative variances on marketable investment securities compared to 2019, partially offset by an $6.9 million loss in Other Equity Investments in 2020.
Equity in earnings (losses) of unconsolidated affiliates, net. Equity in earnings (losses) of unconsolidated affiliates, net totaled $7.3 million in losses for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease in losses of $7.5 million, or 50.7%, as compared to 2019. The decrease in losses was related to decreased losses from our investments in our equity method investees.
Foreign currency transaction gains (losses), net. Foreign currency transaction gains (losses), net totaled $6.0 million in gains for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $11.6 million in losses for the year ended December 31, 2019, a positive change of $17.6 million. The change was due to the net weakening of the U.S. dollar against certain foreign currencies in 2020 compared to 2019.
Income tax benefit (provision), net. Income tax benefit (provision), net was $(24.1) million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $(20.5) million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our effective income tax rate was (86.5)% and (59.8)% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The variations in our effective tax rate from the U.S. federal statutory rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily due to the increase in our valuation allowance associated with certain foreign losses, permanent book tax differences and the impact of state and local taxes, partially offset by the change in net losses that are capital in nature and research and experimentation credits. The variations in our current year effective tax rate from the U.S. federal statutory rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 were primarily due to the increase in our valuation allowance associated with certain foreign losses and by the impact of state and local taxes partially offset by the change in net unrealized gains that are capital in nature and research and experimentation credits.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
Net income (loss) attributable to EchoStar Corporation common stock. Net income (loss) attributable to EchoStar Corporation common stock was $(40.2) million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $(62.9) million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a change of $22.8 million as set forth in the following table:
EBITDA. EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and is described under Explanation of Key Metrics and Other Items below. The following table reconciles EBITDA to Net income (loss), the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure in our Accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements:
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
EBITDA was $616.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $39.3 million, or 6.8%, as compared to 2019 as set forth in the following table:
Segment Operating Results and Capital Expenditures
The following tables present our operating results, capital expenditures and EBITDA by segment for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019:
Hughes Segment
Total revenue was $1.9 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $8.1 million, or 0.4%, as compared to 2019. Services and other revenue increased primarily due to increases in sales of broadband services to our consumer customers of $109.3 million, partially offset by a decrease in sales of services to our enterprise customers of $35.9 million. These variances reflect the negative impact of exchange rate fluctuations of $35.6 million, primarily attributable to our consumer customers. Equipment revenue decreased primarily due to $43.2 million related to the bankruptcy of a certain customer and $38.9 million decreased sales to our international enterprise customers, partially offset by $24.7 million increased sales to our domestic enterprise customers. These variances reflect the negative impact of exchange rate fluctuations of $3.5 million, primarily attributable to our enterprise customers.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
Capital expenditures were $355.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $46.4 million, or 15.0%, as compared to 2019, primarily due to increases in expenditures associated with our consumer business and construction of our satellite-related ground infrastructure.
EBITDA was $727.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $101.9 million, or 16.3%, as compared to 2019 as set forth in the following table:
ESS Segment
* Percentage is not meaningful
Total revenue was $17.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.1 million, or 7.0%, as compared to 2019, primarily due to an increase in transponder services provided to third parties.
EBITDA was $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.9 million, or 12.6%, as compared to 2019, primarily due to the increase in overall ESS revenue.
Corporate and Other
Total revenue was $9.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $7.4 million, or 43.4%, as compared to 2019 which was primarily attributable to a decrease in income from certain real estate previously leased to DISH Network and transferred as part of the BSS Transaction.
Capital expenditures were $53.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $55.7 million, or 51.0%, as compared to 2019, primarily due to decreases in satellite expenditures on the EchoStar XXIV satellite.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
EBITDA was a loss of $118.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increased in loss of $63.6 million as compared to 2019 as set forth in the following table:
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
The following table presents our consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018:
* Percentage is not meaningful.
(1) An explanation of our key metrics is included in Explanation of Key Metrics and Other Items.
(2) A reconciliation of EBITDA to Net income (loss), the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure in our Accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements, is included in Results of Operations. For further information on our use of EBITDA, see Explanation of Key Metrics and Other Items.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
Services and other revenue. Services and other revenue totaled $1.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $62.0 million, or 4.0%, as compared to 2018.
•Services and other revenue from our Hughes segment for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $74.9 million, or 5.0%, to $1.6 billion, as compared to 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to increases in sales of broadband services to our consumer customers of $102.0 million, primarily offset by a decrease in sales of services to our enterprise customers of $30.7 million.
•Services and other revenue from our ESS segment for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $11.0 million, or 40.3%, to $16.3 million, as compared to 2018. The decrease was due to a decrease of $9.2 million in transponder services provided to third parties and a decrease of $1.6 million in satellite capacity leased to DISH Network on the EchoStar IX satellite.
Equipment revenue. Equipment revenue totaled $266.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $61.4 million, or 29.9%, as compared to 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to our Hughes segment due to increases in hardware sales of $45.9 million to our enterprise customers and $15.5 million to our mobile satellite systems customers.
Cost of sales - services and other. Cost of sales - services and other totaled $561.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $2.6 million, or 0.5%, as compared to 2018. The decrease was primarily attributable to our Hughes segment due to lower costs of services provided to our enterprise customers, partially offset by an increase in costs of services to our consumer customers.
Cost of sales - equipment. Cost of sales - equipment totaled $226.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $49.4 million, or 28.0%, as compared to 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to our Hughes segment due to an increase in hardware sales to our enterprise customers and our mobile satellite systems customers.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses totaled $509.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $73.1 million, or 16.8%, as compared to 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to increases in (i) expense of $32.5 million related to certain legal proceedings, (ii) marketing and promotional expenses of $22.5 million from our Hughes segment mainly associated with our consumer business, (iii) bad debt expense of $5.0 million and (iv) other general and administrative expenses of $13.1 million.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expenses totaled $490.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $33.6 million, or 7.4%, as compared to 2018. The increase was primarily from our Hughes segment and due to increases in depreciation expense of (i) $20.2 million relating to our customer premises equipment, (ii) $4.8 million relating the Telesat T19V satellite that was placed into service in the fourth quarter of 2018, (iii) $3.1 million relating to the decrease in depreciable life of the SPACEWAY 3 satellite and (iv) $2.0 million relating to the depreciation of assets acquired from Yahsat in Brazil.
Impairment of long-lived assets. There was no impairment of long-lived assets for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $65.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, which was primarily attributable to the determination that the fair value of our 45 degree west longitude regulatory authorization was de minimis and our recognition of a loss on the assets and in-substance liquidation of the business related to it.
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized. Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized totaled $251.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $31.7 million, or 14.5%, as compared to 2018. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $76.3 million in interest expense associated with certain legal proceedings. The increase was partially offset by a decrease of $39.1 million in interest expense and the amortization of deferred financing cost as a result of the repurchase and maturity of our 6 1/2% Senior Secured Notes due 2019 (the “2019 Senior Secured Notes”) and a net increase of $4.3 million in capitalized interest relating to the construction of the EchoStar XXIV satellite.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
Gains (losses) on investments, net. Gains (losses) on investments, net totaled $28.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $(12.6) million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The change was primarily attributable to an increase in gains on marketable investment securities of $78.2 million in 2019, partially offset by $36.7 million in losses on certain investments in 2019.
Equity in earnings (losses) of unconsolidated affiliates, net. Equity in losses of unconsolidated affiliates, net totaled $(14.7) million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $(6.0) million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The change was primarily related to an increase in loss from our equity method investments. Additionally, in the fourth quarter of 2019, we changed our accounting policy to record our share of net earnings or losses of investees on a three-month lag.
Foreign currency transaction gains (losses), net. Foreign currency transaction gains (losses), net totaled $(11.6) million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $(15.6) million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The change was primarily due to the net strengthening of the U.S. dollar against certain foreign currencies in 2019 compared to 2018.
Other, net. Other, net totaled $(0.2) million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in income of $11.4 million was primarily due to a net gain of $9.6 million due to the one-time settlement of certain amounts due to and from a third party vendor in 2018 and a net decrease of $2.8 million in dividends received from certain marketable equity securities in 2019 compared to 2018.
Income tax benefit (provision), net. Income tax benefit (provision), net was $(20.5) million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $(6.6) million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Our effective income tax rate was (59.8)% and (5.5)% for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The variations in our current year effective tax rate from the U.S. federal statutory rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 were primarily due to the increase in our valuation allowance associated with certain foreign losses and by the impact of state and local taxes partially offset by the change in valuation allowance related to net unrealized gains that are capital in nature and research and experimentation credits. For the year ended December 31, 2018, we recorded a tax provision of zero related to the tax on deemed mandatory repatriation of our unrepatriated foreign earnings. As a result of the release of new treasury regulations in June 2019, we have recorded additional tax expense of $1.5 million on deemed mandatory repatriation of certain deferred foreign earnings. The variations in our effective tax rate from the U.S. federal statutory rate for the year ended December 31, 2018 were primarily due to research and experimentation credits and the change in our valuation allowance associated with unrealized gains that are capital in nature, partially offset by the impact of state and local taxes and the increase in our valuation allowance associated with certain foreign losses.
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
Net income (loss) attributable to EchoStar Corporation common stock. Net income (loss) attributable to EchoStar Corporation common stock was a net loss of $(62.9) million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to net income of $(40.5) million for the year ended December 31, 2018, as set forth in the following table:
EBITDA. EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and is described under Explanation of Key Metrics and Other Items below. The following table reconciles EBITDA to Net income (loss), the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure in our Accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements:
* Percentage is not meaningful.
EBITDA was $577.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $109.1 million, or 23.3%, as compared to 2018 as set forth in the following table:
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
Segment Operating Results and Capital Expenditures
The following tables present our operating results, capital expenditures and EBITDA by segment for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Capital expenditures in the table below are net of refunds and other receipts related to property and equipment.
Hughes Segment
Total revenue was $1.9 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $136.2 million, or 7.9%, as compared to 2018. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $102.0 million in sales of broadband services to our consumer customers and net increases in hardware sales of $45.9 million to our enterprise customers and $15.5 million to our mobile satellite systems customers. The increase was partially offset by a decrease of $30.7 million in sales of services to our enterprise customers.
Capital expenditures were $308.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $81.3 million, or 20.8%, as compared to 2018, primarily due to net decreases in capital expenditures associated with the construction and infrastructure of our satellites and in our consumer and enterprise businesses.
EBITDA was $625.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $24.3 million, or 4.0%, as compared to 2018, as set forth in the following table:
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
ESS Segment
Total revenue was $16.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $11.0 million, or 40.3%, as compared to 2018. The decrease was attributable to a net decrease of $9.2 million in transponder services provided to third parties and a decrease of $1.6 million in satellite capacity leased to DISH Network on the EchoStar IX satellite.
There were no capital expenditures for the year ended for the year ended December 31, 2019, as there were no new satellites under construction in our ESS segment during the year. The negative capital expenditure in 2018 for $76.8 million is primarily driven by a reimbursement of $77.5 million related to the EchoStar 105/SES-11 satellite received in the first quarter of 2018.
EBITDA was $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $10.8 million, or 60.6%, as compared to 2018, primarily due to the decrease in overall ESS revenue.
Corporate and Other
Capital expenditures were $109.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $54.8 million, or 33.4%, as compared to 2018, primarily due to decreases in satellite expenditures on the EchoStar XXIV satellite.
EBITDA was $(55.1) million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $95.5 million, or 63.4%, as compared to 2018, as set forth in the following table:
Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUED
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Current Marketable Investment Securities
We consider all liquid investments purchased with an original maturity of 90 days or less to be cash equivalents. See