Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
THE FOLLOWING DISCUSSION SHOULD BE READ IN CONJUNCTION WITH OUR AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND THE RELATED NOTES THAT APPEAR ELSEWHERE IN THIS ANNUAL REPORT. THE FOLLOWING DISCUSSION CONTAINS FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS THAT REFLECT OUR PLANS, ESTIMATES AND BELIEFS. OUR ACTUAL RESULTS COULD DIFFER MATERIALLY FROM THOSE DISCUSSED IN THE FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS. FACTORS THAT COULD CAUSE OR CONTRIBUTE TO SUCH DIFFERENCES INCLUDE THOSE DISCUSSED BELOW AND ELSEWHERE IN THIS ANNUAL REPORT.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain statements made in this report may constitute “forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events”. These forward-looking statements involve known or unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause the actual results, performance, or achievements of the Company to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “potential,” “continue,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “estimates,” and similar expressions. These statements are based on our current beliefs, expectations, and assumptions and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. Although we believe that the expectations reflected-in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. These forward-looking statements are made as of the date of this report, and we assume no obligation to update these forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise, other than as required by law. In light of these assumptions, risks, and uncertainties, the forward-looking events discussed in this report might not occur and actual results and events may vary significantly from those discussed in the forward-looking statements.
Emerging Growth Company - We are an emerging growth company as defined in Section 2(a)(19) of the Securities Act. We will continue to be an emerging growth company until: (i) the last day of our fiscal year during which we had total annual gross revenues of $1,000,000,000 or more; (ii) the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of the first sale of our common stock pursuant to an effective registration statement under the Securities Act; (iii) the date on which we have, during the previous 3-year period, issued more than $1,000,000,000 in non-convertible debt; or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, as defined in Section 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
As an emerging growth company, we are exempt from:
● Sections 14A(a) and (b) of the Exchange Act, which require companies to hold stockholder advisory votes on executive compensation and golden parachute compensation;
● The requirement to provide, in any registration statement, periodic report or other report to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “Commission” or “SEC”), certain modified executive compensation disclosure under Item 402 of Regulation S-K or selected financial data under Item 301 of Regulation S-K for any period before the earliest audited period presented in our initial registration statement;
● Compliance with new or revised accounting standards until those standards are applicable to private companies;
● The requirement under Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 to provide auditor attestation of our internal controls and procedures; and
● Any Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (“PCAOB”) rules regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or an expanded auditor report, and any other PCAOB rules subsequently adopted unless the Commission determines the new rules are necessary for protecting the public.
We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards under Section 102(b)(1) of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act.
We are also a smaller reporting company as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. As a smaller reporting company, we are not required to provide selected financial data pursuant to Item 301 of Regulation S-K, nor are we required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. We are also permitted to provide certain modified executive compensation disclosure under Item 402 of Regulation S-K.
This form 10-K contains certain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. For this purpose, any statements contained in this Form 10-K that are not statements of historical fact may be deemed to be forward-looking statements. Without limiting the foregoing, words such as “may”, “will”, “expect”, “believe”, “anticipate”, “estimate” or “continue” or comparable terminology are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements by their nature involve substantial risks and uncertainties, and actual results may differ materially depending on a variety of factors, many of which are not within our control. These factors include by are not limited to economic conditions generally and in the industries in which we may participate; competition within our chosen industry, including competition from much larger competitors; technological advances and failure to successfully develop business relationships.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
This discussion summarizes the significant factors affecting the consolidated financial statements, financial condition, liquidity, and cash flows of Seedo, Corp, for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and the interim periods included herein. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Executive Overview
SEEDO CORP. (f/k/a GRCR Partners Inc.) (the “Company”, “Our” or “We”) was formed on January 16, 2015 under the laws of the State of Delaware. Prior to September 14, 2018, we were solely a provider of risk management and asset protection (“RAP”) services for businesses, individuals and families. On September 14th, 2018, (“the Company”) executed an Acquisition and Share Exchange Agreement with Eroll Grow Tech Ltd. (“Eroll”), an Israeli Corporation that was formed on May 18, 2015 under the laws of the state of Israel. On September 17, 2018, the Board of Directors adopted an Amendment to its Articles, changing the name of the Corporation to SEEDO CORP. The State of Delaware effectuated said change on September 21, 2018; and on November 5, 2018, FINRA granted effectiveness for said change and the new ticker Symbol ”SEDO”. Post-Acquisition, SEEDO CORP changed its main business focus to Eroll’s business activities while continuing with some RAP activities.
Eroll was focused on producing automated plant growing devices managed and controlled by an artificial intelligent algorithm, allowing consumers to grow their own herbs and vegetables from seed to plant, while providing optimal conditions to assure premium quality produce year-round.
During the third quarter of 2019, Eroll was experiencing financial and operational difficulties and on December 10, 2019, Mr. Zohar Levy, the Company’s CEO at the time, on behalf of Eroll filed a petition (the “Petition”) for a debt settlement in the Nazareth District Court (the “Court”), in accordance with Section 321 of Chapter A of Part G of the Israeli Insolvency and Economic Rehabilitation Law, seeking a debt settlement and a suspension of proceedings in order to protect Eroll’s creditors from economic damages and other future damages and to allow the Eroll to maintain its business while seeking a proposal of an acquisition of the Eroll and/or its activities and assets.
On March 25, 2020, the Nazareth District Court of the State of Israel (the “Court”) approved the purchase of all of Eroll Grow Tech Ltd.’s (“Eroll”) assets by a non-related third party entity named Seedo Agriculture Ltd. Therefore, from the closing of such purchase, the Company no longer has any legal ties nor privity with Eroll. The Company is focusing on its in-house research and development of agriculture technology products, among others, in the fields of exotic plants and mushrooms.
On July 19, 2020, the Company formed a new wholly-owned subsidiary in Israel, Hachevra Legiduley Pkaot Beisrael Ltd. (the “New Subco”), to develop a fully automated and remotely managed system for growing saffron and other vegetables. On November 5, 2020, the New Subco changed its name to Saffron-Tech Ltd (or “Saffron”).
The Company, through Saffron, plans to roll out its proof of concept in the coming months. This technology will provide turnkey automated growing containers for high-quality, high-yield saffron all year round. The Company is in advanced stages of developing and testing a fully automated and remotely managed system for growing high-quality, high-yield saffron anywhere and anytime.
The Company’s technology offers a controlled environment based on the Company’s deep knowledge in plant biology. The technology provides optimal conditions for each stage of the plant’s development to reach optimal product quality.
Our Business Operations during 2020
On July 19, 2020, the Company formed a new wholly-owned subsidiary in Israel, Hachevra Legiduley Pkaot Beisrael Ltd. (the “New Subsidiary”), to develop a fully automated and remotely managed system for growing saffron and other vegetables. On November 5, 2020, the New Subsidiary changed its name to Saffron-Tech Ltd. (or “Saffron Tech”).
The Company, through Saffron Tech, plans to roll out its proof of concept in the coming months. This technology will provide turnkey automated growing containers for high-quality, high-yield saffron all year round. The Company is in advanced stages of developing and testing a fully automated and remotely managed system for growing high-quality, high-yield saffron anywhere and anytime.
The Company’s technology offers a controlled environment based on the Company’s deep knowledge in plant biology. The technology provides optimal conditions for each stage of the plant’s development to reach optimal product quality.
The Company’s proof of concept utilizes the “Grow Next to Consumer” policy and is therefore sustainable and fit the COVID-19 restrictions on transport. It is also environmentally friendly, using economic levels of water, space, fertilizer, and energy. Accounting to the Company’s calculations, we believe that the controlled indoor growing area will produce ten times more yield compared to the same land area using traditional methods. The sealed environment eliminates the need for harmful pesticides and herbicides, producing a clean and safe product that is easy to control from anywhere. The Company’s solution is easily scalable and pre-designed to quickly grow operations.
Saffron is used in many industries, such as the food industry, particularly by famous chefs and Michelin starred restaurants, the natural cosmetics industry and the natural medicine industry and as a dye in the textile industry. Medicinal claims as an anti-depressant, antioxidant, and antiseptic are constantly increasing.
The global saffron market size was valued at USD 1 Billion in 2019 and is anticipated to attain a revenue based CAGR of 7.3% from 2020 to 2027. The market is expected to grow over the next few years on account of demand from the pharmaceutical sector, particularly in countries with rapid population expansion.
Since the incorporation Saffron Tech, Saffron Tech has hired one employee and several consultants to commence the roll out of our proof of concept. Saffron Tech has signed several agreements with Israeli companies, including Growin Ltd (“Growin”) and the Israeli Ministry of Agricultures research organization - The Volcani Center (“Volcani”). Growin is an owner of proprietary systems for indoor agriculture and Saffron Tech has acquired the exclusive right to market, sell and commercialize our product based on the Growin’s hydroponic machines. Volcani will assist Saffron Tech in writing the protocols required to grow saffron in a controlled and automated way, including the use of robotics and AI.
Our Business Operations during 2018 and 2019
We were a global Technology Company focusing on producing cutting edge technology for the agriculture markets for home, Commercial and medical use. We produced automated plant growing devices managed and controlled by an artificial intelligent algorithm, allowing consumers to grow their own herbs and vegetables effortlessly from seed to plant, while providing optimal conditions to assure premium quality produce year-round. As discussed above, Errol was placed into liquidation in December 2019 and the assets were sold in March 2020.
Results of Operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $107 thousand as compared to $nil for the year ended December 31, 2019. During 2020, the Saffron Tech began its research and development expenses in Israel.
General and Administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $466 thousand as compared to $273 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Financing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $1,377 thousand as compared to $3,004 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. Financing expenses include interest on loans and convertibles loans, amortization of BCF and adjustments to the fair value of certain convertible loans.
Gain on liquation of subsidiary for the year ended December 31, 2020 amount to $9,593 thousand as compared to nil for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase related to Eroll being liquidated by the Israeli court thereby removing the liability form the Company’s balance sheet.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Since inception on January 16, 2015, the Company had a cumulative deficit as of December 31, 2020 of $17,704 thousand and we have a working capital deficit of $2,013 thousand as of December 31, 2020. Our future growth is dependent upon achieving further purchase orders and execution, management of operating expenses and ability of the Company to obtain the necessary financing to fund future obligations, and upon profitable operations.
Historically, we have financed our cash flow and operations from the initial contribution of our majority shareholder and by raising equity, convertible loans and warrants.
As of December 31, 2020, our cash balance was $411 thousand.
During November and December 2020 and January 2021, the Company continued to raise funds to support its operations and received $855 thousand from third party investors and issued convertible promissory notes in respect thereof (“Promissory Notes”). The Promissory Notes bear no interest, are convertible into Shares based on a fixed conversion price of $0.10 per share and mature between 12 and 24 months from the issuance date. On December 24, 2020, Saffron Tech, announced its intention to raise up to 5 million New Israeli Shekels (“NIS”) (approximately $1.6 million) at a pre-money valuation of NIS 20 million (approximately $6.225 million) through the Israeli crowd funding platform - Pipelbiz “Crowd Funding Round”). The Crowd Funding Round was closed on February 16, 2021 having raised the full amount.
Consistent with Section 144 of the Delaware General Corporation Law, it is our current policy that all transactions between the company and our officers, directors and their affiliates will be entered into only if such transactions are approved by a majority of the existing directors, are approved by vote of the stockholders, or are fair to us as a corporation as approved or ratified by the board or authorized officer. We will conduct an appropriate review of all related party transactions on an ongoing basis, and, where appropriate, we review the potential of conflicts of interest.
Year ended December 31, 2020
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s overall position of cash and cash equivalents increased by $409 thousand. This increase in cash can be attributed to the following:
The Company’s net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $316 thousand as compared to $7,040 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is mostly due to a significant decrease in the operations of the Company.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $725 thousand as compared to $7,032 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash provided in 2020 was from the receipt of convertible loans as compared to the receipt of convertible loans and the issuance of shares in 2019.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect or change on the Company’s financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors. The term “off-balance sheet arrangement” generally means any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement to which an entity unconsolidated with the Company is a party, under which the Company has (i) any obligation arising under a guarantee contract, derivative instrument or variable interest; or (ii) a retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to such entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support for such assets. We had no outstanding derivative financial instruments, off-balance sheet guarantees, interest rate swap transactions or foreign currency contracts. We do not engage in trading activities involving non-exchange traded contracts.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For information with respect to recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 to the audited consolidated financial statements of SEEDO CORP. included elsewhere in this Form 10-K
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations are based upon the Company’s financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We believe that the estimates, assumptions and judgments involved in the accounting policies described below have the greatest potential impact on our financial statements, so we consider these to be our critical accounting policies. Because of the uncertainty inherent in these matters, actual results could differ from the estimates we use in applying the critical accounting policies. Certain of these critical accounting policies are fair value of convertible loans and going concern.
Within the context of these critical accounting policies, we are not currently aware of any reasonably likely events or circumstances that would result in materially different amounts being reported.