Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with the Company's financial information and its audited consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, included in this Form 10-K. The following information contains forward-looking statements; see “Forward-Looking Statements” on page 47 of this report.
Company Overview
SilverBow Resources is an independent oil and gas company headquartered in Houston, Texas. The Company's strategy is focused on acquiring and developing assets in the Eagle Ford Shale located in South Texas where it has assembled approximately 155,000 net acres across five operating areas. SilverBow Resources' acreage position in each of its operating areas is highly contiguous and designed for optimal and efficient horizontal well development. The Company believes it has built a balanced portfolio of properties with a significant base of current production and reserves coupled with low-risk development drilling opportunities and meaningful upside from newer operating areas.
SilverBow Resources produced an average 178 MMcfe per day during the fourth quarter of 2020 and as of December 31, 2020 had proved reserves of 1,106 Bcfe (86% natural gas) with a Standardized Measure of $513 million and a PV-10 of $526 million. PV-10 Value is a non-GAAP measure, see the section titled “Oil and Natural Gas Reserves” of this Form 10-K for a reconciliation of this non-GAAP measure to the Standardized Measure of discounted future net cash flows, the most directly comparable GAAP measure.
Being a committed and long-term operator in South Texas, the Company possesses a significant understanding of the reservoir characteristics, geology, landowners and competitive landscape in the region. SilverBow Resources leverages this in-depth knowledge to continue to assemble high quality drilling inventory while continuously enhancing its operations to maximize returns on capital invested.
Recent Events, Actions Taken and Strategy
In March 2020, the spot price of WTI crude oil declined over 50% in response to reductions in global demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic and announcements by Saudi Arabia and Russia of plans to increase crude oil production. Following this unprecedented collapse in crude oil prices, the spot price of Brent and WTI crude oil closed at approximately $15 and $21 per barrel, respectively, on March 31, 2020. Crude oil prices fell further in April but partially recovered during the second quarter of 2020 with Brent and WTI crude oil closing at approximately $41 and $39 per barrel, respectively on June 30, 2020. Crude oil prices traded slightly higher in the third and fourth quarter of 2020 with Brent and WTI crude closing at approximately $42 and $40 per barrel, on September 30, 2020, and $52 and $49 per barrel, on December 31, 2020.
The ultimate magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting governmental restrictions placing limitations on the mobility and ability to work of significant portions of the worldwide population, and the related impact on crude oil prices and the U.S. and global economy and capital markets is uncertain. While it is difficult to assess or predict with precision the broad future effect of this pandemic on the global economy, the energy industry or SilverBow Resources, the pandemic had a direct impact on the Company's results of operations, cash flows and financial condition during 2020 as a result of lower commodity prices and varied production levels.
In response to market conditions, including the COVID-19 pandemic and the rapid decline in commodity prices and economic outlook, SilverBow Resources reduced its original 2020 capital budget of $175-$195 million. The Company released its sole drilling rig in April 2020, and deferred the completion and placement on production of eight wells until the second half of 2020. In the third quarter of 2020, SilverBow Resources restarted completions activity and returned to sales all previously curtailed oil volumes and a substantial portion of natural gas volumes. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company returned to sales the remaining curtailed natural gas volumes coinciding with favorable fundamentals and strong pricing. SilverBow Resources also recommenced its D&C program in the fourth quarter, drilling eight net wells, completing two net wells and bringing two net wells online.
Overall, the Company's strategy of procuring cost savings on drilling and completion activities allows SilverBow Resources to add activity and stay within its capital range. The Company plans to continue pursuing a single-basin operating model, focused on its low-cost structure and optionality across multiple commodity phase windows of the Eagle Ford. As a returns-focused operator, SilverBow Resources employs a risk mitigation strategy by hedging forecasted production volumes and protecting cash flow.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company continues to operate under a "work from home" policy applicable to all employees other than essential personnel whose physical presence is required either in the office or in the field. SilverBow Resources has not experienced any material interruption to its ordinary course business processes as a result of COVID-19. The Company will continue to monitor the COVID-19 situation and follow the advice of government and health leaders.
Operational Results
SilverBow Resources continues to optimize completion techniques in order to enhance well performance across its portfolio. The following table and discussion highlights the Company's drilling and completion schedule for 2020:
(1) Other includes non-core properties.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, SilverBow Resources drilled eight net wells, completed two net wells and brought two net wells online. For the full year, the Company drilled 19 net wells, completed 15 net wells and brought 15 net wells online. SilverBow Resources' D&C activity through the first quarter of 2020 was primarily focused on its AWP McMullen Oil assets. At the end of the first quarter, the Company temporarily ceased D&C activity and strategically curtailed production in order to maximize cash flows. These curtailments had the greatest impact on second quarter production, but extended to varying degrees through October. For the full year 2020, curtailments were estimated to average 11 MMcf/d of net gas production and 340 Bbls/d of net oil production, or approximately 8% and 8% of net 2020 production, respectively.
In response to fluctuations in commodity prices, SilverBow Resources refocused its capital budget through the end of the year towards the drilling of high rate of return dry-gas assets. Of the 11 net wells drilled in the first quarter of 2020, eight wells were deferred to the third quarter to turn to sales. All eight of the deferred wells were located in the Company's AWP McMullen Oil area. In the fourth quarter, SilverBow Resources commenced the drilling of a nine well program in its Webb County Gas area. In addition to resuming capital activity, all curtailed production volumes were returned to production over the second half of 2020.
In the McMullen Oil area, the Company brought 10 net wells online in 2020. SilverBow Resources maintained focus on efficient asset development, completing four wells with over 10,000 feet of completed lateral length. Two of these four wells averaged nine days from spud to rig release, highlighting the drilling team's execution excellence. Two wells were brought online during the first quarter of 2020 while the remaining eight wells, as part of SilverBow's drilled but uncompleted program, were brought online during the third quarter of 2020. All ten wells continue to perform in-line with expectations.
In the La Salle Condensate area, the Company brought three net wells online in 2020. These three wells were developed on a recently acquired land tract adjacent to existing SilverBow Resources acreage. They provided for an opportunistic add-on to that position. The wells continue to perform well and are expected to achieve some of the strongest per well recoveries in the area.
In the Webb County Gas area, the Company brought two net wells online in 2020. Eight net wells were drilled during the fourth quarter as part of SilverBow Resources' focus on its dry gas assets. The drilling program consisted of two Fasken Upper Eagle Ford net wells and six La Mesa net wells. The Fasken wells were drilled, on average, in 9.4 days per well and achieved drilling rates of 1,900 feet per day. The Fasken wells were completed with 2,600 pounds of proppant per foot, achieving an industry leading number of 18 stages per day. These wells were turned to sales in late December and are performing in-line with expectations. The La Mesa wells were drilled, on average, in 9.6 days per well and achieved 2,200 feet per day. The Company completed and brought online the La Mesa wells during the first quarter of 2021.
SilverBow Resources continued to set new Company records in efficiency and safety while also enacting real-time changes to field schedules and capital activity in response to fluctuating commodity prices and the COVID-19 pandemic. SilverBow Resources' La Mesa project is a recent example of specific drilling efficiency improvements. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company drilled its second six-well pad. Compared to the first six-well pad drilled in the fourth quarter of 2020, the three Lower Eagle Ford wells were drilled 26% faster with a 32% reduction in per foot drilling cost and the three Upper Eagle Ford wells were drilled 30% faster with a 26% reduction in per foot drilling cost. These gains were the result of a focus on all aspects of drilling cycle-time variables, engineering designs, quality controls on vendors and active wellsite management.
Across all of its operating areas in 2020, SilverBow Resources drilled 44% more lateral footage per day while lowering the per lateral foot costs by 32% as compared to 2019. The Company completed 8% more stages per day and reduced completion costs per well by 13% as compared to 2019. SilverBow Resources' demonstrated success in reducing costs is a direct result of its operational and supply teams working with vendors to negotiate prices and logistical considerations for the materials used in its operations.
Cost reduction initiatives: SilverBow Resources continues to focus on cost reduction measures in the areas that it can control. These initiatives include the use of regional sand in completions, improved utilization of existing facilities, elimination of redundant equipment and replacement of rental equipment with Company-owned equipment. As previously mentioned, the Company continues to improve its process for drilling, completing and equipping wells. SilverBow Resources' procurement team takes a process-oriented approach to managing the total delivered costs of purchased services by examining costs at their most granular level. Services are routinely sourced directly from the suppliers. The Company's lease operating expenses were $21.4 million or $0.32 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $21.4 million or $0.25 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase on a per Mcfe basis is due to the lower production volumes.
SilverBow Resources' net G&A expenses were $22.6 million or $0.34 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2020. After deducting $4.6 million of share-based compensation, cash G&A expenses (a non-GAAP financial measure) were $18.1 million or $0.27 per Mcfe for the year ended December 31, 2020. This compares to net G&A expenses of $24.9 million or $0.29 per Mcfe for the same period in 2019. After deducting $6.1 million of share-based compensation, cash G&A expenses (a non-GAAP financial measure) were $18.7 million or $0.22 per Mcfe for the same period in 2019.
In the third quarter of 2020, the Company implemented corporate cost reduction initiatives representing annualized savings of $2.5 million starting in 2021. SilverBow Resources has continued to maintain a safe working environment while implementing these cost-reduction efforts. The Company's corporate total recordable incident rate was 0 incidents per 1.1 million work hours in 2020.
SilverBow Resources reports cash G&A because it believes this measure is commonly used by management, analysts and investors as an indicator of cost management and operating efficiency on a comparable basis from period to period. In addition, the Company believes cash G&A expenses are used by analysts and others in valuation, comparison and investment recommendations of companies in the oil and gas industry to allow for analysis of G&A spend without regard to stock-based compensation programs which can vary substantially from company to company. Cash G&A expenses should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, total G&A expenses.
Summary of 2020 Financial Results
•Revenues and net income (loss): The Company's oil and gas revenues were $177.4 million and $288.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Revenues were lower due to overall decreased production and lower commodity pricing. The Company had a net loss of $309.4 million and net income of $114.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to the non-cash impairment write-down on our oil and natural gas properties during the year.
•Capital expenditures: The Company's capital expenditures on an accrual basis were $95.2 million and $259.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were primarily driven by continued legacy development and Southern Eagle Ford gas window delineation. These expenditures were funded by cash flows from operations and borrowings under our Credit Facility.
•Working capital: The Company had a working capital deficit of $23.1 million at December 31, 2020.
•Cash Flows: For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company generated cash from operating activities of $165.2 million, of which $7.1 million was attributable to changes in working capital. Cash used for property additions was $114.7 million. This included $19.4 million attributable to a net decrease of capital related payables and accrued costs. Additionally, $0.8 million was paid during the year for property sale obligations related to the sale of our former Bay De Chene field. The Company’s net repayments under its revolving Credit Facility were $49.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company generated cash from operating activities of $203.2 million, of which $4.9 million was attributable to changes in working capital. Cash used for property additions was $282.7 million. This included $21.6 million attributable to a net decrease of capital related to payables and accrued costs. Additionally, $5.1 million was paid during the year for property sale obligations related to the sale of our former Bay De Chene field. The Company's net borrowings under its Credit Facility were $84.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
SilverBow Resources' primary use of cash has been to fund capital expenditures to develop its oil and gas properties. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s liquidity consisted of approximately $2.1 million of cash-on-hand and $80.0 million in available borrowings on its Credit Facility, which had a $310.0 million borrowing base. Our 2021 capital budget, which is expected to be in the range of $100-$110 million, provides for drilling 17 gross (15 net) horizontal wells and is expected to be funded primarily from operating cash flow. Management believes SilverBow Resources has sufficient liquidity to meet its obligations through at least the first quarter of 2022 and execute its long-term development plans. See Note 4 to the Company's consolidated financial statements for more information on its Debt Facilities.
Contractual Commitments and Obligations
Our contractual commitments for the next five years and thereafter are shown below as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1) Amounts shown represent fees for the minimum delivery obligations. Any amount of transportation utilized in excess of the minimum will reduce future year obligations. The Company's production and reserves are currently sufficient to fulfill the current minimum delivery obligations.
(2) Interest on our Credit Facility is estimated using the weighted average interest rate of 3.7% for the quarter ended December 31, 2020, while interest on our Second Lien is estimated using LIBOR plus 7.5%. See Note 4 of these consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K for more information. Actual interest rate is variable over the term of the facility.
(3) Amount shown primarily for obligation under Bay De Chene sales contract.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements requiring disclosure pursuant to article 303(a) of Regulation S-K.
Proved Oil and Gas Reserves
During 2020, our reserves decreased by approximately 314.0 Bcfe due to decreases in our natural gas reserves primarily from our AWP field. As of December 31, 2020, 46% of our total proved reserves were proved developed, compared with 41% at year-end for both 2019 and 2018.
At December 31, 2020, our proved reserves were 1,106.4 Bcfe with a Standardized Measure of $513 million, which is a decrease of approximately $355 million, or 41%, from the prior year-end levels. In 2020, our proved natural gas reserves decreased 210.3 Bcf, or 18%, while our proved oil reserves decreased 4.5 MMBbl, or 27%, and our NGL reserves decreased 12.8 MMBbl, or 48%, for a total equivalent decrease of 314.0 Bcfe, or 22%.
We have added proved reserves primarily through our drilling activities, including 31.7 Bcfe added in 2020. We obtained reasonable certainty regarding these reserve additions by applying the same methodologies that have been used historically in this area.
We use the preceding 12-month's average price based on closing prices on the first business day of each month, adjusted for price differentials, in calculating our average prices used in the Standardized Measure calculation. Our average natural gas price used in the Standardized Measure calculation for 2020 was $2.13 per Mcf. This average price decreased from the average price of $2.62 per Mcf used for 2019. Our average oil price used in the calculation for 2020 was $37.83 per Bbl. This average price decreased from the average price of $58.37 per Bbl used in the calculation for 2019. Our average NGL price used in the calculation for 2020 was $11.66 per Bbl. This average price decreased from the average price of $16.83 per Bbl used in the calculation for 2019.
Results of Operations
Revenues - Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
2020 - Our oil and gas sales in 2020 decreased by 39% compared to revenues in 2019, primarily due to overall decreased commodity pricing and decreased production. Average oil prices we received were 34% lower than those received during 2019, while natural gas prices were 22% lower and NGL prices were 11% lower.
Crude oil production was 14% and 12% of our production volumes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, while crude oil sales revenues were 33% and 32% of oil and gas sales revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Natural gas production was 76% of our production volumes for both of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, while natural gas sales revenues were 59% of oil and gas sales for both of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
NGL production was 10% and 12% of our production volumes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, while NGL sales were 8% and 9% of oil and gas sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following tables provide information regarding the changes in the sources of our oil and gas sales and volumes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1) Includes our Oro Grande and Uno Mas fields.
Our sales volume decrease from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to lower production as a result of decreased drilling and completion activity and production curtailments.
In 2020, our $111.2 million, or 39%, decrease in oil, NGL, and natural gas sales resulted from:
•Volume variances that had a $49.2 million unfavorable impact on sales, with a $4.8 million decrease due to the 0.1 million Bbl decrease in oil production volumes, a $35.5 million decrease due to the 13.4 Bcf decrease in natural gas production volumes and a $8.9 million decrease due to the 0.6 million Bbl decrease in NGL production volumes.
•Price variances that had a $62.0 million unfavorable impact on sales, with a decrease of $29.8 million due to the 22% decrease in natural gas prices received, a decrease of $30.3 million due to the 34% decrease in oil prices received and a decrease of $1.9 million due to the 11% decrease in NGL prices received.
The following table provides additional information regarding our oil and gas sales, by commodity type, as well as the effects of our hedging activities for derivative contracts held to settlement for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except per-dollar amounts):
(1) Oil and natural gas liquids are converted at the rate of one barrel to six Mcfe.
(2) Excludes the impact of the $38.3 million for derivative contracts monetized in the first quarter of 2020.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 we recorded net gains of $61.3 million and $24.2 million, respectively, related to our derivative activities. Included in our gain during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $38.3 million for monetized derivative contracts received in the first quarter of 2020. The change was driven primarily by changes in commodity pricing. This activity is recorded in “Net gain (loss) on commodity derivatives” on the accompanying consolidated statements of operations in this Form 10-K.
Costs and Expenses
The following table provides additional information regarding our expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Our costs and expenses during 2020 versus 2019 were as follows:
General and Administrative Expenses, Net. These expenses on a per Mcfe basis were $0.34 and $0.29 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase per Mcfe was due to lower production while the decrease in costs was primarily due to lower salaries and burdens, lower share-based compensation and lower temporary labor expenses. Included in general and administrative expenses is $4.6 million and $6.1 million in share-based compensation for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization (“DD&A”). These expenses on a per Mcfe basis were $0.97 and $1.14 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease on a per Mcfe basis was driven by reductions to our depletable base due to non-cash impairment write-downs during the year.
Lease Operating Expenses. These expenses on a per Mcfe basis were $0.32 and $0.25 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase per Mcfe was primarily due to lower production. The increase in costs is due to higher labor and compression costs, partially offset by lower salt water disposal costs.
Transportation and gas processing. These expenses all related to natural gas and NGL sales. These expenses on a per Mcfe basis were $0.31 and $0.32 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Severance and Other Taxes. These expenses on a per Mcfe basis were $0.16 for both of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Severance and other taxes, as a percentage of oil and gas sales, were approximately 5.9% and 4.8% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Interest Expense. Our gross interest expense was $31.2 million and $36.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in gross interest from 2019 was primarily due to decreased borrowings and lower interest rates. There was no capitalized interest costs and $0.2 million of capitalized interest for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Write-down of oil and gas properties. Due to the effects of pricing and timing of projects, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we reported a non-cash impairment write-down, on a pre-tax basis, of $355.9 million on our oil and natural gas properties. These impairments occurred in the first half of 2020. There was no impairment for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income Taxes. In March and April 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic caused volatility in the market price for crude oil due to the disruption of global supply and demand. In response to these market conditions and given the decline in oil prices and economic outlook for the Company, during the quarter ended June 30, 2020, management determined that it was not more likely than not that the Company would realize future cash benefits from its remaining federal carryover items and other deferred tax assets and, accordingly, recorded a full valuation allowance in the second quarter to offset its net deferred tax assets in excess of deferred tax liabilities. This resulted in tax expense of $21.2 million in the second quarter of 2020. Our
income tax provision of $20.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 is inclusive of state income tax benefit of $1.8 million.
During the second quarter of 2019, the Company was able to complete several operational initiatives that resulted in increased production, lower development costs and expanded inventory of development prospects. The results of these initiatives led management to determine, after weighing both positive and negative evidence, that the Company will more likely than not be able to realize the benefits of its deferred tax assets. Accordingly, the Company released the valuation allowance resulting in a net deferred income tax benefit of $21.6 million, which is net of $1.1 million of state income tax expense, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies and New Accounting Pronouncements
Property and Equipment. We follow the “full-cost” method of accounting for oil and natural gas property and equipment costs. Under this method of accounting, all productive and nonproductive costs incurred in the exploration, development, and acquisition of oil and natural gas reserves are capitalized including internal costs incurred that are directly related to these activities and which are not related to production, general corporate overhead, or similar activities. Future development costs are estimated on a property-by-property basis based on current economic conditions and are amortized to expense as our capitalized oil and natural gas property costs are amortized. We compute the provision for DD&A of oil and natural gas properties using the unit-of-production method.
The costs of unproved properties not being amortized are assessed quarterly, on a property-by-property basis, to determine whether such properties have been impaired. In determining whether such costs should be impaired, we evaluate current drilling results, lease expiration dates, current oil and gas industry conditions, international economic conditions, capital availability, and available geological and geophysical information. As these factors may change from period to period, our evaluation of these factors will change. Any impairment assessed is added to the cost of proved properties being amortized.
The calculation of the provision for DD&A requires us to use estimates related to quantities of proved oil and natural gas reserves and estimates of the impairment of unproved properties. The estimation process for both reserves and the impairment of unproved properties is subjective, and results may change over time based on current information and industry conditions. We believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable; however, such estimates and assumptions are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from such estimates.
Full-Cost Ceiling Test. At the end of each quarterly reporting period, the unamortized cost of oil and natural gas properties (including natural gas processing facilities, capitalized asset retirement obligations and deferred income taxes, and excluding the recognized asset retirement obligation liability) is limited to the sum of the estimated future net revenues from proved properties (excluding cash outflows from recognized asset retirement obligations, including future development and abandonment costs of wells to be drilled, using the preceding 12-months’ average price based on closing prices on the first day of each month, adjusted for price differentials, discounted at 10%, and the lower of cost or fair value of unproved properties) adjusted for related income tax effects.
We believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable; however, such estimates and assumptions are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from such estimates.
If future capital expenditures outpace future discounted net cash flows in our reserve calculations, if we have significant declines in our oil and natural gas reserves volumes (which also reduces our estimate of discounted future net cash flows from proved oil and natural gas reserves) or if oil or natural gas prices remain depressed or continue to decline, it is possible that non-cash write-downs of our oil and natural gas properties will occur in the future. We cannot control and cannot predict what future prices for oil and natural gas will be, thus we cannot estimate the amount or timing of any potential future non-cash write-down of our oil and natural gas properties due to decreases in oil or natural gas prices.
New Accounting Pronouncements. In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-03. ASU 2020-03 improves and clarifies various financial instruments topics, including the current expected credit loss standard (“CECL”). ASU 2020-03 includes seven different issues that describe the areas of improvement and the related amendments to GAAP, intended to make the standards easier to understand and apply by eliminating inconsistencies and providing clarifications. This guidance is effective beginning on January 1, 2023 for smaller reporting companies. We are still assessing the requirements to determine the impact of this guidance on our consolidated financial statements.
Forward-Looking Statements
This report includes forward-looking statements intended to qualify for the safe harbors from liability established by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). These forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and assumptions and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this report, including those regarding our strategy, future operations, financial position, estimated production levels, expected oil and natural gas pricing, estimated oil and natural gas reserves or the present value thereof, reserve increases, capital expenditures, budget, projected costs, prospects, plans and objectives of management are forward-looking statements. When used in this report, the words “could,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “budgeted,” “guidance,” “expect,” “may,” “continue,” “predict,” “potential,” “project” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements, although not all forward-looking statements contain such identifying words.
Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations include, but are not limited to, the following risks and uncertainties:
•the severity and duration of world health events, including the COVID-19 pandemic, related economic repercussions and the resulting severe disruption in the oil and gas industry and negative impact on demand for oil and gas, which is negatively impacting our business;
•the current significant surplus in the supply of oil and actions by the members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (“OPEC”) and Russia (together with OPEC and other allied producing countries, “OPEC+”) with respect to oil production levels and announcements of potential changes in such levels, including the ability of the OPEC+ countries to agree on and comply with supply limitations;
•operational challenges relating to the COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to mitigate the spread of the virus, including logistical challenges, protecting the health and well-being of our employees, remote work arrangements, performance of contracts and supply chain disruptions;
•shut-in and curtailment of production due to decreases in available storage capacity or other factors;
•volatility in natural gas, oil and NGL prices;
•future cash flows and their adequacy to maintain our ongoing operations;
•liquidity, including our ability to satisfy our short- or long-term liquidity needs;
•our borrowing capacity, future covenant compliance, cash flows and liquidity;
•operating results;
•the amount, nature and timing of capital expenditures, including future development costs;
•timing, cost and amount of future production of oil and natural gas;
•availability of drilling and production equipment or availability of oil field labor;
•availability, cost and terms of capital;
•timing and successful drilling and completion of wells;
•availability and cost for transportation of oil and natural gas;
•costs of exploiting and developing our properties and conducting other operations;
•competition in the oil and natural gas industry;
•general economic conditions;
•opportunities to monetize assets;
•effectiveness of our risk management activities including hedging strategy;
•environmental liabilities;
•counterparty credit risk;
•governmental regulation and taxation of the oil and natural gas industry;
•developments in world oil and natural gas markets and in oil and natural gas-producing countries;
•uncertainty regarding our future operating results; and
•other risks and uncertainties described in Item 1A. “Risk Factors,” in this annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Many of the foregoing risks and uncertainties, as well as risks and uncertainties that are currently unknown to us, are, and will be, exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic and any consequent worsening of the global business and economic environment. New factors emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for us to predict all such factors. Should one or more of the risks or uncertainties described in this annual report occur, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results and plans could differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements.
All forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Although we believe that our plans, intentions and expectations reflected in or suggested by the forward-looking statements we make in this report are reasonable, we can give no assurance that these plans, intentions or expectations will be achieved. We disclose important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from our expectations under "Risk Factors" in Item 1A of this annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020. These cautionary statements qualify all forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf.
All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or to persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the foregoing. We undertake no obligation to publicly release the results of any revisions to any such forward-looking statements that may be made to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.