ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Forward-looking statements in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis are not guarantees of future performance and may involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements"above and “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for discussions of these risks and uncertainties. A comparative discussion of results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 is provided in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 and is incorporated by reference herein.
Executive Summary
Internal Review, Investigations and Regulatory Matters Related to the Advantage Loan Program
On December 9, 2019, the Company announced it had voluntarily suspended its Advantage Loan Program in connection with the Internal Review. The primary focus of the Internal Review, which has been led by outside legal counsel under the direction of the Special Committee, has involved the origination of residential real estate loans under the Advantage Loan Program and related matters. The Internal Review has indicated that certain employees engaged in misconduct in connection with the origination of a significant number of such loans. As a result, the Company permanently discontinued the Advantage Loan Program, and a significant number of officers and employees have been terminated or resigned, including the top loan producers within the Advantage Loan Program. While the Internal Review is substantially complete, the Company expects it to remain open during the pendency of the government investigations discussed below, and it is possible additional work will be required in connection with the Internal Review.
The Bank is currently under formal investigation by the OCC, is responding to grand jury subpoenas from the DOJ and is responding to a formal investigation recently initiated by the SEC that is related to the Advantage Loan Program. The Bank also continues to be subject to the OCC Agreement, which relates primarily to certain aspects of the Bank’s BSA/AML compliance program as well as its credit administration. The OCC Agreement requires the Bank to: (i) establish a compliance committee to monitor and oversee the Bank’s compliance with the provisions of OCC Agreement; (ii) develop a revised customer due diligence and enhanced due diligence program; (iii) develop a revised suspicious activity monitoring program; (iv) engage an independent, third-party consultant to review and provide a written report on the Bank’s suspicious activity monitoring; (v) develop revised policies and procedures to ensure effective BSA/AML model risk management for the Bank’s automated suspicious activity monitoring system, which must be validated by a qualified, independent third party; (vi) ensure that the Bank’s BSA Department maintains sufficient personnel; and (vii) develop revised policies and procedures to ensure effective controls over loan underwriting. In addition to these requirements, while the OCC Agreement remains in effect, the Bank is subject to certain restrictions on expansion activities, such as growth through acquisition or branching to supplement organic growth of the Bank.
The Company incurred significant legal, consulting and other third-party expenses in 2020 in connection with the Internal Review, the OCC and DOJ investigations, compliance with the OCC Agreement and defending litigation related to the Advantage Loan Program. For additional information regarding risks related to the Internal Review, the government investigations and the OCC Agreement, as well as other aspects of and consequences arising from the Advantage Loan Program, see the risk factors under “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Related to the Advantage Loan Program.”
Impact of COVID-19
Economic Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic, which was declared a national emergency in the United States in March 2020, continues to create extensive disruptions to U.S. and global economic conditions and financial markets and to businesses and the lives of individuals throughout the world. Federal and state governments are taking unprecedented actions to contain the spread of the disease, including quarantines, travel bans, shelter-in-place orders, closures of businesses and schools, fiscal stimulus, and legislation designed to deliver monetary aid and other relief to businesses and individuals impacted by the pandemic. Although in various locations certain activity restrictions have been relaxed with some level of success, in many states and localities the number of individuals diagnosed with
COVID-19 has increased significantly, causing a freezing or, in certain cases, a reversal of previously announced relaxation of activity restrictions and prompting the need for additional aid and other forms of relief. Moreover, although multiple COVID-19 vaccines have received regulatory approval and currently are being distributed to certain at-risk populations, it is too early to know how quickly these vaccines can be distributed to the broader population and how effective the vaccination of the broader population will be in mitigating the adverse social and economic effects of the pandemic. Further, variant strains of the COVID-19 virus have appeared, further complicating efforts of the medical community and federal, state and local governments in response to the pandemic.
The governmental and social response to the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in an unprecedented slowdown in economic activity and a related increase in unemployment. Since the outbreak of COVID-19 in the United States, more than 70 million people nationwide have filed claims for unemployment. Stock markets , trading prices of bank stocks in particular, significantly declined in value in the first half of 2020, though many bank stocks' trading prices have since recovered. As of February 2021, the national unemployment rate was 6.2%. Although an improvement from the 14.7% national unemployment rate observed in April 2020, the current rate of unemployment is substantially higher than the 3.6% national unemployment rate observed in January 2020 prior to the outbreak of COVID-19 in the United States.
The COVID-19 pandemic is rapidly evolving, and the ultimate impact will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the scope and duration of the pandemic and actions taken currently or in the future by governmental authorities in response to the pandemic. And while there have been trillions of dollars in economic stimulus packages initiated by the Federal Reserve and the federal government, in efforts to counteract the significant economic disruptions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, there can be no assurance that these packages will be sufficient, or produce positive results quickly enough, to stimulate the economy, and additional governmental stimulus and related interventions may be needed. Accordingly, the Company will be operating under uncertain economic conditions for a lengthy period of time.
To help address the recent, significant disruptions in the functioning of the financial markets and increased economic and market uncertainty and volatility, the FOMC has reduced the benchmark federal funds rate to a target range of 0% to 0.25%, and the yields on 10- and 30-year treasury notes have declined to historic lows. Throughout 2020, the FOMC continued to follow this approach as pandemic-related risks to the economy are likely to persist for the foreseeable future, indicating that the target federal funds rate would remain at current levels until the economy is in position to achieve the FOMC’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals. In addition, in order to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, the FRB indicated that it would continue to increase its holdings of U.S. Treasury securities and agency residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities to sustain proper functioning of the financial markets. The reductions in interest rates, especially if prolonged, could adversely affect our net interest income, net interest spread and net interest margin.
Forbearance and Eviction Moratoria and Other Borrower Relief
Congress and various state governments and federal agencies have taken actions to require lenders to provide forbearance and other relief to borrowers (for example, waiving late payment and other fees). The federal banking agencies have encouraged financial institutions to work constructively with affected borrowers, and recently passed legislation has provided relief from reporting loan classifications due to modifications related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The CARES Act created a forbearance program for impacted borrowers and imposed a temporary 60-day moratorium on foreclosures and foreclosure-related evictions in respect of federally backed residential real estate loans. In addition, the CARES Act established a forbearance program for multifamily mortgage loan borrowers with a federally backed multifamily mortgage loan whose payments were current as of February 1, 2020 but who have since experienced financial hardship as a result of COVID-19. Since the passage of the CARES Act, various federal agencies with responsibility over the programs that provide federal backing of residential and multifamily mortgage loans have modified and extended these forbearance and moratorium programs and so continue to affect our real estate lending business.
Additionally, temporary bans on evictions and foreclosures have been enacted through a mix of executive orders, regulations, and judicial orders in many states in which we do business or in which our borrowers and loan collateral are located. Certain such relief orders have since expired, although several states, including California, New York and New Jersey, have extended their temporary orders and may continue to do so indefinitely.
See "Item 1. Business-Supervision and Regulation-Government and Regulatory Responses to the COVID-19 Pandemic" for additional information regarding these regulatory and legislative actions.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken several actions to offer various forms of support to our customers and employees that have experienced impacts from this development. We are actively working with customers impacted by the economic downturn, offering payment deferrals and other loan modifications. Our COVID-19 Hardship Forbearance Program provides a 120-day deferral of principal and interest payments for residential mortgages with extensions to qualified borrowers available for up to a maximum deferral period of twelve months. Interest will continue to accrue at the note rate. At the end of the forbearance period, the borrower's accrued but unpaid interest will be added to their outstanding principal balance while keeping the principal and interest payment at the amount determined in accordance with the terms of their note, thus extending the loan's maturity date. The terms for commercial loan forbearances are reviewed and determined on a case-by-case basis. At December 31, 2020, pandemic-related forbearances totaled $15.8 million, or 0.6% of total loans, down significantly from a peak of $125.8 million at June 30, 2020. The remaining forbearances consist of $10.7 million residential real estate loans and $5.1 million commercial real estate loans. We continue to have active dialogue with customers on deferrals.
Other Effects on our Operations
The spread of COVID-19 has caused us to modify our business practices, including curtailing employee travel, changing employee work locations and cancelling physical participation in meetings, events and conferences. We have many employees working remotely, and we may take further actions as may be required by government authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers and business partners.
We continue to actively monitor developments related to COVID-19 and its impact on our business, customers, employees, counterparties, vendors, and service providers. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the most notable financial impacts to our results of operations was a higher provision for loan losses primarily reflecting the substantial increase in economic uncertainty and the resultant potential for increased credit losses in future periods because of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our customers are facing varying degree of financial stress, which is expected to continue into 2021, especially if COVID-19 infections increase and previously announced activity restrictions are reinforced. Our commercial real estate and construction loan portfolios have been and are likely to continue to be significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. We continue to monitor these loan portfolios closely.
The economic disruptions related to the COVID-19 pandemic have resulted in a significant increase in delinquencies and loans on nonaccrual status across our commercial real estate loan, construction loan and residential real estate loan portfolios as certain industries have been particularly hard-hit by the COVID-19 pandemic, which has adversely affected the ability of many of our borrowers to repay their loans. For example, as of December 31, 2020, our commercial real estate loan portfolio includes loans secured by SROs, hotels, retail properties and offices, totaling $110.9 million, representing 4.4% of total loans, including $67.6 million of loans secured by SROs and hotels. According to data from Cushman & Wakefield, the office vacancy rate in San Francisco rose 11 percentage points from the fourth quarter of 2019, to 16.7% in the fourth quarter of 2020, partially as a result of changes in work patterns caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, operating cash flows from tenants have decreased as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and decreased travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic has affected our SRO borrowers by reducing demand from tourists for travel accommodations in San Francisco. Our construction loan portfolio also includes similar substantial exposures. In addition, the elevated unemployment rate will continue to have a significant adverse impact on the ability of our residential real estate borrowers to repay their loans.
After several years in which total charge offs were less than $200 thousand per year, total charge offs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $4.3 million. Similarly, total loans 90 days or more past due, including nonaccrual loans but excluding loan forbearances related to the COVID-19 pandemic, increased $71.7 million, or 485%, from $14.8 million at December 31, 2019 to $86.5 million at December 31, 2020.
During this volatile time, we remain focused on our capital and liquidity. Our regulatory capital ratios remained well above the levels required to be considered well capitalized for regulatory purposes with a Common Equity Tier 1 ratio for the Company of 17.68% and a ratio of Tier 1 Capital to adjusted tangible assets of 8.08%. We have significantly increased the liquidity in our balance sheet over the past twelve months, with cash and due from banks as of December 31, 2020 totaling $998.5 million. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
The duration and severity of the effect of COVID-19 on economic, market and business conditions remain uncertain. We are subject to heightened business, operational, market, credit and other risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which may have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. For further discussion regarding risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Related to the COVID-19 Pandemic.”
Overview of 2020 Performance
Our historical lending strategy has been to offer a range of loan products to the residential and commercial markets. The majority of our loan portfolio consists of residential real estate mortgages, which accounted for 81% of our loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020. The balance of our loan portfolio consists of commercial real estate, construction, and commercial lines of credit.
While we continued to originate residential real estate loans in 2020, primarily conforming loans, for portfolio or for sale to the secondary market, we did not originate loans under the former Advantage Loan Program. Our focus for 2020, which will continue for 2021, was to continue to work hard to resolve our outstanding compliance issues and re-establish strong credit metrics for new lending initiatives. Going forward, we plan to focus on the diversification of our overall loan production and develop new residential loan products. However, the implementation of any new loan products takes time and may be subject to the prior review and approval of applicable bank regulatory authorities. In addition, in 2020 we explored exiting unproductive or ancillary businesses and aggressively resolving problem loans. For example, the Company closed the sale of substantially all of the assets of Quantum Capital Management, its registered investment advisory business, on December 21, 2020, and placed $19.4 million of nonperforming loans into held for sale as of year- end. We also pursued a strategy of aggressively increasing our liquidity to prepare for potential Advantage Loan Program repurchase requests, which we have solicited from loan investors, and to compensate for the Bank's reduced borrowing capacity from the FHLB as a result of a reduction in collateral pledged, as well as to prepare for additional uncertainties related to our ongoing examinations and investigations.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had total consolidated assets of $3.91 billion, which reflected an increase of $669.2 million, or 21%, from $3.24 billion as of December 31, 2019, total consolidated deposits of $3.10 billion, which reflected an increase of $603.5 million, or 24%, from December 31, 2019, and total consolidated shareholders’ equity of $319.6 million, compared to $332.6 million as of December 31, 2019. Cash and due from banks increased to $998.5 million at December 31, 2020 from $77.8 million at December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to a net increase in total consolidated deposits to $3.10 billion at December 31, 2020, from $2.50 billion at December 31, 2019, reflecting a strategic decision to build liquidity in light of the volatile economic conditions of 2020 and the legal and regulatory risks we are managing. The increase in cash and due from banks also reflects increased cash flows provided by a $406.5 million decrease in our total loans, from $2.91 billion at December 31, 2019 to $2.51 billion at December 31, 2020, driven by repayment of outstanding loans and the permanent discontinuation of our Advantage Loan Program, which was not replaced by an alternative loan product with comparable origination volume in 2020. These increases were offset, in part, by our investment of a portion of our excess cash in investment securities, which increased $152.4 million, or 100%, from $152.5 million at December 31, 2019 to $305.0 million at December 31, 2020. The resulting excess liquidity was retained consistent with our strategy to aggressively increase our liquidity during the year.
Our net income (loss) decreased $42.2 million, or 144%, from net income of $29.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to net loss of $(13.0) million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by a $54.9 million provision for loan losses. Our provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 is mainly due to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and risk-rating downgrades of certain residential, commercial real estate and construction loans. Other significant factors that contributed to the decrease in our net income (loss) include a significant increase in professional fees related to our efforts to achieve compliance with the OCC Agreement, our ongoing enhancements to our regulatory compliance framework (including our internal controls over financial reporting), government investigations, litigation and the audit of our financial statements for fiscal year 2019. In addition, our decrease in net income (loss) also reflects a decrease in net interest income. These factors were partially offset by a net recovery for contingent losses of $10.0 million that reflects, in part, the agreement in principle to settle our class action lawsuit in the fourth quarter of the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a $25.0 million provision for contingent losses in the year ended December 2019, and an income tax benefit because of decreased pre-tax income. Our net interest margin decreased from 3.78% for the prior year to 2.94% for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting the prevailing lower interest rate environment in which we were originating new portfolio loans and the reinvestment of substantial loan payments and increased cash from deposit growth into lower-yielding interest-earning assets.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and with general practices within the financial services industry. Application of these principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under current circumstances. These assumptions form the basis for our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from independent, objective sources. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Use of alternative assumptions may have resulted in significantly different estimates. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We have identified the following accounting policies and estimates that, due to the difficult, subjective or complex judgments and assumptions inherent in those policies and estimates, and the potential sensitivity of our consolidated financial statements to those judgments and assumptions, are critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. We believe that the judgments, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements are appropriate.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is a valuation allowance for probable incurred credit losses, increased or decreased by the provision for loan losses and decreased by charge offs less recoveries. Loan losses are charged against the allowance for loan losses when a loan is considered partially or fully uncollectible, or has such little value that continuance as an asset is not warranted. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance for loan losses. Management estimates the allowance for loan losses balance using past loan loss experience, the nature and volume of the portfolio, information about specific borrower situations , estimated collateral values, economic conditions and other factors. Allocations of the allowance for loan losses may be made for specific loans, but the entire allowance for loan losses is available for any loan that, in management’s judgment, should be charged off.
The allowance for loan losses consists of specific and general components. The specific component relates to loans that are individually classified as impaired. The general component covers all other loans and is based on historical loss experience adjusted for general economic conditions and other qualitative factors by portfolio segment. The historical loss experience is determined by portfolio segment and is based on the actual loss history experienced over the most recent three-year period. This actual loss experience is supplemented with economic and other factors based on the risks present for each portfolio segment. These economic and other risk factors include consideration of the following: levels of and trends in delinquencies and impaired loans; levels of and trends in charge offs and recoveries; trends in portfolio volume; effects of any changes in underwriting standards; other changes in lending policies, procedures and practices; experience, ability and depth of lending management and other relevant staff; national and local economic trends and conditions; industry conditions; and effects of changes in credit concentrations.
Commercial real estate loans, construction loans and commercial lines of credit that are classified loans, including all nonaccrual loans and troubled debt restructurings, are individually evaluated for impairment. See “-Nonperforming Assets-Classified Loans” for a discussion of our classified loans. These evaluations are based upon a quarterly systematic review utilizing, among other components, our internal risk rating system, similar to those employed by banking regulators. If a loan is impaired, a portion of the allowance for loan losses is allocated so that the loan is reported, net, at the present value of estimated future cash flows using the loan’s existing rate or at the fair value of collateral if repayment is expected solely from the collateral or operations of collateral. Large groups of homogeneous loans, including residential real estate loans with an aggregate principal balance representing the vast majority of our loan portfolio, are collectively evaluated for impairment and, accordingly, are not separately identified for impairment disclosures. Loans with aggregate principal balances representing 97% and 99% of our loan portfolio were collectively evaluated for impairment as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Loans that have been modified resulting in a concession, and for which the borrower is experiencing financial difficulties, are considered troubled debt restructurings. Troubled debt restructurings are separately identified for impairment disclosures and are measured at the present value of estimated future cash flows using the loan’s effective rate at inception. If a troubled debt restructuring is considered a collateral-dependent loan, the loan is reported, net, at the fair value of the collateral. For loans that are considered troubled debt restructurings that subsequently go into default, the Bank determines the amount of the allowance for loan losses in accordance with the accounting policy for the allowance for loan losses on loans individually identified as impaired.
The degree of risk in residential real estate lending depends primarily on the loan amount in relation to collateral value, the interest rate and the borrower’s ability to repay in an orderly fashion. Economic trends determined by unemployment rates and other key economic indicators are closely correlated to the credit quality of these loans. Weak economic trends indicate that the borrowers’ capacity to repay their obligations may be deteriorating. The classes in the residential real estate portfolio segment consist of residential first mortgages and residential second mortgages.
Adverse economic developments or an overbuilt market impact commercial real estate projects and may result in troubled loans. Trends in vacancy rates of commercial properties impact the credit quality of these loans. High vacancy rates reduce operating revenues and the ability for the properties to produce sufficient cash flow to service debt obligations. The segmentation classes identified by the Company in the commercial real estate portfolio consist of retail, multifamily, offices, hotels/SROs, industrial and other.
The construction loan portfolio is comprised of loans to builders and developers primarily for residential, commercial and mixed-use development. In addition to general commercial real estate risks, construction loans have additional risk of cost overruns, market deterioration during construction, lack of permanent financing and no operating history.
The commercial lines of credit portfolio is comprised of loans to businesses such as sole proprietorships, partnerships, limited liability companies and corporations for the daily operating needs of the business. The risk characteristics of these loans vary based on the borrowers’ business and industry as repayment is typically dependent on cash flows generated from the underlying business. These loans may be secured by real estate or other assets or may be unsecured. The segmentation classes in the commercial lines of credit portfolio consist of private banking loans and commercial & industrial lending.
See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Allowance for Loan Losses to our consolidated financial statements for further information on how we recognize and measure our allowance for loan losses.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair value is defined as the exit price, the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in the principal or most advantageous market for an asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date under current market conditions.
We use fair value measurements to record fair value adjustments to certain financial instruments and to determine fair value disclosures. For example, debt securities available for sale are carried at fair value each period. Other financial instruments, including substantially all of our loans held for sale, are not carried at fair value each period but may require nonrecurring fair value adjustments due to application of lower-of-cost-or-market accounting. We also disclose our estimate of fair value for financial instruments not recorded at fair value, such as loans held for investment or issuances of long-term debt.
The degree of management judgment involved in determining the fair value of a financial instrument is dependent upon the availability of quoted market prices or observable market inputs. For financial instruments that are traded actively and have quoted market prices or observable market inputs, there is nominal subjectivity involved in measuring fair value. However, when quoted market prices or observable market inputs are not fully available, significant management judgment may be necessary to estimate fair value.
When developing fair value measurements, we maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. When available, we use quoted prices in active markets to measure fair value. If quoted prices in active markets are not available, fair value measurement is based upon models that use primarily market-based or independently sourced market parameters, such as interest rate yield curves and prepayment speeds.
In certain cases, when market observable inputs for model-based valuation techniques are not readily available, we are required to make judgments about assumptions market participants would use to estimate fair value.
Significant judgment is also required to determine whether certain assets measured at fair value are classified as Level 2 or Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. When making this judgment, we consider available information, including observable market data, indications of market liquidity and orderliness, and our understanding of the valuation techniques and significant inputs used. The
classification of Level 2 or Level 3 is based upon the specific facts and circumstances of each instrument or instrument category and judgments are made regarding the significance of the Level 3 inputs to the instruments’ fair value measurement in its entirety. If Level 3 inputs are considered significant, the instrument is classified as Level 3.
See Note 15-Fair Value of Financial Instruments to our consolidated financial statements for more information on our use of fair value estimates.
Valuation of Mortgage Servicing Rights
Mortgage servicing rights are recognized separately when residential real estate loans are sold with servicing rights retained by the Bank. Mortgage servicing rights are initially recorded at fair value, which is determined based on an internal valuation model that calculates the present value of estimated future net servicing income based on an analysis of future cash flows, incorporating estimates of assumptions market participants would use in determining fair value, including market discount rates, prepayment speeds, servicing income, servicing costs and default rates. Mortgage servicing rights are subsequently measured using the amortization method which requires mortgage servicing rights to be amortized into non-interest income in the consolidated statements of income in proportion to, and over the period of, the estimated future net servicing income of the underlying loans.
On a quarterly basis, mortgage servicing rights are evaluated for impairment based upon the fair value of the mortgage servicing rights as compared to their carrying amount. Impairment is determined by stratifying rights into groupings based on predominant risk characteristics, such as interest rate, loan type and investor type. If the carrying amount of an individual grouping exceeds fair value, impairment is recorded on that grouping so that the mortgage servicing rights is carried at fair value. Impairment is recognized through an addition to a valuation allowance for an individual grouping. If it is later determined that all or a portion of the impairment no longer exists for a particular grouping, a reduction of the valuation allowance may be recorded as an increase to income.
At December 31, 2020, our mortgage servicing rights had a carrying value of $5.7 million, which is net of a valuation allowance of $2.2 million. The estimated fair value of our mortgage servicing rights was $5.8 million based on expected future cash flows considering a weighted average discount rate of 11.2%, a weighted average constant prepayment rate on mortgages of 22.7% and a weighted average life of 3.6 years. At December 31, 2019, our mortgage servicing rights had a carrying value of $9.8 million, which is net of a valuation allowance of $1.1 million. The estimated fair value of our mortgage servicing rights was $10.3 million based on expected future cash flows considering a weighted average discount rate of 11.5%, a weighted average constant prepayment rate on mortgages of 20.2% and a weighted average life of 4.3 years.
The fair value of mortgage servicing rights is highly sensitive to changes in assumptions. Changes in prepayment speed assumptions generally have the most significant impact on the fair value of our mortgage servicing rights. Generally, as interest rates decline, mortgage loan prepayments accelerate due to increased refinance activity, which results in a decrease in the fair value of mortgage servicing rights.
As interest rates rise, mortgage loan prepayments slowdown, which results in an increase in the fair value of mortgage servicing rights. Thus, any measurement of the fair value of our mortgage servicing rights is limited by the conditions existing and the assumptions utilized as of a particular point in time, and those assumptions may not be appropriate if they are applied at a different point in time.
Mortgage Repurchase Liability
In connection with portfolio loans sold in the secondary market, we make customary representations and warranties about certain characteristics of each loan. We establish a liability which may result from breaches in such representations and warranties. The repurchase liability reflects management’s estimate of such losses based on a combination of factors. Our estimation process requires management to make subjective and complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain, such as expectations of future repurchase demands, economic factors, and findings from the Internal Review. The actual losses on repurchases could vary significantly from the recorded repurchase liability, depending on the outcome of various factors.
See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Mortgage Repurchase Liability to our consolidated financial statements for further information on how we recognize and measure our mortgage repurchase liability.
Legal Contingencies and Litigation Accruals
We are involved in several material legal proceedings, as described in more detail in Note 19-Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements. On a quarterly basis, we assess potential losses in relation to these and other pending or threatened legal matters. If a loss is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, we recognize an expense for the estimated loss. Estimates of any such loss are subjective in nature and require the evaluation of numerous facts and assumptions as to future events, including the application of legal precedent that may be conflicting. To the extent these estimates are more or less than the actual liability resulting from the resolution of these matters, our net income will be increased or decreased accordingly. If the differences are material, our consolidated financial statements could be materially impacted.
Financial Condition
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had total consolidated assets of $3.91 billion, which reflected an increase of $669.2 million, or 21%, from $3.24 billion as of December 31, 2019, total consolidated deposits of $3.10 billion, which reflected an increase of $603.5 million, or 24%, from December 31, 2019, and total consolidated shareholders’ equity of $319.6 million, compared to $332.6 million as of December 31, 2019. Cash and due from banks increased to $998.5 million at December 31, 2020 from $77.8 million at December 31, 2019. Total loans, net of allowance for loan losses, decreased $457.2 million, or 15.8%, to $2.43 billion at December 31, 2020, as compared to $2.89 billion at December 31, 2019. The investment securities portfolio increased $152.4 million, or 100%, to $305.0 million at December 31, 2020 from $152.5 million at December 31, 2019. Borrowings, excluding subordinated notes, increased $89.0 million, or 39%, to $318.0 million at December 31, 2020.
Loan Portfolio Composition. The following table sets forth the composition of our loan portfolio by type of loan at the dates indicated.
Maturities and Sensitivities of Loans to Changes in Interest Rates. The following table sets forth the contractual maturities of our loan portfolio at December 31, 2020. Demand loans, loans having no stated repayment schedule or maturity and overdraft loans are reported as being due in one year or less. The table does not include any estimate of prepayments that could significantly shorten the average life of all loans and may cause our actual repayment experience to differ from that shown below.
The following table sets forth fixed and adjustable-rate loans in our loan portfolio at December 31, 2020 that are contractually due after December 31, 2021:
The table set forth below contains the repricing dates of the adjustable- rate loans included within our loan portfolio at December 31, 2020:
At December 31, 2020, $390.0 million, or 16%, of our adjustable interest rate loans were at their interest rate floor.
Asset Quality
Nonperforming Assets. Nonperforming assets include nonaccrual loans, loans that are 90 or more days past due or more and still accruing interest, troubled debt restructurings, nonaccrual loans held for sale and other loan collateral acquired through foreclosures and repossessions. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $46 thousand and $50 thousand, respectively, of accruing loans that were past due 90 or more days. For nonaccrual loans, interest previously accrued but not collected is reversed and charged against income at the time a loan is placed on nonaccrual status. Loans are returned to accrual status when all the principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are reasonably assured.
Troubled debt restructurings are modified loans in which a borrower demonstrated financial difficulties and for which a concession has been granted. However, not all troubled debt restructurings are placed on nonaccrual status. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had troubled debt restructurings totaling $28.3 million and $13.7 million, respectively. Troubled debt restructurings on nonaccrual status at such dates totaled $20.1 million and $138 thousand, respectively, and are included in the nonaccrual loan categories in the following table. See Note 4-Loans-Troubled Debt Restructurings to our consolidated financial statements for additional information about our troubled debt restructurings.
The following table sets forth information regarding our nonperforming assets at the dates indicated. In addition to the exclusions and presentation conventions described in the footnotes to the table, the categories of nonperforming assets in the following table do not include COVID-19-related loan forbearances that may be excluded from troubled debt restructurings under the CARES Act.
(1) Loans are classified as held for investment and are presented before the allowance for loan losses.
(2) Total nonaccrual loans exclude nonaccrual loans held for sale but include troubled debt restructurings on nonaccrual status.
(3) Other troubled debt restructurings exclude those loans presented above as nonaccrual or past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest.
(4) Nonaccrual loans held for sale were residential real estate loans as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, nonperforming assets totaled $114.3 million, reflecting an increase of $85.9 million, from a balance of $28.4 million as of December 31, 2019. This increase is attributable primarily to nonaccrual loans, which totaled $86.4 million as of December 31, 2020, reflecting an increase of $71.7 million, from a balance of $14.7 million as of December 31, 2019. Residential real estate loans comprised 24% of total nonaccrual loans as of December 31, 2020 compared to nearly 100% as of
December 31, 2019. Commercial real estate and construction loans collectively comprised 72% of total nonaccrual loans as of December 31, 2020 compared to nearly 0% as of December 31, 2019.
The increase in nonaccrual loans is attributable primarily to construction loans, of which loans totaling $41.9 million were placed on nonaccrual status in 2020. Most of these projects have experienced significant construction delays, in many instances due to delays in obtaining necessary permits. The increase in nonaccrual loans was also attributable to commercial real estate loans, of which $19.9 million of loans, nearly all related to SRO properties, were placed on nonaccrual status in 2020. Many of these commercial real estate loans were impacted by increased SRO vacancy and exhaustion of available liquidity.
In addition, the increase in nonperforming assets was partially attributable to nonaccrual residential real estate loans and nonaccrual residential real estate loans held for sale, which collectively increased $25.4 million from $14.7 million as of December 31, 2019 to $40.1 million as of December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and on our residential real estate borrowers.
Unlike larger financial institutions that are more geographically diversified, a large portion of our business is concentrated in the state of California, specifically in the San Francisco and Los Angeles areas. Loans related to the California market comprise 87% of total loans and 96% of total nonaccrual loans as of December 31, 2020 compared to 89% of total loans and 81% of total nonaccrual loans as of December 31, 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, the average loan size was approximately $483 thousand for our 43 nonaccrual residential real estate loans and approximately $2.7 million for our 24 other nonaccrual loans. Of the nonaccrual loans as of December 31, 2020, the four largest had an aggregate net balance of approximately $26.5 million, or 31% of the total aggregate net balance of nonaccrual loans, and were secured by SRO properties in San Francisco, California. The two largest nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2020 were a $9.5 million commercial real estate loan with no related allowance for loan loss recorded and secured by an 89-unit SRO property with four ground-floor commercial units, and a $6.9 million construction loan with a $1.9 million related allowance for loan loss recorded and secured by a 19-unit SRO property that is being expanded into a 28-unit SRO property but for which construction has been delayed. The next two largest nonaccrual loans as of December 31, 2020 were construction loans that had net balances of $5.7 million and $5.4 million, respectively, with no related allowance for loan loss recorded and are secured by SRO properties that have ground-floor commercial space and are under renovation.
The total amount of additional interest income on nonaccrual loans that would have been recognized for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 if interest on all such loans had been recorded based upon original contract terms was approximately $2.3 million and $281 thousand, respectively.
COVID-19-Related Forbearances. Under the CARES Act, COVID-19-related loan forbearances may be excluded from treatment as a troubled debt restructuring if such forbearance meets certain criteria. Further, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have offered forbearance under the CARES Act to customers facing COVID-19-related financial difficulties. The principal balance of loans modified due to the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and still in forbearance has continued to decline from the June 30 high and from September 30 levels. We continue to work together with our borrowers as circumstances may permit. Total loans in forbearance as of December 31, 2020 were $15.8 million, or 0.63%, of total loans held for investment. The following table sets forth such loans in forbearance at each quarter-end during 2020.
Delinquent Loans. The following tables set forth our loan delinquencies, including nonaccrual loans but excluding loan forbearances related to the COVID-19 pandemic, by type and amount at the dates indicated.
Total loans 90 days or more past due, including nonaccrual loans but excluding loan forbearances related to the COVID-19 pandemic, increased $71.7 million, or 485%, from $14.8 million at December 31, 2019 to $86.5 million at December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to our commercial real estate loan portfolio, which had six loans, totaling $20.0 million, 90 days or more past due at December 31, 2020, compared to one loan, totaling $40 thousand, 90 days or more past due at December 31, 2019, and our construction loan portfolio, which had 15 loans, totaling $41.9 million, 90 days or more past due at December 31, 2020, compared to no loans 90 days or more past due at December 31, 2019. Commercial real estate and construction loans collectively represented 72% and nearly 0% of total loans 90 days or more past due at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In addition, this increase in loans 90 days or more past due was partially attributable to our residential real estate loan portfolio, which had 45 loans, totaling $20.8 million, 90 days or more past due at December 31, 2020, compared to 22 loans, totaling $14.8 million, 90 days or more past due at December 31, 2019.
Classified Loans. We categorize loans into risk categories based on relevant information about the ability of borrowers to service their debt such as current financial information, historical payment experience, credit documentation, public information and current economic trends, among other factors. The four risk categories utilized are Pass, Special Mention, Substandard and Doubtful. Loans in the Pass category are considered to be of satisfactory quality, while the remaining three categories indicate varying levels of credit risk. See Note 4-Loans-Credit Quality to our consolidated financial statements for additional information about our risk categories.
Loans classified as Special Mention, Substandard and Doubtful were as follows at the dates indicated:
Total Special Mention, Substandard and Doubtful loans were $198.2 million, or 7.90% of total loans, at December 31, 2020, compared to $91.6 million, or 3.14% of total loans, at December 31, 2019, and the balance of each of the three categories increased from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. The $15.4 million increase in Special Mention loans was primarily attributable to the risk rating of eighteen commercial real estate loans totaling $37.5 million, and nine construction loans totaling $25.9 million, being downgraded. These downgrades were partially offset by net principal payments of $20.5 million, including $19.2 million of loans paid in full. In addition, six loans totaling $29.7 million were further downgraded to Substandard. The $84.6 million increase in Substandard loans was primarily due to the downgrade of 60 residential real estate loans totaling $36.1 million, eight construction loans totaling $25.0 million and 12 commercial real estate loans totaling $40.4 million, in addition to the further downgrades previously discussed. These downgrades were offset, in part, by the reclassification of $19.4 million of residential real estate loans as held-for-sale, principal payments of $22.7 million, including $20.9 million of loans paid in full, and the further downgrade to doubtful of one construction loan totaling $6.9 million.
Impaired Loans. A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that Bank will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. If a loan is impaired, a portion of the allowance for loan losses is allocated so that the loan is reported, net, at the present value of estimated future cash flows using the loan's existing rate or at the fair value of collateral if repayment is expected solely from the collateral or operations of collateral. See Note 4-Loans to our consolidated financial statements for tables presenting additional data regarding the allowance for loan losses and impaired loans.
At December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we had 31, 12 and 13 impaired loans with recorded investments of $74.0 million, $19.8 million and $11.8 million, respectively. Total impaired loans increased $54.2 million, or 274%, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, primarily due to a $31.8 million increase in total impaired construction loans, a $19.9 million increase in total impaired commercial real estate loans secured by SROs and hotels and a $2.6 million increase in total impaired commercial lines of credit. Impaired construction loans as a percentage of total impaired loans decreased from 86% as of December 31, 2019 to 66% as of December 31, 2020, while impaired commercial real estate loans secured by SROs and hotels as a percentage of total impaired loans increased from 0% as of December 31, 2019 to 30% as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, $58.4 million, or 79%, of total impaired loans did not have any related allowance for loan losses recorded. Of total impaired loans with no related allowance for loan losses recorded as of December 31, 2020, $42.0 million, or 72%, comprised 16 construction loans, of which 10 loans, representing $25.0 million, were for residential construction, 5 loans, representing $15.1 million, were for commercial construction and one loan, representing $1.8 million, was secured by commercial land.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is maintained at levels considered adequate by management to provide for probable loan losses inherent in the loan portfolio as of the consolidated balance sheet reporting dates. The allowance for loan losses is based on management’s assessment of various factors affecting the loan portfolio, including portfolio composition, delinquent and nonaccrual loans, national and local business conditions, loss experience and an overall evaluation of the quality of the underlying collateral. Please see “-Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Allowance for Loan Losses” for additional discussion of our allowance for loan losses policy.
The following table sets forth activity in our allowance for loan losses for the periods indicated.
Our total allowance for loan losses increased by $50.7 million, or 233%, to $72.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, from $21.7 million at December 31, 2019, primarily due to the $54.9 million provision for loan losses that we recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020. See “-Results of Operations-Provision (Recovery) for Loan Losses” for additional information about our provision for loan losses.
The following tables set forth the allowance for loan losses allocated by loan category at the dates indicated. The allowance for loan losses allocated to each category is not necessarily indicative of future losses in any particular category and does not restrict the use of the allowance for loan losses to absorb losses in other categories.
The allowance for loan losses as a percentage of loans was 2.89%, 0.75% and 0.75% as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in the total allowance for loan losses to $72.4 million at December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the $54.9 million provision for loan losses that we recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020, which was partially offset by net charge offs of $4.2 million during the same period. Our provision for loan losses was attributable in part to certain qualitative components within our allowance for loan losses methodology that took on increased significance as a result of the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. These qualitative components include increased unemployment, commercial property vacancy rates, uncertainty in property values and deterioration in the overall macro-economic environment. The increase in the allowance for loan losses also reflects an increased allocation of the allowance for loan losses for Special Mention, Substandard and Doubtful loans related to the $106.6 million increase in such loans during the year ended December 31, 2020. Continued declines or stagnation in these or related economic and real estate risk factors would likely to continue to affect our asset quality.
Although we believe that we use the best information available to establish the allowance for loan losses, future adjustments to the allowance for loan losses may be necessary and our results of operations could be adversely affected if circumstances differ substantially from the assumptions used in determining the allowance for loan losses. Furthermore, while we believe we have established our allowance for loan losses in conformity with U.S. GAAP, there can be no assurance that regulators, in reviewing our loan portfolio, will not require us to increase our allowance for loan losses. In addition, because future events affecting borrowers and collateral cannot be predicted with certainty, there can be no assurance that the existing allowance for loan losses is adequate or that increases will not be necessary should the quality of any loans deteriorate. Any material increase in the allowance for loan losses may adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Investment Securities Portfolio
The following table sets forth the amortized cost and estimated fair value of our available-for-sale debt securities portfolio at the dates indicated.
We increased the size of our available-for-sale debt securities portfolio (on an amortized-cost basis) $152.0 million, or 103%, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, to productively utilize a portion of our excess cash flows keeping in mind our on-hand liquidity target levels. Most of this increase was attributable to increased holdings of collateralized mortgage obligations, from $1.1 million at December 31, 2019 to $126.4 million at December 31, 2020. A majority of the collateralized mortgage obligations that we purchased during 2020 were issued and guaranteed by a U.S. government agency (Government National Mortgage Association) or a U.S. government-sponsored enterprise (Freddie Mac or Fannie Mae).
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no investments in a single company or entity, other than the U.S. government and government agency securities, with an aggregate book value in excess of 10% of our total shareholders’ equity.
We review the debt securities portfolio on a quarterly basis to determine the cause, magnitude and duration of declines in the fair value of each security. In estimating other-than-temporary impairment, we consider many factors including: (1) the length of time and extent that fair value has been less than cost, (2) the financial condition and near term prospects of the issuer, (3) whether the market decline was affected by macroeconomic conditions and (4) whether we have the intent to sell the security or more likely than not will be required to sell the security before its anticipated recovery. If either of the criteria regarding intent or requirement to sell is met, the entire difference between amortized cost and fair value is recognized through income as impairment. For debt securities that do not meet the aforementioned criteria, the amount of impairment is split into two components as follows: (1) other-than-temporary impairment related to credit loss, which must be recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and (2) other-than-temporary impairment related to other factors, which is recognized in other comprehensive income (loss). The credit loss is defined as the difference between the present value of the cash flows expected to be collected and the amortized cost basis. The assessment of whether any other-than-temporary decline exists may involve a high degree of subjectivity and judgment and is based on the information available to management at a point in time. We evaluate debt securities for other-than-temporary impairment at least on a quarterly basis and more frequently when economic or market conditions warrant such an evaluation.
At December 31, 2020, gross unrealized losses on debt securities totaled $419 thousand. We do not consider the debt securities to be other-than-temporarily impaired at December 31, 2020, since (i) the decline in fair value of the debt securities is attributable to changes in interest rates and illiquidity, not credit quality, (ii) we do not have the intent to sell the debt securities and (iii) it is likely that we will not be required to sell the debt securities before their anticipated recovery.
Our equity securities consist of an investment in a qualified community reinvestment act investment fund, which is a publicly-traded mutual fund, and an investment in the common equity of Pacific Coast Banker’s Bank, a thinly traded restricted stock. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, equity securities totaled $5.4 million and $5.3 million, respectively.
Portfolio Maturities and Yields. The composition and maturity distribution schedule, with corresponding weighted-average yields, of the available-for-sale debt securities portfolio at December 31, 2020, are summarized in the following table. Maturities are based on final contractual payment dates and do not reflect the impact of prepayments or early redemptions that may occur.
Deposits
Deposits are the primary source of funding for the Company. We regularly review the need to adjust our deposit offering rates on various deposit products in order to maintain a stable liquidity profile and a competitive cost of funds.
Total deposits were $3.10 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $603.5 million, or 24%, compared to $2.50 billion at December 31, 2019, reflecting our strategic decision to build liquidity in 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to a $492.4 million increase in time deposits and a $130.2 million increase in money market, savings and NOW accounts. Noninterest-bearing demand deposits decreased by $19.1 million from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. Brokered deposits totaled $42.8 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $25.0 million at December 31, 2019. We continue to focus on core deposits, which we define as all deposits except for time deposits greater than $250 thousand and brokered deposits. Core deposits totaled $2.62 billion at December 31, 2020, or 85% of total deposits at that date, down from 89% of total deposits at December 31, 2019.
The following tables set forth the distribution of average deposits by account type at the dates indicated.
At December 31, 2020, the aggregate amount of our retail time deposits in amounts greater than or equal to $100 thousand was approximately $1.12 billion. The following table sets forth the maturity of these time deposits at December 31, 2020:
Borrowings
In addition to deposits, we use short-term borrowings, such as FHLB advances and an FHLB overdraft credit line, as sources of funds to meet the daily liquidity needs of our customers.Our short-term FHLB advances consist primarily of advances of funds for one- or two-week periods.
At December 31, 2020, outstanding FHLB borrowings totaled $318.0 million, compared to $229.0 million at December 31, 2019, and there were no amounts outstanding on lines of credit with other banks at December 31, 2020 and 2019. In addition, $65.0 million in principal amount of our Fixed to Floating Subordinated Notes due April 15, 2026 (the “Subordinated Notes”) remained outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
At December 31, 2020, we had the ability to borrow an additional $170.8 million from the FHLB, which included an available line of credit of $50.0 million. We also had available credit lines with other banks totaling $100.0 million.
The following table sets forth information on our short-term FHLB borrowings during the periods presented:
Shareholders’ Equity
Total shareholders’ equity was $319.6 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $13.0 million, or 4%, from December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily a result of the net loss for the year of $(13.0) million. In 2020, we repurchased 10,912 shares of common stock and paid a dividend of $.01 per share, each of which was in the first quarter of 2020. In 2019, we repurchased 3,134,806 shares of our common stock and made dividend payments of $0.04 per share. We ceased all share repurchases and dividend declarations by the end of the first quarter of 2020 in consideration of the many regulatory and legal issues the Company was facing.
Results of Operations
The following discussion compares our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
General. A net loss of $(13.0) million was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting a decrease of $42.2 million, or 144%, compared to net income of $29.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net income (loss) was primarily attributable to a $54.9 million provision for loan losses compared to a $133 thousand recovery of loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net income (loss) also reflects a $26.7 million increase in professional fees; a $15.2
million decrease in net interest income, as our asset mix changed and the net interest margin decreased to 2.94% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 3.78% for the previous year; and a $6.0 million decrease in gain on sale of portfolio loans, due to the absence of portfolio loan sales in 2020. The decreases were partially offset by a net recovery of provision for contingent losses of $10.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the provision for contingent losses of $25.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Average Balance Sheet and Related Yields and Rates. The following tables present average balance sheet information, interest income, interest expense and the corresponding average yields earned and rates paid for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. The average balances are daily averages and, for loans, include both performing and nonperforming balances. Interest income on loans includes the effects of discount accretion and net deferred loan origination costs accounted for as yield adjustments.
(1) Nonaccrual loans are included in the respective average loan balances. Income, if any, on such loans is recognized on a cash basis.
(2) Interest income does not include taxable equivalence adjustments.
The following table presents the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for major components of interest earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities for the periods indicated. The table distinguishes between: (1) changes attributable to volume (changes in volume multiplied by the prior period’s rate), (2) changes attributable to rate (change in rate multiplied by the prior year’s volume) and (3) total increase (decrease) (the sum of the previous columns). Changes attributable to both volume and rate are allocated ratably between the volume and rate categories.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income represents the difference between income on interest-earning assets and expense on interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest income depends primarily upon the volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and the corresponding interest rates earned or paid. Our net interest income is significantly impacted by changes in interest rates and market yield curves and their related impact on cash flows.
Net interest income was $105.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $15.2 million, or 13%, from $121.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest income was $151.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $24.0 million, or 14% from the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income was primarily due to a change in asset mix, as the size of our loan portfolio decreased with excess cash flows from loan repayments and deposits invested in short-term, low yielding liquid assets. Our average yield on interest-earning assets decreased 127 basis points, to 4.21%, from the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting the change in asset mix.
The average balance of our securities and other interest-earning assets, which generally are lower-yielding and more liquid than our loans, was $836.5 million for year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $237.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. These assets had an average yield of 0.56% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our average balance of loans decreased $204.6 million, or 7%, to $2.76 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, as net principal payments exceeded new loan production. Our average yield on loans decreased 39 basis points, to 5.32%, from the year ended December 31, 2019. The yield on our loan portfolio decreased primarily due to our variable-rate loans resetting at lower interest rates in the lower interest rate environment and new loans originating at lower interest rates than the loans that paid off.
Interest expense was $45.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $8.8 million, or 16% from the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to rate decreases reflecting the impact of the lower interest rate environment, as our average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities decreased 51 basis points, to 1.45%. The decrease in average rate was partially offset by an increase in the average balance of interest-bearing liabilities of $373.7 million, or 13%, from the year ended
December 31, 2019 that was primarily attributable to an increase in average interest-bearing deposits as we pursued our strategy of increasing our liquidity.
Our average balance of interest-bearing deposits increased $328.1 million, or 13% from the year ended December 31, 2019, to $2.77 billion. Our average rate paid on interest-bearing deposits decreased 52 basis points from the year ended December 31, 2019, to 1.35%. The rates on interest-bearing deposits were lower than in the prior year in response to changes in market rates.
Net Interest Margin and Spread. Net interest margin was 2.94% for the year ended December 31, 2020, down 84 basis points from 3.78% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The interest rate spread was 2.76% for the year ended December 31, 2020, down 76 basis points from 3.52% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our net interest margin and interest rate spread were negatively impacted during the year ended December 31, 2020 by a substantial increase in highly liquid, lower yielding interest-earning assets on our balance sheet, as part of our strategy to increase liquidity in order to reduce our risk profile, which resulted in an increase in the relative proportion of our lower-yielding interest-earning assets consisting primarily of deposits held in an interest-bearing account at the Federal Reserve. The declines in net interest margin and interest rate spread were also due to lower yields in our loan portfolios, partially offset by lower rates paid on our interest-bearing deposits, which was a reflection of the low interest rate environment in 2020. A discussion of the effects of changing interest rates on net interest income is set forth in “