Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The Company
We are North America’s largest provider of deathcare products and services, with a network of funeral service locations and cemeteries unequaled in geographic scale and reach. At December 31, 2020, we operated 1,470 funeral service locations and 483 cemeteries (including 297 funeral service/cemetery combination locations), which are geographically diversified across 44 states, eight Canadian provinces, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Our funeral and cemetery operations consist of funeral service locations, cemeteries, funeral service/cemetery combination locations, crematoria, and other related businesses, which enable us to serve a wide array of customer needs. We sell cemetery property and funeral and cemetery merchandise and services at the time of need and on a preneed basis.
Our financial position is enhanced by our $12.7 billion backlog of future revenue from both trust and insurance-funded preneed sales at December 31, 2020. Preneed selling provides us with a strategic opportunity to gain future market share. We also believe it adds to the stability and predictability of our revenue and cash flows. While revenue on the majority of preneed merchandise and service sales is deferred until the time of need, sales of preneed cemetery property provide opportunities for full current revenue recognition to the extent that the property is developed and available for use.
We have adequate liquidity and a favorable debt maturity profile, which allow us to return capital to shareholders through share repurchases and dividends.
Factors affecting our operating results include: demographic trends in terms of population growth and average age, which impact death rates and number of deaths; establishing and maintaining leading market share positions supported by strong local heritage and relationships; effectively responding to increasing cremation trends by selling complementary services and merchandise; controlling salary and merchandise costs; and exercising pricing leverage related to our atneed revenue. The average revenue per funeral contract is influenced by the mix of traditional and cremation services because our average revenue for cremations is lower than that for traditional burials. To further enhance revenue opportunities, we continue to focus on our cremation customer’s preferences and remaining relevant by developing additional memorialization merchandise and services that specifically appeal to cremation customers. We believe the presentation of these additional merchandise and services through our customer-facing technology enhances our customer’s experience by reducing administrative burdens and allowing them to visualize the product offerings and services, which will help drive increases in the average revenue for a cremation in future periods.
Recent Trends
During 2020, an outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) spread worldwide and was declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020. COVID-19 poses a threat to the health and economic well-being of our employees, customers, and vendors. Our dedicated associates are acting as first responders and providing essential services for our client families and communities. The operation of all our facilities is critically dependent on our employees who operate these locations. To ensure the well-being of all our employees and their families, we provided them with detailed health and safety literature on COVID-19, such as the Center for Disease Control (the “CDC”)’s industry-specific guidelines for working with the deceased who were and may have been infected with COVID-19. In addition, we provide personal protection equipment to those employees whose positions require such equipment. We continue to add measures to help ensure client families can safely visit our facilities and celebrate the life of their loved ones. We have implemented work from home policies at our corporate offices consistent with CDC and local government guidance to reduce the risks of exposure to COVID-19, while continuing to support our locations and the customers they serve.
Like most businesses world-wide, COVID-19 has impacted various aspects of our business operations; however, we cannot, with certainty, presently predict the scope, severity, or duration with which COVID-19 will continue to impact our business, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows. As recently as the middle of March 2020, sales growth was continuing to trend in-line and consistent with our forecast for the first quarter of 2020 and when compared to the first quarter of 2019. However, during the last two weeks of March and through April, we saw our preneed sales activity and our sales averages precipitously decline as North Americans began to practice social distancing to comply with multiple state and provincial shelter-in-place orders. Due to the impacts of COVID-19 and uncertainty about the duration of the effects, we took a variety of actions to preserve capital, including but not limited to, reducing the base salaries for officers from the peak of the COVID-19 effects in late April 2020 until late May when the impacts eased. As the world continues to experience the effects of COVID-19, we remain reliant on the values and capabilities of our organization to meet the needs of our client families and while ensuring our associates and customers are safe. As community restrictions have lifted, we have experienced unprecedented growth in our preneed cemetery sales and increased funeral services and burials performed. We have also experienced a return to full memorial services or celebrations in many markets which fluctuates with the varying local restrictions placed on gatherings. We view this as further evidence that a considerable number of our customers continue to value what our team does best, which is helping our client families gain closure and healing through the process of grieving, remembrance, and celebration.
24 Service Corporation International
PART II
The rigorous restrictions placed on gathering, mandated by state, provincial, and local governments have posed a unique challenge for our locations. In mid-March, we quickly implemented technology solutions, including leveraging Facebook Live, which allows extended family and friends to virtually participate in the ceremony alongside the immediate family. In addition, certain locations found other ways to include families and friends in services, including giving guests the opportunity to leave condolences on balloons that are tied to chapel chairs so families can feel connected to those unable to attend in person. We also carefully designed outdoor venues to allow guests to be present, while remaining at a safe distance and even offer customers the ability to broadcast cemetery services through radio transmitters at certain locations. Atneed funeral directors are also using virtual meeting platforms to discuss and plan service details with client families. Our preneed sales teams have continued to overcome social distancing obstacles in certain areas of the country by leveraging technology with customers who may prefer to purchase cemetery property and merchandise from the safety of their home or setting up outdoor pop-up canopies to discuss pre-planning from a safe distance. Although they may face challenges to meet face-to-face, our funeral directors continue to listen, understand, suggest, and plan important details for honoring a loved one’s life.
For further discussion of our key operating metrics, see our "Cash Flow" and “Results of Operations” sections below. For a discussion of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018, see Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources and Results of Operations in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year December 31, 2019, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 18, 2020.
Financial Condition, Liquidity, and Capital Resources
Capital Allocation Considerations
We rely on cash flow from operations as a significant source of liquidity. Our cash flow from operating activities provided $804.4 million in 2020. In addition, as of December 31, 2020, we have $441.0 million in remaining borrowing capacity under our Bank Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2020, we have $228.4 million in long-term debt current maturities, which primarily consist of $150.0 million on our 2021 senior notes, current amounts due on the term loan, and finance leases.
Our Bank Credit Facility requires us to maintain certain leverage and interest coverage ratios. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all of our debt covenants. Our financial covenant requirements and actual ratios as of December 31, 2020 are as follows:
Per Credit Agreement Actual
Leverage ratio 4.75 (Max) 3.19
Interest coverage ratio 3.00 (Min) 7.06
We have the financial strength and flexibility to reward shareholders through share repurchases and dividends while maintaining a prudent capital structure and pursuing new opportunities for profitable growth.
Our unencumbered cash on hand, future operating cash flows, and the available capacity under our bank credit agreement will give us adequate liquidity to meet our short-term needs as well as our long-term financial obligations. Due to cash balances residing in Canada and minimum operating cash requirements, a portion of our cash on hand is encumbered.
We consistently evaluate the best uses of our cash flow that will yield the highest value and return on capital. Our capital deployment strategy is prioritized as follows:
Investing in Acquisitions and Building New Funeral Service Locations. We manage our footprint by focusing on strategic acquisitions and building new funeral service locations where the expected returns are attractive and exceed our weighted average cost of capital by a meaningful margin. We target businesses with favorable customer dynamics and/or where we can achieve additional economies of scale. We continue to pursue strategic acquisitions and build new funeral service locations in areas that provide us with the potential for scale.
Paying Dividends. Our quarterly dividend rate has steadily grown from $0.025 per common share in 2005 to $0.21 per common share at the end of 2020. We target a payout ratio of 30% to 40% of after tax earnings excluding special items and intend to grow our cash dividend commensurate with the growth in our business. While we intend to pay regular quarterly cash dividends for the foreseeable future, all future dividends are subject to limitations in our debt covenants and final determination by our Board of Directors each quarter upon review of our financial performance.
Repurchasing Shares. Absent opportunities for strategic acquisitions, we expect to continue to repurchase shares of our common stock in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions, subject to market conditions, debt covenants, and normal trading restrictions. There can be no assurance that we will buy our common stock under our repurchase program in the future.
FORM 10-K 25
PART II
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased 12,043,347 shares of common stock at an aggregate cost of $516.9 million, which is an average cost per share of $42.92. During August 2020, our Board of Directors increased our share repurchase authorization to $500.0 million. After these repurchases and the increase in our share repurchase authorization, the remaining dollar value of shares authorized to be purchased under the share repurchase program was $231.0 million at December 31, 2020. Since 2010, we have reduced the number of our shares outstanding by 29%.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, we repurchased 802,146 shares for $40.7 million at an average cost per share of $50.74.
Managing Debt. We may seek to make open market debt repurchases when it is opportunistic to do so relative to other capital deployment opportunities and to manage our near-term debt maturity profile. We have a relatively consistent annual cash flow stream that is generally resistant to down economic cycles. This cash flow stream and our significant liquidity are available to substantially reduce our long-term debt maturities should we choose to do so.
Cash Flow
Our ability to generate strong operating cash flow is one of our fundamental financial strengths and provides us with substantial flexibility in meeting operating and investing needs.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $804.4 million, and $628.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Excluding $6.4 million in legal settlements in the prior year, cash flow from operations increased $169.2 million for 2020 versus 2019. The 2020 increase over 2019 comprises:
•a $217.9 million increase in cash receipts from customers,
•a $38.1 million decrease in cash interest payments,
•a $10.4 million decrease in vendor and other payments, and
•a $7.8 million decrease in employee compensation; partially offset by
•a $66.1 million increase in cash tax payments,
•a $19.9 million decrease in General Agency (GA) and other receipts, and
•a $19.0 million decrease in net trust withdrawals.
Investing Activities
Cash flows from investing activities used $318.4 million, and $278.5 million, in 2020, and 2019, respectively. The $39.9 million higher outflow from 2020 over 2019 is primarily due to the following:
•a $55.2 million decrease in cash received from divestitures and asset sales,
•a $8.5 million increase in cash spent on business acquisitions, and
•a $0.7 million increase in cash spent on real estate acquisitions, partially offset by
•a $17.7 million decrease in capital expenditures, primarily due to the temporary deferral of certain capital expenditures as we navigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and
•a $6.8 million decrease in payments for Company-owned life insurance policies, net of proceeds.
Financing Activities
Financing activities used $492.8 million in 2020 compared to using $319.1 million in 2019. The $173.7 million higher outflow from 2020 over 2019 is primarily due to:
•a $387.3 million increase in purchase of our common stock,
•a $14.3 million decrease in proceeds from exercises of stock options, and
•a $6.0 million increase in payments of dividends, partially offset by
•a $220.0 million increase in debt proceeds, net of payments, and
•a $13.9 million change in bank overdrafts and acquisition-related financing.
26 Service Corporation International
PART II
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, Contractual Obligations, and Commercial and Contingent Commitments
We have assumed various financial obligations and commitments in the ordinary course of conducting our business. We have contractual obligations requiring future cash payments under existing contractual arrangements, such as debt maturities, interest on long-term debt, operating lease agreements, and employment, consulting, and non-competition agreements. We also have commercial and contingent obligations that result in cash payments only if certain events occur requiring our performance pursuant to a funding commitment.
The following table details our known future cash payments (on an undiscounted basis) related to various contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
Payments Due by Period
Contractual Obligations 2021 2022-2023 2024-2025 Thereafter Total
(In millions)
Debt maturities (including finance leases)(1) (2) (3)
$ 228.4 $ 130.9 $ 1,077.7 $ 2,305.5 $ 3,742.5
Interest obligation on long-term debt(4)
135.3 246.4 217.7 331.1 930.5
Operating lease agreements(5)
10.8 16.9 11.3 37.5 76.5
Employment and management, consulting, and non-competition agreements(6)
7.2 8.6 4.8 3.9 24.5
Benefit cost obligation(7)
2.5 4.5 3.7 8.0 18.7
Firm purchase agreement(8)
7.7 1.7 - - 9.4
Total contractual obligations $ 391.9 $ 409.0 $ 1,315.2 $ 2,686.0 $ 4,802.1
(1)Our outstanding indebtedness contains standard provisions, such as payment delinquency default clauses and change of control clauses. In addition, our Bank Credit Facility contains a maximum leverage ratio and a minimum interest coverage ratio. See “Capital Allocation Considerations” and Note 6 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, for additional details related to our long-term debt.
(2)Excludes non-cash net premiums and original issuance discounts recorded on the debt. The unamortized balance of the net premiums and original issuance discounts at December 31, 2020 is $0.3 million.
(3)Excludes non-cash debt issuance costs on the debt. The unamortized balance of debt issuance costs at December 31, 2020 is $36.7 million.
(4)Approximately 66% of our total debt is fixed rate debt for which the interest obligation was calculated at the stated rate. Future interest obligations on our floating rate debt are based on the current forward rate curve of the underlying index. See Note 6 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for additional information related to our future interest obligations.
(5)Our operating leases primarily include funeral service real estate and office equipment for funeral service locations, cemetery locations, and administrative offices. See Note 8 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for additional details related to our leases.
(6)We have entered into employment and management, consulting, and non-competition agreements that require us to make cash payments over the contractual period. The agreements have been primarily entered into with certain officers and associates and former owners of businesses acquired. Agreements with contractual periods less than one year are excluded. See Note 9 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for additional details related to these agreements.
(7)See Note 12 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for discussion of our pension plans.
(8)We have entered into a purchase commitment for certain merchandise for resale. The agreement is through 2022 and includes annual minimum volume purchase commitments.
The following table details our known potential or possible future cash payments (on an undiscounted basis) related to various commercial and contingent obligations as of December 31, 2020.
Expiration by Period
Commercial and Contingent Obligations 2021 2022-2023 2024-2025 Thereafter Total
(In millions)
Surety obligations(1)
$ 145.3 $ - $ - $ - $ 145.3
Long-term obligations related to uncertain tax positions(2)
2.1 - - - 2.1
Letters of credit(3)
34.0 - - - 34.0
Total commercial and contingent obligations $ 181.4 $ - $ - $ - $ 181.4
(1)Represents the aggregate funding obligation associated with our surety bond arrangements assuming our surety partners did not renew any of our surety obligations and we could not find replacement surety assurance. See the section titled “Financial Assurances” following this table in this Form 10-K for more information related to our surety bonds.
(2)We have recorded a liability for unrecognized tax benefits and related interest and penalties of $2.1 million as of December 31, 2020. See Note 5 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for additional information related to our uncertain tax positions.
(3)We are occasionally required to post letters of credit, issued by a financial institution, to secure certain insurance programs or other obligations. Letters of credit generally authorize the financial institution to make a payment to the beneficiary upon the satisfaction of a certain event or the failure to satisfy an obligation. The letters of credit are generally posted for one-year terms and are usually automatically renewed upon maturity until such time as we have satisfied the commitment secured by the letter of credit. We are obligated to reimburse the issuer only if the beneficiary collects on the letter of credit. We believe it is unlikely we will be required to fund a claim under our outstanding letters of credit. As of December 31, 2020, $34.0 million of our letters of credit were supported by our Bank Credit Facility, which expires in May 2024.
Not included in the above table are potential funding obligations related to our merchandise and service trusts. In certain states and provinces, we have withdrawn allowable distributable earnings including unrealized gains prior to the maturity or
FORM 10-K 27
PART II
cancellation of the related contract. Additionally, some states have laws that either require replenishment of investment losses under certain circumstances or impose various restrictions when trust fund values drop below certain prescribed amounts. In the event that our trust investments do not recover from market declines, we may be required to deposit portions or all of these amounts into the respective trusts in some future period. As of December 31, 2020, we had unrealized losses of $6.9 million in the various trusts within these states.
Financial Assurances
In support of our operations, we have entered into arrangements with certain surety companies whereby such companies agree to issue surety bonds on our behalf as financial assurance and/or as required by existing state and local regulations. The surety bonds are used for various business purposes; however, the majority of the surety bonds issued and outstanding have been used to support our preneed sales activities. The obligations underlying these surety bonds are recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheet as Deferred revenue, net. The breakdown of surety bonds between funeral and cemetery preneed arrangements, as well as surety bonds for other activities, is described below.
Years Ended December 31,
2020 2019
(In millions)
Preneed funeral $ 94.4 $ 94.6
Preneed cemetery:
Merchandise and services 149.4 147.6
Pre-construction 24.2 20.3
Bonds supporting preneed funeral and cemetery obligations 268.0 262.5
Bonds supporting preneed business permits 5.5 5.5
Other bonds 20.7 19.7
Total surety bonds outstanding $ 294.2 $ 287.7
When selling preneed contracts, we may post surety bonds where allowed by state law. We post the surety bonds in lieu of trusting a certain amount of funds received from the customer. The $268.0 million in bonds supporting preneed funeral and cemetery obligations differs from the $145.3 million potential funding obligation disclosed in our “Commercial and Contingent Obligations” table above because the amount of the bond posted is generally determined by the total amount of the preneed contract that would otherwise be required to be trusted, in accordance with applicable state law, at the time we enter into the contract. We would only be required to fund the trust for the portion of the preneed contract for which we have received payment from the customer, less any applicable retainage, in accordance with state law. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we had $6.2 million, $24.2 million, and $23.4 million, respectively, of cash receipts from sales attributable to bonded contracts. These amounts do not consider reductions associated with taxes, obtaining costs, or other costs.
Surety bond premiums are paid annually and the bonds are automatically renewable until maturity of the underlying preneed contracts, unless we are given prior notice of cancellation. Except for cemetery pre-construction bonds (which are irrevocable), the surety companies generally have the right to cancel the surety bonds at any time with appropriate notice. In the event a surety company were to cancel the surety bond, we are required to obtain replacement surety assurance from another surety company or fund a trust for an amount generally less than the posted bond amount. Management does not expect that we will be required to fund material future amounts related to these surety bonds due to a lack of surety capacity or surety company non-performance.
Preneed Activities and Backlog of Contracts
In addition to selling our products and services to client families at the time of need, we enter into price-guaranteed preneed contracts, which provide for future funeral or cemetery merchandise and services. Because preneed funeral and cemetery merchandise or services will generally not be provided until sometime in the future, most states and provinces require that all or a portion of the funds collected from customers on preneed contracts be deposited into merchandise and service trusts until the merchandise is delivered or the service is performed. In certain situations, as described above, where permitted by state or provincial laws, we may post a surety bond as financial assurance for a certain amount of the preneed contract in lieu of placing funds into trust accounts. Alternatively, we may sell a life insurance or annuity policy from third-party insurance companies.
Insurance-Funded Preneed Contracts: Where permitted by state or provincial law, we may sell a life insurance or annuity policy from third-party insurance companies, for which we earn a commission as general sales agent for the insurance company. These general agency commissions (GA revenue) are based on a percentage per contract sold and are recognized as funeral revenue when the insurance purchase transaction between the preneed purchaser and third-party insurance provider is completed. All selling costs incurred pursuant to the sale of insurance-funded preneed contracts are expensed as incurred. We do not reflect the unfulfilled insurance-funded preneed contract amounts in our Consolidated Balance Sheet. The proceeds of the life insurance policies or annuity contracts will be reflected in funeral revenue as we perform these funerals.
28 Service Corporation International
PART II
The table below details our results of insurance-funded preneed production and maturities.
Years Ended December 31,
2020 2019
(Dollars in millions)
Preneed insurance-funded:
Sales production(1)
$ 501.3 $ 568.8
Sales production (number of contracts) (1)
89,080 99,310
General agency revenue $ 124.5 $ 139.7
Maturities $ 385.2 $ 347.5
Maturities (number of contracts) 66,362 58,773
(1) Amounts are not included in our Consolidated Balance Sheet
Trust-Funded Preneed Contracts: The funds collected from customers and required by state or provincial law are deposited into trusts. We retain any funds above the amounts required to be deposited into trust accounts and use them for working capital purposes, generally to offset the selling and administrative costs of our preneed programs. Although this represents cash flow to us, the associated revenues are deferred until the merchandise is delivered or services are performed (typically at maturity). The funds in trust are then invested by professional money managers with oversight by independent trustees in accordance with state and provincial laws.
The tables below detail our results of preneed production and maturities, excluding insurance contracts, for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Years Ended December 31,
2020 2019
(Dollars in millions)
Funeral:
Preneed trust-funded (including bonded):
Sales production $ 357.3 $ 379.7
Sales production (number of contracts) 94,059 102,176
Maturities $ 313.4 $ 289.2
Maturities (number of contracts) 80,962 72,523
Cemetery:
Sales production:
Preneed $ 1,045.5 $ 908.9
Atneed 400.9 327.0
Total sales production $ 1,446.4 $ 1,235.9
Sales production deferred to backlog:
Preneed $ 481.3 $ 397.8
Atneed 281.0 241.4
Total sales production deferred to backlog $ 762.3 $ 639.2
Revenue recognized from backlog:
Preneed $ 334.5 $ 310.2
Atneed 267.4 237.6
Total revenue recognized from backlog $ 601.9 $ 547.8
Backlog of Preneed Contracts: The following table reflects our backlog of trust-funded deferred preneed contract revenue, including amounts related to Deferred receipts held in trust at December 31, 2020 and 2019. Additionally, the table reflects our backlog of unfulfilled insurance-funded contracts (which are not included in our Consolidated Balance Sheet) at December 31, 2020 and 2019. The backlog amounts presented include amounts due from customers for undelivered performance obligations on cancelable preneed contracts to arrive at our total backlog of deferred revenue. The table does not include the backlog associated with businesses that are held for sale.
FORM 10-K 29
PART II
The table also reflects our preneed receivables and trust investments associated with the backlog of deferred preneed contract revenue including the amounts due from customers for undelivered performance obligations on cancelable preneed contracts. The table below is meaningful because it sets forth the aggregate amount of future revenue we expect to recognize as a result of preneed sales, as well as the amount of funds associated with this revenue. Because the future revenue exceeds the assets, future revenue will exceed the cash distributions actually received from the associated trusts and future collections from the customer.
December 31, 2020 December 31, 2019
Fair Value Cost Fair Value Cost
(In billions)
Deferred revenue, net $ 1.49 $ 1.49 $ 1.47 $ 1.47
Amounts due from customers for unfulfilled performance obligations on cancelable preneed contracts 0.64 0.64 0.58 0.58
Deferred receipts held in trust 4.27 3.66 3.84 3.54
Allowance for cancellation on trust investments (0.29) (0.25) (0.27) (0.25)
Backlog of trust-funded deferred revenue, net of estimated allowance for cancellation 6.11 5.54 5.62 5.34
Backlog of insurance-funded revenue (1)
6.58 6.58 6.37 6.37
Total backlog of deferred revenue $ 12.69 $ 12.12 $ 11.99 $ 11.71
Preneed receivables, net and trust investments $ 5.35 $ 4.73 $ 4.79 $ 4.49
Amounts due from customers for unfulfilled performance obligations on cancelable preneed contracts 0.64 0.64 0.58 0.58
Allowance for cancellation on trust investments (0.29) (0.25) (0.27) (0.25)
Assets associated with backlog of trust-funded deferred revenue, net of estimated allowance for cancellation 5.70 5.12 5.10 4.82
Insurance policies associated with insurance-funded deferred revenue (1)
6.58 6.58 6.37 6.37
Total assets associated with backlog of preneed revenue $ 12.28 $ 11.70 $ 11.47 $ 11.19
(1) Amounts are not included in our Consolidated Balance Sheet.
The fair value of our trust investments was based on a combination of quoted market prices, observable inputs such as interest rates or yield curves and appraisals. As of December 31, 2020, the difference between the backlog and asset market amounts represents $0.21 billion related to contracts for which we have posted surety bonds as financial assurance in lieu of trusting, $0.01 billion collected from customers that were not required to be deposited into trusts, and $0.19 billion in allowable cash distributions from trust assets. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of the total backlog comprised $3.50 billion related to cemetery contracts and $9.19 billion related to funeral contracts. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of the assets associated with the backlog of trust-funded deferred revenue comprised $3.34 billion related to cemetery contracts and $2.36 billion related to funeral contracts.
Trust Investments
In addition to selling our products and services to client families at the time of need, we enter into price-guaranteed preneed funeral and cemetery contracts, which provide for future funeral or cemetery merchandise and services. Since preneed funeral and cemetery merchandise or services will generally not be provided until sometime in the future, most states and provinces require that all or a portion of the funds collected from customers on preneed funeral and cemetery contracts be paid into trusts and/or escrow accounts until the merchandise is delivered or the service is performed. Investment earnings associated with the trust investments are expected to mitigate the inflationary costs of providing the preneed funeral and cemetery merchandise and services in the future at the prices that were guaranteed at the time of sale. Also, we are required by state and provincial law to pay a portion of the proceeds from the preneed or atneed sale of cemetery property interment rights into perpetual care trusts. For these investments, the original corpus generally remains in the trust in perpetuity and the earnings or elected distributions are withdrawn as allowed to defray the expense to maintain the cemetery property. While many states require that net capital gains or losses be retained and added to the corpus, certain states allow the net realized capital gains and losses to be included in the earnings that are distributed. Additionally, some states allow a total return distribution that may contain elements of income, capital appreciation, and principal.
Independent trustees manage and invest the majority of the funds deposited into the funeral and cemetery merchandise and services trusts as well as the cemetery perpetual care trusts. The majority of the trustees are selected based on their respective geographic footprint and qualifications per state and provincial regulations. Most of the trustees engage the same independent investment managers. These trustees, with input from SCI's wholly-owned registered investment advisor, establish an investment policy that serves as an operating document to guide the investment activities of the trusts including asset allocation and manager selection. The investments are also governed by state and provincial guidelines. All of the trusts
30 Service Corporation International
PART II
seek to control risk and volatility through a combination of asset classes, investment styles, and a diverse mix of investment managers.
Asset allocation is based on the liability structure of each funeral, cemetery, and perpetual care trust. Based on the various criteria set forth in the investment policy, the investment advisor recommends investment managers to the trustees. The primary investment objectives for the funeral and cemetery merchandise and service trusts include 1) preserving capital within acceptable levels of volatility and risk and 2) achieving growth of principal over time sufficient to preserve and increase the purchasing power of the assets. Preneed funeral and cemetery contracts generally take several years to mature; therefore, the funds associated with these contracts are often invested through several market cycles.
Historically, the cemetery perpetual care trusts' investment objectives, in accordance with state and provincial regulations, have emphasized providing a steady stream of current investment income with some capital appreciation in order to provide for the maintenance and beautification of cemetery properties. However, during 2016, SCI worked with several state legislatures to adjust laws and regulations to allow for a fixed distribution rate from cemetery perpetual care trusts' assets regardless of the level of ordinary income, similar to university endowments. As a result, beginning in 2017, a significant portion of our cemetery perpetual care trust assets were liquidated and reinvested in a more growth-oriented asset allocation with investment objectives similar to the funeral and cemetery merchandise and service trusts. As of December 31, 2020, the asset allocation is now approximately 60% growth-oriented. We expect this asset allocation shift to enhance asset growth and provide further protection to our customers. Additionally, we expect more states to adopt total return distribution legislation in the coming years.
As of December 31, 2020, approximately 89% of our trusts were under the control and custody of three large financial institutions. The U.S. trustees primarily use four managed limited liability companies (LLCs), one for each merchandise and service trust type and two for the cemetery perpetual care trust type, each with an independent trustee as custodian. Each financial institution acting as trustee manages its allocation of trust assets in accordance with the investment policy through the purchase of the appropriate LLCs' units. For those accounts not eligible for participation in the LLCs or where a particular state's regulations contain other investment restrictions, the trustee utilizes institutional mutual funds that comply with our investment policy or with such state restrictions. The U.S. trusts include a modest allocation to alternative investments. These alternative investments are held in vehicles structured as LLCs and are managed by certain trustees. The trusts that are eligible to allocate a portion of their investments to alternative investments purchase units of the respective alternative investment LLCs.
Investment Structures
The managed LLCs use the following structures for investments:
Commingled Funds. These funds allow the trusts to access, at a reduced cost, some of the same investment managers and strategies used elsewhere in the portfolios.
Mutual Funds. The trust funds employ institutional share class mutual funds where operationally or economically efficient. These mutual funds are utilized to invest in various asset classes including U.S. equities, non-U.S. equities, corporate bonds, government bonds, high yield bonds, and commodities, all of which are governed by guidelines outlined in their individual prospectuses.
Separately Managed Accounts. To reduce the costs to the investment portfolios, the trusts utilize separately managed accounts where appropriate.
Asset Classes
Fixed income investments are intended to preserve principal, provide a source of current income, and reduce overall portfolio volatility. The majority of the fixed income allocation for the trusts is invested in institutional share class mutual funds. Where the trusts have direct investments in individual fixed income securities, these are primarily in government and corporate instruments.
Canadian government fixed income securities are investments in Canadian federal and provincial government instruments. In many cases, regulatory restrictions mandate that the funds from the sales of preneed funeral and cemetery contracts sold in certain Canadian jurisdictions must be invested in these instruments.
Equity investments have historically provided long-term capital appreciation in excess of inflation. The trusts have direct investments in individual equity securities primarily in domestic equity portfolios that include large, mid, and small capitalization companies of different investment styles (i.e., growth and value). The majority of the equity allocation is managed by institutional investment managers that specialize in an objective-specific area of expertise. Our equity securities are exposed to market risk; however, we believe these securities are well-diversified. As of December 31, 2020, the largest single equity position represented less than 1% of the total securities portfolio.
Private equity fund investments serve to provide high rates of return with reduced volatility and lower correlation. These investments are typically long term in duration. These investments are diversified by strategy, sector, manager, and vintage year. The investments consist of numerous limited partnerships, including but not limited to private equity, real estate, energy, infrastructure, transportation, distressed debt, and mezzanine financing. The trustees that have oversight of their respective alternative LLCs work closely with the investment advisor in making all investment decisions.
FORM 10-K 31
PART II
Trust Performance
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Standard and Poor’s 500 Index increased 18.4% and the Barclay’s Aggregate Index increased 7.5%. This compares to the SCI trusts that increased 15.6% during the same year-end period, which have a diversified allocation of approximately 59% equities, 29% fixed income securities, 7% alternative and other investments with the remaining 5% available in cash.
SCI, the trustees, and the investment advisor monitor the capital markets and the trusts on an on-going basis. The trustees, with input from the investment advisor, take prudent action as needed to achieve the investment goals and objectives of the trusts.
Results of Operations - Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Management Summary
In 2020, we reported consolidated net income attributable to common stockholders of $515.9 million ($2.88 per diluted share) compared to net income attributable to common stockholders in 2019 of $369.6 million ($1.99 per diluted share). These results were impacted by certain significant items including:
Years Ended December 31,
2020 2019
(In millions)
Pre-tax gains on divestitures and impairment charges, net $ 7.0 $ 32.9
Pre-tax losses on early extinguishment of debt, net $ (18.4) $ (16.6)
Pre-tax legal settlements $ - $ (6.4)
Tax effect from special items $ 2.6 $ (4.1)
Change in uncertain tax reserves and other income tax adjustments(1)
$ 3.0 $ 10.9
(1) See Note 5 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, for additional information related to change in uncertain tax reserves and other.
In addition to the above items, the growth in the current year can be attributed to higher funeral and cemetery revenue, lower interest expense due to refinancing activities, and the favorable impact of a lower share count in 2020. This growth is slightly offset by increased corporate general and administration expenses related to performance based incentive compensation, legal reserves, and charitable contributions.
Funeral Results
Years Ended December 31,
2020 2019
(Dollars in millions, except average revenue per service)
Consolidated funeral revenue $ 2,052.3 $ 1,923.9
Less: revenue associated with acquisitions/new construction 39.3 9.5
Less: revenue associated with divestitures 1.4 7.0
Comparable(1) funeral revenue
2,011.6 1,907.4
Less: comparable recognized preneed revenue 123.3 139.2
Less: comparable general agency and other revenue 111.3 129.6
Adjusted comparable funeral revenue $ 1,777.0 $ 1,638.6
Comparable services performed 356,603 316,310
Comparable average revenue per service(2)
$ 4,983 $ 5,180
Consolidated funeral gross profit 494.6 372.6
Less: gross profit associated with acquisitions/new construction 11.0 1.3
Less: gross losses associated with divestitures (1.6) (3.9)
Comparable(1) funeral gross profit
$ 485.2 $ 375.2
(1) We define comparable (or same store) operations as those funeral locations owned by us for the entire period beginning January 1, 2019 and ending December 31, 2020.
32 Service Corporation International
PART II
(2) We calculate comparable average revenue per service by dividing comparable funeral revenue, excluding general agency revenue, recognized preneed revenue, and other revenue to avoid distorting our average of normal funeral services revenue, by the comparable number of funeral services performed during the period. Recognized preneed revenue is preneed sales of merchandise that are delivered at the time of sale, including memorial merchandise and travel protection, net, and excluded from our calculation of comparable average revenue per service because the associated service has not yet been performed.
Funeral Revenue
Consolidated revenue from funeral operations was $2,052.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1,923.9 million for the same period in 2019. This $128.4 million, or 6.7%, increase in revenue is primarily attributable to a $29.8 million increase in revenue contributed from acquired and newly constructed properties and a $104.2 million, or 5.5%, increase in comparable funeral revenue as described below. These increases were partially offset by the loss of $5.6 million in revenue contributed by properties that have been subsequently divested.
Comparable revenue from funeral operations was $2,011.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1,907.4 million for the same period in 2019. This $104.2 million increase was primarily attributable to a 12.7% increase in funeral services performed compared to 2019 primarily due to COVID-19 pandemic-related deaths. The increase in funeral services performed comprised a 12.4% increase in funeral services performed by our funeral service locations and a 15.0% increase in cremations performed by our non-funeral home channel.
Average revenue per funeral service decreased 3.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The comparable average revenue per service was negatively impacted by the social distancing effects from the pandemic resulting in fewer and smaller funeral memorial services. Our total comparable cremation rate increased 140 basis points to 58.6% primarily as a result of an increase in direct cremations.
Funeral Gross Profit
Consolidated funeral gross profit increased $122.0 million, or 32.7%, in 2020 compared to 2019. This increase is primarily attributable to a $9.7 million increase in gross profit contributed from acquired and newly constructed properties and an increase in comparable funeral gross profit of $110.0 million, or 29.3%. The comparable funeral gross profit percentage increased 440 basis points to 24.1% as comparable funeral gross profit was positively impacted by growth in higher margin core business activities coupled with more efficient cost structure.
Cemetery Results
Years Ended December 31,
2020 2019
(In millions)
Consolidated cemetery revenue $ 1,459.2 $ 1,306.9
Less: revenue associated with acquisitions/new construction 1.0 0.7
Less: revenue associated with divestitures 0.2 1.4
Comparable(1) cemetery revenue
$ 1,458.0 $ 1,304.8
Consolidated cemetery gross profit $ 482.2 $ 387.9
Less: gross (loss) profit associated with acquisitions/new construction (0.4) 0.1
Less: gross profit associated with divestitures 0.1 0.3
Comparable(1) cemetery gross profit
$ 482.5 $ 387.5
(1) We define comparable (or same store) operations as those cemetery locations owned by us for the entire period beginning January 1, 2019 and ending December 31, 2020.
Cemetery Revenue
Consolidated revenue from our cemetery operations increased $152.3 million, or 11.7%, in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to an increase in comparable cemetery revenue of $153.2 million, or 11.7%. The increase in comparable cemetery revenue was primarily attributable to a $89.8 million, or 10.3%, increase in recognized preneed revenue as a result of strong comparable preneed cemetery property sales production for the period and a $61.1 million, or 18.8%, increase in atneed revenue driven by an increase in burials performed.
Cemetery Gross Profit
Consolidated cemetery gross profit increased $94.3 million, or 24.3%, in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily attributable to the increase in comparable cemetery gross profit of $95.0 million, or 24.5%. Comparable cemetery gross profit increased 340 basis points to 33.1% driven by the increase in comparable cemetery revenue described above coupled with a more efficient cost structure.
FORM 10-K 33
PART II
Other Financial Statement Items
Corporate General and Administrative Expenses
Corporate general and administrative expenses were $141.1 million in 2020 compared to $126.9 million in 2019. Excluding a $6.4 million legal settlement in 2019, corporate general and administrative expenses increased $20.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due to performance-based incentive compensation, legal reserves, and charitable contributions for community outreach efforts.
Gains on Divestitures and Impairment Charges, Net
We recognized a $7.0 million and a $32.9 million net pre-tax gain on asset divestitures and impairments in 2020 and 2019, respectively, primarily as the result of asset divestitures associated with non-strategic funeral and cemetery locations in the United States and Canada partially offset by impairment losses.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased $22.7 million to $163.1 million in 2020 compared to $185.8 million in 2019 primarily due to lower interest rates on our floating rate debt and other debt refinancing activities over the last two years.
Losses on Early Extinguishment of Debt, Net
During 2020, we made aggregate debt payments of $1.4 billion for scheduled and early extinguishment payments. During 2019, we made aggregate debt payments of $1.2 billion for scheduled and early extinguishment payments. Certain of these transactions resulted in the recognition of pre-tax losses of $18.4 million and $16.6 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, recorded in Losses on early extinguishment of debt, net in our Consolidated Statement of Operations.
Provision for Income Taxes
The 2020 consolidated effective tax rate was 22.0%, compared to 20.4% in 2019. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was higher than the federal statutory tax rate of 21% primarily due to state income taxes partially offset by tax benefits from share-based compensation. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was lower than the federal statutory tax rate of 21% primarily due to the reduction in tax liabilities as a result of the expiration of statutes of limitation and higher tax benefits of share-based compensation.
Weighted Average Shares
The diluted weighted average number of our shares outstanding was 179.0 million in 2020, compared to 185.5 million in 2019. The decrease primarily reflects the impact of shares repurchased under our share repurchase program.
Critical Accounting Policies, Recent Accounting Pronouncements, and Accounting Changes
Our consolidated financial statements are impacted by the accounting policies used and the estimates and assumptions made by management during their preparation. See Note 2 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, for more information. Estimates and assumptions affect the carrying values of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the balance sheet date. Actual results could differ from such estimates due to uncertainties associated with the methods and assumptions underlying our critical accounting measurements. The following is a discussion of our critical accounting policies pertaining to revenue recognition, valuation of goodwill, valuation of intangible assets, fair value measurements, and the use of estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when control of the merchandise or services is transferred to the customer. Our performance obligations include the delivery of funeral and cemetery merchandise and services and cemetery property interment rights. Control transfers when merchandise is delivered or services are performed. For cemetery property interment rights, control transfers to the customer when the property is developed and the interment right has been sold and can no longer be marketed or sold to another customer.
On our atneed contracts, we generally deliver the merchandise and perform the services at the time of need. Personalized marker merchandise and marker installation services sold on atneed contracts are recognized when control is transferred to the customer, generally when the marker is delivered and installed in the cemetery.
We also sell price-guaranteed preneed contracts through various programs providing for future merchandise and services at prices prevailing when the agreements are signed. Revenue associated with sales of preneed contracts is deferred until control of the merchandise or the services is transferred to the customer, which is upon delivery of the merchandise or as services are performed, generally at the time of need. On certain preneed contracts, we sell memorialization merchandise, which consists
34 Service Corporation International
PART II
of urns and urn-related products, that we deliver to the customer at the time of sale. Revenue is recognized at the time of delivery when control of the memorialization merchandise is transferred.
For personalized marker merchandise sold on a preneed contract, we will:
•purchase the merchandise from vendors,
•personalize such merchandise in accordance with the customer's specific written instructions,
•either store the merchandise at a third-party bonded storage facility or install the merchandise, based on the customer's instructions, and
•transfer title to the customer.
We recognize revenue and record the cost of sales when control is transferred for the merchandise, which occurs upon delivery to the third-party storage facility or installation of the merchandise at the cemetery.
Pursuant to state or provincial law, all or a portion of the proceeds from funeral and cemetery merchandise or services sold on a preneed basis may be required to be paid into trust funds. We defer investment earnings related to these merchandise and service trusts until the associated merchandise is delivered or services are performed. Fees charged by our wholly-owned registered investment advisor are also included in revenue in the period in which they are earned.
A portion of the proceeds from the sale of cemetery property interment rights is required by state or provincial law to be paid by us into perpetual care trust funds to maintain the cemetery. This portion of the proceeds is not recognized as revenue. Investment earnings from these trusts are distributed to us regularly and recognized in current cemetery revenue.
For more information related to revenue, see Notes 2, 3, and 13 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Valuation of Goodwill
We record the excess of purchase price over the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired in business combinations as goodwill. Goodwill is tested annually during the fourth quarter for impairment by assessing the fair value of each of our reporting units.
Our goodwill impairment test involves certain estimates and management judgment. In the first step of our goodwill impairment test, we compare the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying amount, including goodwill. We determine fair value of each reporting unit using both a market and income approach. The income approach, which is a discounted cash flow method, uses projections of future cash flows and includes assumptions concerning future operating performance and economic conditions that may differ from actual future cash flows. We do not record an impairment of goodwill in instances where the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount. If the aggregate fair value is less than the related carrying amount for a reporting unit, we compare the implied fair value of goodwill to the carrying amount of goodwill. If the carrying amount of reporting unit goodwill exceeds the implied fair value of that goodwill, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess.
For more information related to goodwill, see Notes 2 and 4 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Valuation of Intangible Assets
Our intangible assets include covenants-not-to-compete, customer relationships, trademarks and tradenames, and other intangible assets primarily resulting from acquisitions. Certain of our trademark and tradenames and other intangible assets are considered to have an indefinite life and are not subject to amortization. We test for impairment of intangible assets annually during the fourth quarter.
Our intangible asset impairment tests involve estimates and management judgment. For trademark and tradenames, our test uses the relief from royalty method whereby we determine the fair value of the assets by discounting the cash flows that represent a savings over having to pay a royalty fee for use of the trademark and tradenames. The discounted cash flow valuation uses projections of future cash flows and includes assumptions concerning future operating performance and economic conditions that may differ from actual future cash flows.
For more information related to intangible assets, see Notes 2 and 4 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
FORM 10-K 35
PART II
Fair Value Measurements
We measure the securities held by our funeral merchandise and service, cemetery merchandise and service, and cemetery perpetual care trusts at fair value on a recurring basis. Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We utilize a three-level valuation hierarchy for disclosure of fair value measurements. The valuation hierarchy is based upon the transparency of inputs to the valuation of an asset or liability as of the measurement date. The three levels are defined as follows:
•Where quoted prices are available in an active market, securities held by the trusts are classified as Level 1 investments.
•Where quoted market prices are not available for the specific security, fair values are estimated by using either quoted prices of securities with similar characteristics or an income approach fair value model with observable inputs that include a combination of interest rates, yield curves, credit risks, prepayment speeds, ratings, and tax-exempt status. These securities are classified as Level 2 investments.
•The valuation of other investments requires management judgment due to the absence of quoted market prices, inherent lack of liquidity, and the long-term nature of such assets. These securities are classified as Level 3 investments.
An asset’s or liability’s categorization within the valuation hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. Certain securities held by our funeral merchandise and service, cemetery merchandise and service, and cemetery perpetual care trusts have been classified as Level 3 of the hierarchy due to the significant management judgment required as a result of the absence of quoted market prices, inherent lack of liquidity, or the long-term nature of the securities. For more information related to our fair value measurements, see Notes 2, 3, and 7 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in the United States (GAAP) requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions affect the carrying values of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the balance sheet date. Actual results could differ from such estimates due to uncertainties associated with the methods and assumptions underlying our critical accounting measurements. Key estimates used by management include:
Reserves and Allowances. We provide reserves for credit losses on our receivables. These reserves are based on an analysis of historical trends of collection activity adjusted for current conditions and forecasts. We also record an estimate of general agency revenue that may be canceled in its first year and revenue would be charged back by the insurance company. These estimates are impacted by a number of factors, including changes in the economy and demographic or competitive changes in our areas of operation.
Valuation of trust investments. When available, we use quoted market prices for specific securities. When quoted market prices are not available for the specific security, fair values are estimated by using either quoted market prices for securities with similar characteristics or a fair value model with observable inputs that include a combination of interest rates, yield curves, credit risks, prepayment terms, rating, and tax exempt status. The valuation of certain investments requires significant management judgment due to the absence of quoted market prices, inherent lack of liquidity, and the long-term nature of such assets.
Legal liability reserves. Contingent liabilities, principally for legal matters, are recorded when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Liabilities accrued for legal matters require judgments regarding projected outcomes and a range of loss based on historical experience and recommendations of legal counsel. However, litigation is inherently unpredictable and excessive verdicts do occur. As disclosed in Note 8 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, our legal exposures and the ultimate outcome of these legal proceedings could be material to operating results or cash flows in any given quarter or year.
Depreciation of long-lived assets. We depreciate our long-lived assets ratably over their estimated useful lives. These estimates of useful lives may be affected by such factors as changing market conditions, changes in our expected use, or changes in regulatory requirements.
Amortization of certain intangible assets. We amortize certain intangible assets ratably over their estimated useful lives. These estimates of useful lives may be affected by such factors as contractual terms, changing market conditions, or changes in regulatory requirements.
Valuation of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their fair value and goodwill is recognized for any difference between the price of acquisition and our fair value determination. We have customarily estimated our purchase costs and other related transactions known to us at closing of the acquisition. To the extent that information not available to us at the closing date subsequently became available during the measurement period, we have adjusted our goodwill, assets, or liabilities associated with the acquisition.
Income taxes. We compute income taxes using the liability method. Our ability to realize the benefit of our deferred tax assets requires us to achieve certain future earnings levels. We have established a valuation allowance against a portion of our deferred tax assets, and we could be required to further adjust that valuation allowance in the near term if market conditions
36 Service Corporation International
PART II
change materially and future earnings are, or are projected to be, significantly different than our current estimates. An increase in the valuation allowance would result in additional income tax expense in such period.
As of December 31, 2020, foreign withholding taxes have not been provided on the estimated $298.1 million of undistributed earnings and profits ("E&P") of our foreign subsidiaries as we intend to permanently reinvest these foreign E&P in those businesses outside the United States. However, if we were to repatriate such foreign E&P, the foreign withholding tax liability is estimated to be $14.3 million.
We file income tax returns, including tax returns for our subsidiaries, with federal, state, local, and foreign jurisdictions. We consider the United States to be our most significant jurisdiction; however, all tax returns are subject to routine compliance review by the taxing authorities in the jurisdictions in which we file tax returns in the ordinary course of business.
The federal statutes of limitations have expired for all tax years prior to 2017, and we are not currently under audit by the Internal Revenue Service. Various state jurisdictions are auditing years 2013 through 2018. There are currently no federal or provincial audits in Canada; however, years subsequent to 2015 remain open and could be subject to examination. We believe that it is reasonably possible that the recorded amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits may decrease up to $1.4 million within the next twelve months as a result of concluding various state tax matters.
Retirement plans. Certain retirement plans are frozen with no benefits accruing to participants except interest. Benefit costs and liabilities are actuarially determined based on certain assumptions, including the discount rate used to compute future benefit obligations. Weighted-average discount rates used to determine net periodic benefit cost were 2.98% and 4.15% as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We verify the reasonableness of the discount rate by comparing our rate to the rate earned on high-quality fixed income investments, such as the Moody’s Aa index. See Note 12 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for more information.
Insurance loss reserves. We purchase comprehensive general liability, morticians and cemetery professional liability, automobile liability, and workers’ compensation insurance coverages structured with high deductibles. This high-deductible insurance program means we are primarily self-insured for claims and associated costs and losses covered by these policies. Historical insurance industry experience indicates a high degree of inherent variability in assessing the ultimate amount of losses associated with casualty insurance claims. This is especially true with respect to liability and workers’ compensation exposures due to the extended period of time that transpires between when the claim might occur and the full settlement of such claim, which is often many years. We continually evaluate loss estimates associated with claims and losses related to these insurance coverages falling within the deductible of each coverage. Assumptions based on factors such as claim settlement patterns, claim development trends, claim frequency and severity patterns, inflationary trends, and data reasonableness will generally affect the analysis and determination of the “best estimate” of the projected ultimate claim losses. The results of these evaluations are used to both analyze and adjust our insurance loss reserves.
As of December 31, 2020, reported losses for workers' compensation, general liability, and auto liability incurred during the period May 1, 1991 through December 31, 2020 were approximately $631.1 million over 29.8 years. The fully developed ultimate settlement value estimated was $704.3 million for the same period. Paid losses were $611.5 million indicating a reserve requirement of $92.8 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements and Accounting Changes
For discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and accounting changes, see Note 2 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.