Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In light of the uncertainty in the economy during the COVID-19 global pandemic, the Company undertook several actions to strengthen its financial positions and balance sheet including issuing debt, reducing operating expenses, and prioritizing capital expenditures. While the Company has the ability to continue to take more of these actions, if needed, it also has the ability to borrow under its existing $2.5 million revolving credit facility that matures on January 31, 2023. At December 31, 2020, the Company had no outstanding drawings against the revolving credit facility and had cash of approximately $2.1 million. Overall, the Company believes that the available cash, cash flows generated from future operating activities and borrowing capacity will provide the Company with continued financial viability and adequate liquidity to fund its operations and support its growth. The Company’s cash requirements are subject to change as the business conditions change. As the COVID-19 global pandemic is complex and rapidly evolving, the Company's plans may change. Although the Company saw positive momentum and improved cash generated from operating activities over the second half of 2020, the Company is still unable to predict the duration and severity of this pandemic, which could have a material adverse impact on the Company’s future sales, results of operations, financial position and cash flows, particularly if the global pandemic continues to exist or worsens for a prolonged period of time, or if plans to administer vaccines are delayed. Any such material adverse impacts could result in the Company's inability to satisfy credit facility covenants and could limit the ability to make future borrowings under credit lines.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to our financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The application of these policies requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on a combination of historical experience and reasonable judgment applied to other facts. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and such differences may be material to the financial statements. In addition, the use of different assumptions or judgments may result in different estimates. We believe our critical accounting policies that are subject to these estimates are: Revenue Recognition and Accounts Receivable Reserves, Inventory Valuation, Stock-Based Compensation, Income Taxes and Valuation of Goodwill.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expense during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates, and such differences may be material to the financial statements.
Earnings (Loss) Per Share
The basic computation of loss per share is based on the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the period presented in accordance with ASC 260, "Earnings Per Share”. The computation of diluted earnings per common share is based on the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the period plus the common stock equivalents which would arise from the exercise of stock options and warrants outstanding using the treasury stock method and the average market price per share during the period. Common stock equivalents are not included in the diluted earnings per share calculation when their effect is antidilutive.
Revenue Recognition and Accounts Receivable Reserves
On January 1, 2017, we adopted ASC 606 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” and implemented a new revenue recognition policy. Previously we deferred 100% of revenue and cost of revenue until products are sold by distributors. Under the new policy, we recognize revenue on sales to distributors when shipping of product is completed and title transfers to the distributor, less a reserve for estimated product returns (sales and cost of sales). The reserves are based on estimates of future returns calculated from actual return history, primarily from stock rotations, plus knowledge of pending returns outside of the norm. At December 31, 2020, the deferred revenue and deferred cost on shipments to distributors were approximately $451,000 and $170,000, respectively, compared to approximately $611,000 and $234,000, respectively, at December 31, 2019.
We generally recognize revenues on sales to customers other than distributors upon shipment provided that contract with the customer is identified, performance obligations in the contract are satisfied, and the price is determined. Most of our customers other than distributors do not have rights of return except under warranty.
We earn revenue from an extended warranty service program offered on select products. Revenues from the extended warranty service program are recognized ratably over the life of the extended warranty contract. The amount of unrecognized warranty service revenue is classified as deferred service revenue and presented on our balance sheet in its short and long-term components.
We also earn revenue from services performed in connection with consulting and engineering development arrangements. For those contracts that include contract milestones or acceptance criteria we recognize revenue as such milestones are achieved or as such acceptance occurs. In some instances, the acceptance criteria in the contract requires acceptance after all services are complete and all other elements have been delivered, in which case revenue recognition is deferred until those requirements are met.
We estimate the amount of uncollectible receivables at the end of each reporting period based on the aging of the receivable balance, historical trends, and communications with our customers. If actual bad debts are significantly different from our estimates our operating results will be affected.
Inventory Valuation
Our inventories primarily consist of component parts used to assemble our products after we receive orders from our customers. We purchase or have manufactured the component parts required by our engineering bill of materials. The timing and quantity of our purchases are based on order forecasts, the lead time requirements of our vendors, and on economic order quantities. At the end of each reporting period, we compare our inventory on hand to our forecasted requirements for the next nine-month period and reserve the cost of any inventory that is a surplus, less any amounts that we believe we can recover from disposal of goods or that we specifically believe will be saleable past a nine-month horizon. Our sales forecasts are based upon historical trends, communications from customers, and marketing data regarding market trends and dynamics. Surplus or obsolete inventory can also be created by changes to our engineering bill of materials. Charges for the amounts we record as surplus or obsolete inventory are included in cost of revenue.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for share-based awards to employees, including grants of employee stock options and restricted stocks, in our financial statements based on the grant date fair values of the share-based awards. We use a binomial lattice valuation model to estimate the fair value of stock option grants. The binomial lattice model incorporates calculations for expected volatility, risk-free interest rates, employee exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior, and these factors affect the estimate of the fair value of the stock option grants.
Valuation of Goodwill
In January 2017, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU) 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment. The amendments in this update eliminate Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. The annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test is performed by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. An impairment charge should be recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. In addition, income tax effects from any tax-deductible goodwill on the carrying amount of the reporting unit should be considered when measuring the goodwill impairment loss, if applicable.
The Company tests its goodwill for impairment annually as of September 30th or more frequently when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the Company’s single reporting unit more likely than not exceeds its fair value.
As of September 30, 2020, the Company experienced a triggering event due to a drop in its stock price, which had been negatively impacted by the economic downturn caused by COVID-19 pandemic and performed a quantitative analysis for potential impairment of its goodwill. The Company's fair value measurement approach combines the income approach, which estimates fair value based upon projections of future revenues, expenses, and cash flows discounted to its present value, and market valuation technique. The income valuation technique uses estimates and assumptions including the projected future cash flows, discount rate reflecting the risk attributable to the Company, perpetual growth rate, and projected future economic and market conditions. Under the market approach, the principal assumption included an estimate for a control premium. As a result of the analysis, the Company determined the carrying value exceeded its fair value and recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $4,427,000 at September 30, 2020. No income tax benefit related to this goodwill impairment charge is recorded at September 30, 2020.
Results of Operations for Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Revenue for 2020 was $15.7 million, a decrease of 19% compared to revenue of $19.3 million for 2019. Although we saw positive momentum, which included sales growth during the second half of the year, the negative effects from the COVID-19 global pandemic in the first half of 2020 were material to the Company's operating results. Revenue of Companion SocketScan products represented 65% of our revenue and decreased 9% compared to 2019. Our Companion DuraScan products, which are weatherproof and ruggedized and primarily targeted at commercial, industrial, warehousing and outdoor application and their associated customers, represented about 17% of revenue and decreased 28% compared to 2019. We upgraded all our DuraScan products to support themed field-replaceable battery, increased the durability and added healthcare specific options. Our Attachable scanners, DuraSled and 800 Series, made up of approximately 11% of our 2020 revenue and decreased approximately 29% compared to 2019. In 2020, we expanded our support for Apple devices, and now DuraSled supports iPhone 6, 7, 8, iPhone X series, SE 2020, and the entire iPhone 11 and 12 series.
Gross Margins
Annual gross margins on revenue increased slightly to 53.1% in 2020 from 52.5% in 2019. The improvement in margins was primarily attributed to the reduction in manufacturing overhead, a cost-saving initiative implemented during the year.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expenses in 2020 were approximately $3.1 million, a decrease of 19% compared to expenses of approximately $3.9 million one year ago. Decreases in the level of research and development expense was primarily due to a reduction in employee compensation, a short-term cost saving initiative implemented by the Company to cope with COVID-19 impacts.
Research and Development expenses as a percentage of revenue were 20% in 2020 and in 2019. We believe that a continued commitment to Research and Development activities is essential to maintain or achieve a leadership position for our existing products, to provide innovative new product offerings, and to provide engineering support for key customers. In addition, we consider our ability to accelerate time to market for new products to be critical to our revenue growth. Therefore, we expect to continue to make significant Research and Development investments in the future. The investment percentage is impacted by revenue levels and investing cycles.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expenses in 2020 were approximately $2.8 million, a decrease of approximately 6% compared to $3.0 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a reduction in employee compensation, a short-term cost saving initiative implemented by the Company to cope with COVID-19 impacts.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense in 2020 was $2.3 million, a decrease of 12% compared to $2.6 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a reduction in employee compensation, a short-term cost saving initiative implemented by the Company to cope with COVID-19 impacts.
Interest Expense, net of Interest Income
Interest expense and other, net of interest income and other, was approximately $97,000 in 2020 compared to approximately $101,000 in 2019. Interest expense in 2020 were primarily related to the subordinated convertible notes to related parties and interest on bank term loan and credit line facilities. Interest expense in 2019 was primarily related to interest on bank term loan and credit line facilities (see “NOTE 2 - Bank Financing Arrangements” for more information). Average total outstanding balance of bank term loan and credit lines during 2020 was $0.48 million, compared to $1.49 million during 2019. Additionally, interest expense in each of the comparable periods includes interest on equipment lease financing obligations.
Interest income reflects interest earned on cash balances. Interest income was nominal in each of the comparable periods, reflecting low average rates of return.
Income Taxes
In 2020, the differences between the financial loss and taxable income included the goodwill impairment charge of $4.47 million and stock-based compensation of $0.51 million, partially offset by $1.06 million for PPP loan forgiveness, which arrived a Federal taxable income of $0.29 million. The State taxable income, however, was $1.3 million due to the expenses on which the PPP loan proceeds were spent on are non-deductible in California. No deferred tax expense or benefit was recorded in 2020. In 2019, our stock-based compensation of $519,891 is the primary permanent difference between financial and tax income, which increased our taxable income and the effective tax rate. We recorded a deferred tax expense of $274,000 in 2019 with the expectation of a return to profitable operating results and full utilization of our net operating loss carryforwards. Our net operating loss carryforwards do not begin expiring until the end of 2023 if not used. Our deferred tax asset, primarily representing future income tax savings from the application of net operating loss carry forwards, was valued at $5,507,000 at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table sets forth summary quarterly statements of operations data for each of the quarters in 2019 and 2020. This unaudited quarterly information has been prepared on the same basis as the annual information presented elsewhere herein, and, in our opinion, includes all adjustments (consisting only of normal recurring entries) necessary for a fair presentation of the information for the quarters presented. The operating results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of results for any future period.
We generally ship orders as received and therefore quarterly revenue and operating results depend on the volume and timing of orders received during the quarter, which are difficult to forecast. Historically, we have recognized a substantial portion of our revenue in the last month of the quarter. Operating results may also fluctuate due to factors such as the demand for our products, the size and timing of customer orders, the introduction of new products and product enhancements by us or our competitors, product mix, timing of software enhancements, manufacturing supply shortages, changes in the level of operating expenses, and competitive conditions in the industry. Because our staffing and other operating expenses are based on anticipated revenue, a substantial portion of which is not typically generated until the end of each quarter, delays in the receipt of orders can cause significant variations in operating results from quarter to quarter.
Cash Flows and Contractual Obligations
As reflected in our Statements of Cash Flows, net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 was $0.80 million, compared to $0.87 million in 2019. We calculate net cash provided by operating activities by reducing our net loss ($3.3 million in 2020) or increasing our net income ($0.3 million in 2019) by the expenses, such as our Goodwill impairment charges in 2020, stock-based compensation expense, depreciation, amortization of intangible assets, deferred tax expense, that did not require the use of cash, and by increasing our net loss by the PPP loan forgiveness in 2020. The net amounts were $4.48 million and $1.26 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. In addition, we report increases in assets and reductions in liabilities as uses of cash and decreases in assets and increases in liabilities as sources of cash, together referred to as changes in operating assets and liabilities. In 2020, changes in operating assets and liabilities resulted in a net use of cash of $0.4 million which was primarily due to a decrease of accounts payable and accrued expenses as well as accrued payroll and related expenses, partially offset by decrease in accounts receivable due to reduced levels of shipments in the second half of Q4 2020 compared to Q4 2019. In 2019, changes in operating assets and liabilities resulted in a net use of cash of $0.67 million which was primarily due to the buildup of inventories to support rising sales and to secure long lead time components, and due to increase in accounts receivables driven by higher levels of shipments in the second half of Q4 2019.
In 2020 and 2019, we used $0.5 million and $0.6 million, respectively, in investing activities related to expenditures on production tooling for new products and purchases of computer software and hardware.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $0.89 million in 2020, compared $0.40 million of cash used in financing activities during 2019. Financing activities in 2020 consisted of the receipt of the PPP loan & EIDL loan for $1.21 million and proceeds of $1.43 million from convertible notes payable, partially offset by net $1.41 million paydown of our bank line of credit and a $0.33 million paydown of the bank term loan. Financing activities in 2019 consisted primarily a $0.5 million paydown of the bank term loan.
Our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 are outlined in the table shown below:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303 of Regulation S-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of "Notes to Financial Statements" of this Annual Report for additional information regarding the status of recent accounting pronouncements.