Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations:
The following review of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere within this Report.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This item contains certain non-GAAP financial measures. A “non-GAAP financial measure” is defined as a numerical measure of a company’s financial performance that excludes or includes amounts so as to be different than the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP in the consolidated statements of income, balance sheets or statements of cash flows of the company. Pursuant to the requirements of Regulation G, we have provided a reconciliation below of the non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
The non-GAAP financial measures used are: (1) organic revenue growth (decline), which represents the change in revenue from the prior year excluding estimated currency translation effects, the impacts of acquisitions and divestitures and the impact of the additional week in 2020; and (2) adjusted operating income (loss), which represents operating income (loss) excluding goodwill impairment charges and restructuring costs. These measures are presented because management uses this information to monitor and evaluate financial results and trends. Therefore, management believes this information is also useful for investors.
Financial Summary
Results of Operations
Our reportable segments consist of the Americas segment, the EMEA segment and the Other category. Unallocated corporate expenses are reported as Corporate.
________________________
* Currency translation effects represent the net effect of translating prior year foreign currency revenues using the average exchange rate on a monthly basis during the current year.
** 2020 included 53 weeks of revenue in the Americas and Other category. EMEA ends its fiscal year on the last day of February, so the comparison to the prior year is generally consistent.
The current year results of operations are presented in comparison to the prior year within the sections below. For a discussion of the 2020 results of operations in comparison to 2019, see "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
During 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic, actions taken by various governments and third parties to combat the spread of COVID-19 and the related global economic uncertainty resulted in significant declines in our revenue and orders compared to the prior year. We took a number of actions to conserve capital and reduce our cost structure in response to such events, including significantly reducing salaries in the first half of the year and substantially reducing discretionary spending. By the end of Q2 2021, we restored most of our global salaried workforce to full pay, and in Q2 and Q3 2021, we implemented workforce reductions in the Americas which lowered our annualized costs by approximately $40.
In 2021, our revenue declined 30% compared to the prior year, and we had $43.0 of operating income. The impact of the decline in revenue was partially mitigated by savings from cost reduction actions and lower variable compensation expense, which supported our profitability in 2021 despite the economic challenges faced throughout the year.
We recorded net income of $26.1 and diluted earnings per share of $0.22 in 2021 compared to net income of $199.7 and diluted earnings per share of $1.66 in 2020. In 2021, the results included: (1) a goodwill impairment charge related to the EMEA segment, which had the effect of decreasing net income by $17.6 and diluted earnings per share by $0.15, and (2) restructuring costs in the Americas segment, which had the effect of decreasing net income by $17.4 and diluted earnings per share by $0.15. In 2020, the results included a gain from the sale of PolyVision Corporation ("PolyVision"), which had the effect of increasing net income by $19.7 after taking into account related variable compensation expense and tax benefits. Operating income of $43.0 in 2021 represented a decrease of $214.0 compared to the prior year. The decrease was due to lower revenue across all segments, restructuring costs and the goodwill impairment charge, partially offset by lower operating expenses and overhead costs. Excluding the impact of the restructuring costs and the impairment charge, adjusted operating income decreased by $167.8 compared to the prior year.
Revenue of $2,596.2 in 2021 represented a decrease of $1,127.5, or 30%, compared to the prior year. The decline was broad-based across all segments due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Revenue declined by 31% in the Americas, 24% in EMEA and 38% in the Other category. After adjusting for a $61.5 impact from the divestiture of PolyVision, $48.4 from an additional week in 2020, $23.0 of currency translation effects and $2.2 from an acquisition, the organic revenue decline was $1,042.8 or 29% compared to the prior year. The organic revenue decline was 30% in the Americas, 26% in EMEA and 25% in the Other category.
Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue increased by 280 basis points to 70.2% of revenue in 2021 compared to 2020. Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue increased by 260 basis points in the Americas, 370 basis points in EMEA and 190 basis points in the Other category compared to the prior year. The year-over-year increase was driven by the decrease in revenue and approximately $15 of higher costs related to direct labor and logistics inefficiencies as a result of disruptions and supply chain challenges experienced throughout the year, partially offset by:
•an approximately $47 reduction in overhead costs,
•a $35.0 reduction in variable compensation expense ($4.3 of which related to the gain on the sale of PolyVision in the prior year), and
•pricing benefits.
Operating expenses of $684.2 in 2021 represented a decrease of $274.0 compared to the prior year. The primary drivers of the year-over-year decrease included:
•approximately $112 of lower discretionary spending,
•approximately $69 of lower wage and benefit expenses related to workforce reductions and temporary salary reductions,
•a $69.3 reduction in variable compensation expense ($9.1 of which related to the gain on the sale of PolyVision in the prior year),
•$10.4 related to the additional week in 2020,
•$6.7 of gains from the sale of land in 2021, and
•$6.2 of higher COLI income in 2021.
The year-over-year decrease in operating expenses was partially offset by a $21.0 gain from the sale of PolyVision in 2020. Operating expenses decreased by $206.0 in the Americas, $40.9 in EMEA and $16.7 in the Other category (which had a $20.6 benefit in 2020 from the gain on the sale of PolyVision, net of related variable compensation expense).
We recorded restructuring costs of $28.6 in 2021 in the Americas related to workforce reduction actions taken as a result of reduced demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic. See Note 23 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
Our 2021 effective tax rate was (0.8)% compared to a 2020 effective tax rate of 18.6%. The 2021 rate reflected $11.7 of benefits related to the U.S. Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act") and the non-deductible nature of the $17.6 goodwill impairment charge. The 2020 rate reflected $8.7 of net tax benefits related to the sale of PolyVision and a $3.1 reversal of a valuation allowance in the U.K. See Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Interest Expense, Investment Income and Other Income, Net
Investment income decreased by $4.0 in 2021 compared to the prior year primarily due to lower market interest rates. Miscellaneous income (expense), net in 2021 included a $2.8 gain related to additional proceeds received in 2021 from the partial sale of an investment in an unconsolidated affiliate in 2018.
Business Segment Disclosure
See Note 22 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our business segments.
Americas
The Americas segment serves customers in the U.S., Canada, the Caribbean Islands and Latin America with a comprehensive portfolio of furniture, architectural and technology products marketed to corporate, government, healthcare, education and retail customers through the Steelcase, Coalesse, Smith System, AMQ and Orangebox brands.
________________________
* Currency translation effects represent the net effect of translating prior year foreign currency revenues using the average exchange rate on a monthly basis during the current year.
** 2020 included 53 weeks of revenue.
Operating income in the Americas declined by $143.0 in 2021 compared to the prior year. The 2021 results included $28.6 of restructuring costs. The remaining decrease was driven by lower revenue, partially offset by cost reductions. Excluding the impact of the restructuring costs, adjusted operating income decreased by $114.4 compared to the prior year.
The Americas revenue represented 71.2% of consolidated revenue in 2021. Revenue for 2021 of $1,848.5 represented a decrease of $824.4 or 31% compared to 2020. The decline was driven by reduced industry demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic. After adjusting for the $42.7 impact from the additional week in 2020, $2.2 from an acquisition and $0.8 of currency translation effects, revenue in 2021 declined by $783.1 or 30% on an organic basis compared to the prior year.
Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue increased by 260 basis points to 69.5% of revenue in 2021 compared to the prior year. The year-over-year increase was driven by the decrease in revenue and approximately $14 of higher costs related to direct labor and logistics inefficiencies as a result of disruptions and supply chain challenges experienced throughout the year, partially offset by:
•an approximately $39 reduction in overhead costs,
•$32.3 of lower variable compensation expense, and
•pricing benefits.
Operating expenses decreased by $206.0 in 2021 compared to the prior year. The year-over-year comparison reflected the following:
•approximately $75 of lower discretionary spending,
•$55.3 of lower variable compensation expense,
•approximately $48 of lower wage and benefit expenses related to workforce reductions and temporary salary reductions,
•$7.2 related to the additional week in 2020, and
•$6.7 from gains on the sale of land in 2021.
We recorded restructuring costs of $28.6 in 2021 related to workforce reduction actions taken as a result of reduced demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic. See Note 23 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
EMEA
The EMEA segment serves customers in Europe, the Middle East and Africa primarily under the Steelcase, Orangebox and Coalesse brands, with a comprehensive portfolio of furniture, architectural and technology products.
________________________
* Currency translation effects represent the net effect of translating prior year foreign currency revenues using the average exchange rate on a monthly basis during the current year.
** EMEA ends its fiscal year on the last day of February, so the comparison to the prior year is generally consistent.
EMEA operating results declined by $42.2 in 2021 compared to the prior year. The decrease was driven by lower revenue and a $17.6 goodwill impairment charge related to the Orangebox U.K. reporting unit in Q1 2021, partially offset by lower operating expenses. Excluding the impact of the goodwill impairment charge, the 2021 adjusted operating loss of $14.7 represented a decline of $24.6 compared to the prior year.
EMEA revenue represented 19.7% of consolidated revenue in 2021. Revenue decreased by $158.3 or 24% compared to the prior year. The decrease was broad-based across most markets due to reduced demand from the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by $24.3 of favorable currency translation effects. Adjusted for the currency translation effects, revenue in 2021 declined by $182.6 or 26% on an organic basis compared to the prior year.
Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue increased by 370 basis points to 74.4% in 2021 compared to the prior year. The increase was driven by lower revenue and unfavorable shifts in business mix (which included a higher mix of project business), partially offset by approximately $8 of lower overhead costs.
Operating expenses decreased by $40.9 in 2021 compared to the prior year. The decrease was driven by approximately $21 from lower discretionary spending, approximately $12 of lower wage and benefit expenses primarily related to temporary work hour reductions and $8.2 of lower variable compensation expense.
Other
The Other category includes Asia Pacific and Designtex. Asia Pacific serves customers in Australia, China, India, Japan, Korea and other countries in Southeast Asia primarily under the Steelcase brand with a comprehensive portfolio of furniture, architectural and technology products. Designtex primarily sells textiles, wall coverings and surface imaging solutions specified by architects and designers directly to end-use customers through a direct sales force primarily in North America. In 2020 and 2019, the Other category also included PolyVision which was sold in Q4 2020.
________________________
* Currency translation effects represent the net effect of translating prior year foreign currency revenues using the average exchange rate on a monthly basis during the current year.
** 2020 included 53 weeks of revenue.
Operating income in the Other category decreased by $39.2 in 2021 compared to the prior year, which included a $20.4 benefit from the gain on the sale of PolyVision, net of related variable compensation expense, and a $7.0 negative impact from the PolyVision divestiture. The remaining decrease was driven by lower revenue, partially offset by lower operating expenses.
Revenue in the Other category represented 9.1% of consolidated revenue in 2021. Revenue in 2021 decreased by $144.8 or 38% compared to the prior year. The decrease was driven by lower revenue in both Asia Pacific and Designtex as a result of reduced demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic and a $61.5 impact from the PolyVision divestiture. After adjusting for the impact of the divestiture, $5.7 related to the additional week in 2020 and $0.5 of currency translation effects, the organic revenue decline was $77.1 or 25%, compared to the prior year.
Operating expenses decreased by $16.7 compared to the prior year. The decrease was driven by approximately $14 of lower discretionary spending, an $11.8 impact from the PolyVision divestiture, and approximately $9 of lower wage and benefit expenses related to temporary salary reductions, partially offset by the gain from the sale of PolyVision in Q4 2020, net of related variable compensation expense, of $20.6.
Corporate
Corporate costs include unallocated portions of shared service functions such as information technology, corporate facilities, finance, human resources, research, legal and customer aviation, plus deferred compensation expense and income or losses associated with COLI.
The decrease in operating expenses in 2021 was driven by $6.2 of higher COLI income, approximately $3 of lower discretionary spending, $2.8 of lower variable compensation expense and approximately $2 of lower wage and benefit expenses related to temporary salary reductions and lower discretionary spending, partially offset by a $4.2 increase in deferred compensation expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Cash and cash equivalents are used to fund day-to-day operations, including seasonal disbursements, particularly the annual payment of accrued variable compensation and retirement plan contributions in Q1 of each fiscal year. During normal business conditions, we target a range of $75 to $175 for cash and cash equivalents to fund operating requirements. In addition, we may carry additional liquidity for potential investments in strategic initiatives and as a cushion against economic volatility, and from time to time, we may allow our cash and cash equivalents to temporarily fall below our targeted range to fund acquisitions and other growth initiatives.
As of February 26, 2021, we held $489.8 in cash and cash equivalents. Of that total, 87% was located in the U.S. and the remaining 13%, or $63.5, was located outside of the U.S., primarily in China (including Hong Kong), Mexico, the U.K., Malaysia and India.
COLI investments are recorded at their net cash surrender value. Our investments in COLI policies are intended to be utilized as a long-term funding source for long-term benefit obligations. However, COLI can also be used as a source of liquidity. We believe the financial strength of the issuing insurance companies associated with our COLI policies is sufficient to meet their obligations. See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Availability under credit facilities may be reduced related to compliance with applicable covenants. See Liquidity Facilities for more information.
The following table summarizes our consolidated statements of cash flows:
Cash provided by operating activities
The decrease in cash provided by operating activities in 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to lower net income. Annual payments related to accrued variable compensation and retirement plan contributions, typically made in Q1 each year for the preceding year, totaled $148.0 in 2021 compared to $114.3 in 2020. In 2021, we paid $28.2 related to severance and other separation-related benefits for workforce reductions in our Americas segment which is reflected in the change in employee compensation liabilities. Changes in other operating assets and liabilities in 2021 reflects a net $40.2 increase in income taxes receivable related to the tax loss that we recorded in the U.S. in the current year which can be carried back.
Cash provided by (used in) investing activities
Capital expenditures in 2021 were lower compared to 2020 due to our reduced spending during the COVID-19 pandemic and were primarily related to investments in manufacturing operations, product development and customer-facing facilities. We sold land for proceeds of $7.1 in 2021. Other investing activities included $3.3 of additional proceeds received in 2021 from the partial sale of an investment in an unconsolidated affiliate in 2018. Remaining proceeds from other investing activities primarily relate to COLI policy maturities.
In 2020, we sold PolyVision for net proceeds of $72.6. See Note 21 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Cash provided by (used in) financing activities
We paid dividends of $0.07 per common share in Q1 2021 and dividends of $0.10 per common share in each of Q2 2021, Q3 2021 and Q4 2021. We paid dividends of $0.145 per common share during each quarter in 2020. On March 23, 2021, our Board of Directors declared a dividend of $0.10 per common share to be paid in Q1 2022.
In Q1 2021, we borrowed $250.0 under our global credit facility to provide additional liquidity in light of the uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic. We repaid the full $250.0 borrowed by the end of Q3 2021.
During 2021 and 2020, we made common stock repurchases of $42.7 and $8.7, respectively, all of which related to our Class A Common Stock. These common stock repurchases included repurchases of Class A Common Stock of $4.0 and $4.8 in 2021 and 2020, respectively, which were made to satisfy participants' tax withholding obligations upon the issuance of shares under equity awards, pursuant to the terms of our Incentive Compensation Plan.
As of February 26, 2021, we had $56.4 of remaining availability under the $150 share repurchase program approved by our Board of Directors in 2016.
Capital Resources
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In certain cases, we guarantee completion of contracts by our dealers or other third parties. Due to the contingent nature of guarantees, the full value of the guarantees is not recorded in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We record reserves to cover potential losses related to guarantees when appropriate based upon the applicable accounting guidance. As of February 26, 2021 and February 28, 2020, there were no reserves for guarantees recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of February 26, 2021 were as follows:
Total consolidated debt as of February 26, 2021 was $483.9 which primarily consists of $444.1 in term notes due in 2029 and $37.5 related to a term loan secured by our two corporate aircraft which is due in 2024.
We have commitments related to corporate offices, sales offices, showrooms, manufacturing facilities and equipment under non-cancelable operating leases that expire at various dates through 2031. Minimum payments under operating leases, net of sublease rental income, are presented in the table above.
Committed capital expenditures represent obligations we have related to property, plant and equipment purchases.
Purchase obligations represent obligations under non-cancelable contracts to purchase goods or services beyond the needs of meeting current backlog or production.
Other liabilities represent obligations for foreign exchange forward contracts.
Employee benefit and compensation obligations represent contributions and benefit payments expected to be made for our post-retirement, pension, deferred compensation, defined contribution, severance arrangements and variable compensation plans. Our obligations related to post-retirement benefit plans are not contractual, and the plans could be amended at the discretion of the Compensation Committee of our Board of Directors. We limited our disclosure of post-retirement and pension contributions and benefit payments to 10 years as information beyond this time period was not available. See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
The contractual obligations table above is presented as of February 26, 2021. The amounts of these obligations could change materially over time as new contracts or obligations are initiated and existing contracts or obligations are terminated or modified. We anticipate the cash expected to be generated from future operations and current cash and cash equivalents, funds available under our credit facilities and funds available from COLI will be sufficient to fulfill our existing contractual obligations.
Liquidity Facilities
Our total liquidity facilities as of February 26, 2021 were as follows:
We have a $250.0 global committed bank facility in effect through 2025. As of February 26, 2021, there were no borrowings outstanding under the facility, $3.7 of guarantees which reduced our availability, and we were in compliance with all covenants under the facility.
We have a $12.5 committed credit facility related to a subsidiary, which has current availability of $2.7 based on eligible accounts receivable of the subsidiary. As of February 26, 2021, $1.4 was outstanding under the facility.
The various uncommitted lines may be changed or canceled by the applicable lenders at any time. There were no borrowings outstanding under the uncommitted facilities as of February 26, 2021.
In addition, we have revolving credit agreements of $40.7 which can be utilized to support bank guarantees, letters of credit or foreign exchange contracts. As of February 26, 2021, we had $12.9 in outstanding bank guarantees and standby letters of credit against these agreements. There were no draws against our letters of credit during 2021 or 2020.
Total consolidated debt as of February 26, 2021 was $483.9. Our debt primarily consists of $444.1 in term notes due in 2029 with an effective interest rate of 5.6%. In addition, we have a term loan with a balance as of February 26, 2021 of $37.5. This term loan has a floating interest rate based on 30-day LIBOR plus 1.20% and is due in 2024. The term notes are unsecured, and the term loan is secured by our two corporate aircraft. The term notes and the term loan contain no financial covenants and are not cross-defaulted to our other debt facilities.
See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Liquidity Outlook
At February 26, 2021, our total liquidity, which is comprised of cash and cash equivalents and the cash surrender value of COLI, aggregated to $659.3. Our liquidity position, funds available under our credit facilities and cash generated from operations are expected to be sufficient to finance our known and foreseeable liquidity needs.
Our significant funding requirements include operating expenses, non-cancelable operating lease obligations, capital expenditures, variable compensation and retirement plan contributions, dividend payments and debt service obligations. We have flexibility over some of these uses of cash, including capital expenditures and discretionary operating expenses, to preserve our liquidity position. We expect capital expenditures in 2022 will not exceed $70 as compared to $41.3 in 2021.
During 2021, we took a number of actions to protect our liquidity as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including eliminating travel and events, temporary labor, overtime and scaling back project spending. We maintained these cost reduction efforts through the end of 2021 and have continued to maintain them going into 2022 as we monitor incoming order patterns and as our customers begin to return to their offices, while resuming some project spending to stay invested in our growth initiatives.
On March 23, 2021, we announced a quarterly dividend on our common stock of $0.10 per share, or approximately $12, to be paid in Q1 2022. Future dividends will be subject to approval by our Board of Directors.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Our consolidated financial statements were prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. These principles require the use of estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported and disclosed in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Although these estimates are based on historical data and management’s knowledge of current events and actions it may undertake in the future, actual results may differ from the estimates if different conditions occur. The accounting estimates that typically involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity are listed and explained below. These estimates were discussed with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors and affect all of our segments.
Business Combinations and Goodwill
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is allocated to goodwill. The allocation of the purchase consideration requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. These estimates are reviewed with our advisors and can include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows related to acquired dealer relationships, trademarks and know-how/designs and require estimation of useful lives and discount rates. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable, and as a result, actual results may differ from these estimates. During the measurement period, which is up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings. During 2021, there were no material acquisitions. See Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Annually in Q4, or earlier if conditions indicate it is necessary, the carrying value of each reporting unit is compared to an estimate of its fair value. If the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, the difference is recorded as an impairment charge. Goodwill is assigned to and the fair value is tested at the reporting unit level. In 2021, we evaluated goodwill using eight reporting units: the Americas, Red Thread, EMEA, Asia Pacific, Designtex, AMQ, Smith System and Orangebox U.K.
During Q4 2021, we performed our annual impairment assessment of goodwill in our reporting units. In the test for potential impairment, we measured the estimated fair values of our reporting units using a discounted cash flow (“DCF”) valuation method. The DCF analysis calculated the present value of projected cash flows and a residual value using discount rates that ranged from 8% to 13%. Considerable management judgment is necessary to evaluate the impact of operating changes and to estimate future cash flows in measuring fair value. Assumptions used in our impairment valuations, such as discount rates, forecasted revenue growth rates, expected operating margins and estimated capital investment, are consistent with our internal projections as of the time of the assessment. These assumptions could change over time, which may result in future impairment charges. We corroborated the results of the DCF analysis with a market-based approach that used observable comparable company information to support the appropriateness of the fair value estimates.
In Q1 2021, we recorded a goodwill impairment charge related to the Orangebox U.K. reporting unit. There were no other goodwill impairments recorded for the year ended February 26, 2021. See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
As of February 26, 2021, we had remaining goodwill recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheet as follows:
As of the valuation date, the enterprise value available for goodwill determined as described above is substantially in excess of the underlying reported value of goodwill for all reporting units. See Note 2 and Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Income Taxes
Our annual effective tax rate is based on income, statutory tax rates and tax planning strategies in various jurisdictions in which we operate. Tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective governmental taxing authorities. Significant judgment is required in determining our tax expense and in evaluating tax positions.
We are audited by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service under the Compliance Assurance Process (“CAP”). Under CAP, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service works with large business taxpayers to identify and resolve issues prior to the filing of a tax return. Accordingly, we expect to record minimal liabilities for U.S. Federal uncertain tax positions. Tax positions are reviewed regularly for state, local and non-U.S. tax liabilities associated with uncertain tax positions.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. These assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse. In evaluating our ability to recover deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all positive and negative evidence. These expectations require significant judgment and are developed using forecasts of future taxable income that are consistent with the internal plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying business as of the time of the evaluation. Changes in tax laws and rates could also affect recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future.
Future tax benefits are recognized to the extent that realization of these benefits is considered more likely than not. As of February 26, 2021, we recorded tax benefits from net operating loss carryforwards of $46.1. We also have recorded valuation allowances totaling $3.0 against these assets, which reduced our recorded tax benefit to $43.1. It is considered more likely than not that a $43.1 cash benefit will be realized on these carryforwards in future periods. This determination is based on the expectation that related operations will be sufficiently profitable or various tax, business and other planning strategies will enable us to utilize the carryforwards. To the extent that available evidence raises doubt about the realization of a deferred tax asset, a valuation allowance would be established or adjusted. A change in judgment regarding our expected ability to realize deferred tax assets would be accounted for as a discrete tax expense or benefit in the period in which it occurs.
Additionally, we have deferred tax assets related to tax credit carryforwards of $22.0 comprised primarily of United States foreign tax credits and investment tax credits granted by the Czech Republic. The U.S. foreign tax credit carryforward period is 10 years, and utilization of foreign tax credits is restricted to 21% of foreign source taxable income in that year. We have projected our pretax domestic earnings and foreign source income and expect to utilize $12.9 of excess foreign tax credits within the allowable carryforward period. The carryforward period for the Czech Republic investment tax credits is also 10 years. We have projected our pretax earnings in the Czech Republic and expect to utilize the entire $6.0 of credits within the allowable carryover period. Valuation allowances are recorded to the extent realization of the tax credit carryforwards is not more likely than not.
See Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Pension and Other Post-Retirement Benefits
We sponsor a number of domestic and foreign plans to provide pension, medical and life insurance benefits to retired employees. As of February 26, 2021 and February 28, 2020, the fair value of plan assets, benefit plan obligations and funded status of these plans were as follows:
The post-retirement medical and life insurance plans are unfunded. As of February 26, 2021, approximately 61% of our unfunded defined benefit pension obligations is related to our non-qualified supplemental retirement plan that is limited to a select group of management approved by the Compensation Committee of our Board of Directors and is unfunded. The post-retirement medical and life insurance plans were frozen to new participants in 2003. The non-qualified supplemental retirement plan was frozen to new participants in 2016, and the benefits were capped for existing participants. A portion of our investments in whole life and variable life COLI policies with a net cash surrender value of $169.5 as of February 26, 2021 are intended to be utilized as a long-term funding source for post-retirement medical benefits, deferred compensation and defined benefit pension plan obligations. The asset values of the COLI policies are not segregated in a trust specifically for the plans and thus are not considered
plan assets. Changes in the values of these policies have no effect on the post-retirement benefits expense, defined benefit pension expense or benefit obligations recorded in the consolidated financial statements.
We recognize the cost of benefits provided during retirement over the employees’ active working lives. Inherent in this approach is the requirement to use various actuarial assumptions to predict and measure costs and obligations many years prior to the settlement date. Key actuarial assumptions that require significant management judgment and have a material impact on the measurement of our consolidated benefits expense and benefit obligations include, among others, the discount rate and health care cost trend rates. These and other assumptions are reviewed with our actuaries and updated annually based on relevant external and internal factors and information, including, but not limited to, benefit payments, expenses paid from the plan, rates of termination, medical inflation, regulatory requirements, plan changes and governmental coverage changes.
To conduct our annual review of discount rates, we perform a matching exercise of projected plan cash flows against spot rates on a yield curve comprised of high quality corporate bonds as of the measurement date (the Ryan ALM Top Third curve). The measurement dates for our retiree benefit plans are consistent with the last day in February. Accordingly, we select discount rates to measure our benefit obligations that are consistent with market indices at the end of February.
Based on consolidated benefit obligations as of February 26, 2021, a one percentage point decline in the weighted-average discount rate used for benefit plan measurement purposes would have changed the 2021 consolidated benefit obligations by approximately $16. All obligation-related actuarial gains and losses are amortized using a straight-line method over the average remaining service period of active plan participants.
To conduct our annual review of healthcare cost trend rates, we model our actual claims cost data over a historical period, including an analysis of the pre-65 age group and other important demographic components of our covered retiree population. This data is adjusted to eliminate the impact of plan changes and other factors that would tend to distort the underlying healthcare cost inflation trends. Our initial healthcare cost trend rate is reviewed annually and adjusted as necessary to remain consistent with recent historical experience and our expectations regarding short-term future trends. As of February 26, 2021, our initial rate of 6.00% for pre-age 65 retirees was trended downward by each year, until the ultimate trend rate of 4.50% was reached. The ultimate trend rate is adjusted annually, as necessary, to approximate the current economic view on the rate of long-term inflation plus an appropriate healthcare cost premium. Post-age 65 trend rates are not applicable as our plan provides a fixed subsidy for post-age 65 benefits.
Despite the previously described policies for selecting key actuarial assumptions, we periodically experience material differences between assumed and actual experience. Our consolidated net unamortized prior service credits and net actuarial losses of $0.9 and $21.9, respectively, are recorded in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Forward-Looking Statements
From time to time, in written and oral statements, we discuss our expectations regarding future events and our plans and objectives for future operations. These forward-looking statements discuss goals, intentions and expectations as to future trends, plans, events, results of operations or financial condition, or state other information relating to us, based on current beliefs of management as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, us. Forward-looking statements generally are accompanied by words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “forecast,” “intend,” “may,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” or other similar words, phrases or expressions. Although we believe these forward-looking statements are reasonable, they are based upon a number of assumptions concerning future conditions, any or all of which may ultimately prove to be inaccurate. Forward-looking statements involve a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to vary from our expectations because of factors such as, but not limited to, competitive and general economic conditions domestically and internationally; acts of terrorism, war, governmental action, natural disasters, pandemics and other Force Majeure events, cyberattacks; the COVID-19 pandemic and the actions taken by various governments and third parties to combat the pandemic; changes in the legal and regulatory environment; changes in and availability of raw material, commodity and other input costs; currency fluctuations; changes in customer demands; and the other risks and contingencies detailed in this Report and our other filings with the SEC. We undertake no obligation to update, amend or clarify forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for information regarding recently issued accounting standards.