Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes, and other information that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations, and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under the cautionary note regarding “Forward-Looking Statements” contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Additionally, you should read the “Risk Factors” section of this Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
SecureTech is an emerging growth company focused on developing and marketing personal and automobile security and safety devices and technologies. SecureTech first product, Top Kontrol, is currently being sold in the United States.
Top Kontrol is unlike any other product on the market - it prioritizes the driver and passengers' safety. Not only does Top Kontrol protect your vehicle from unattended theft like other car alarms, but it is the only anti-theft and personal safety device able to thwart an active carjacking attempt without any action by the driver.
Through its advanced design and use of a licensed patent, Top Kontrol can tell the difference between an authorized driver and an unauthorized thief or carjacker using strategically placed sensors in the automobile and a unique FOB device hidden on the authorized driver’s person. Regardless of whether someone tries to steal your vehicle while it is innocently idling unattended in the parking lot or take it by force at gunpoint, Top Kontrol will only allow the unauthorized driver to drive for 15-20 seconds before automatically turning the engine off and preventing any attempt to restart the engine. This prevents the thief from stealing your car and/or allows the driver sufficient time to run to safety after being threatened at gunpoint. SecureTech is not aware of any other product on the market that solves the carjacking problem in the manner of Top Kontrol.
Because Top Kontrol is wired into the automobile’s ignition and lighting systems, it must be installed and serviced by a Top Kontrol Certified Technician.
Limited Operating History; Need for Additional Capital
There is limited historical financial information about us upon which to base an evaluation of our performance. We are an emerging growth business with limited operating history. We cannot guarantee that we will be successful in our business operations. Our business is subject to risks inherent in the establishment of a new business enterprise, including limited capital resources and possible cost overruns, such as increases in marketing costs, increases in administrative expenditures associated with daily operations, increases in accounting and audit fees, and increases in legal fees related to filings and regulatory compliance.
As of December 31, 2020, we had incurred ($347,018) in losses since our inception on March 2, 2017. We have not achieved profitability and expect to continue to incur net losses into subsequent fiscal periods. We expect to incur significant operating expenses and, as a result, will need to generate significant revenues to achieve profitability, which may never occur. Even if we do achieve profitability, we may be unable to sustain or increase profitability on an ongoing basis, which could cause us to go out of business.
To become profitable and competitive, we must successfully sell our current product, Top Kontrol, and continue to innovate and develop new similar personal and automobile security and safety devices and technologies that will be accepted by the marketplace. We anticipate relying on equity sales of our common stock to continue to fund our business operations until we can generate sufficient revenues to cover our operating expenses, which may never happen. Issuances of additional shares will result in dilution to our then existing stockholders. There is no assurance that we will be able to make any additional sales of our equity securities or arrange for debt or other financing to fund our planned business activities. We may also rely on loans from our management or other significant shareholders. However, there are no assurances that management or any of our significant shareholders will provide us with any additional funds in the future.
We are continually exploring new financing sources to meet our need for additional cash, including raising funds through sales of our equity securities and loans. We cannot provide any assurances that our efforts to secure additional financing will be successful. We have no guarantee that future funding will be available to us on acceptable terms. If financing is not available on satisfactory terms, we may be unable to continue, develop, or expand our operations. Further, future equity financing could result in additional and substantial dilution to existing shareholders.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth the results of our operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Sales
Sales for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 were $20,266, compared to $-0- for the same period of 2019. All sales were attributable to Top Kontrol.
Sales for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 were negatively impacted by the continuing COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, we have encountered numerous delays in establishing a group training and certification program necessary to educate and authorize automobile technicians to safely and properly install and repair our Top Kontrol product. It is simply not safe for groups of people to gather within the confines of small interior areas, which are typical of most automobile repair bays where we would typically perform this type of hands-on training.
We were hosting modified COVID-19 aware classes in September 2020 and October 2020, but then it became too cold to continue this revised program. The revised training and certification program was held outdoors in open parking lots.
Participants observed personal COVID-19 safety measures, including sanitizing hands, wearing masks, and maintaining social distancing protocols.
As of March 18, 2021, we are only conducting indoor training sessions in one-on-one situations to minimize the risks related to COVID-19. We hope to resume our outdoor training classes once again in the spring when the snow melts and the weather becomes more conducive to our purposes.
Having a limited number of Top Kontrol Certified Technicians available to install Top Kontrol is significantly restricting the number of customer installations being performed, which is subsequently influencing retail customers to delay purchases until they can have it readily installed in their vehicle.
However, because we did not commence marketing and selling Top Kontrol before this pandemic, we have no historical perspective to quantify or speculate on the extent COVID-19 is having on our sales and overall financial condition.
Cost of Goods Sold
Our cost of goods sold consists primarily of purchasing components and circuitry from various vendors then utilizing third-party contract manufacturing facilities to produce our products, with final assembly conducted at our Minnesota headquarters. Cost of goods sold for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 was $5,882, compared to $-0- for the same period of 2019. As a percentage of overall sales, cost of goods sold was 29.0% during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 was $14,384, compared to $-0- for the same period of 2019. Our gross profit margin was 71.0% during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consisted of two components: general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses. Total operating expenses were $78,825 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $61,286 for the same period of 2019, representing an increase in operating expenses of $17,539, or 28.6%, during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
General and administrative expenses consisted of selling, general and administrative expenses, legal and accounting expenses, and regulatory compliance expenses. During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 our general and administrative expenses were $78,395, compared to $52,281 for the same period of 2019, representing an increase of $26,114, or 50.0%. The increase in general and administrative expenses is the result of higher accounting and regulatory compliance expenses and expenses related to selling Top Kontrol.
Research and development expenses are expenses related to the development and certification of our products. During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 our research and development expenses were $430, which were attributable to a new product under development, which has been temporarily suspended due to COVID-19 travel and local “lock-down” mandates currently in place. Our research and development expenses for the same period of 2019 were $9,005, which were attributable to final development expenses associated with Top Kontrol. The result was a decrease in research and development expenses of ($8,575), or (95.2%). Research and development expenses will continue to vary considerably, depending on the product cycle. Presently, we are developing our second product and expect to incur continued research and development expenses before its commercial release.
Loss From Operations
As a result of the preceding, our loss from operations was ($64,441) during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, compared with ($61,286) for the same period of 2019. This $3,155, or 5.2%, increase in our loss from operations is the result of a significant increase in our general and administrative expenses, which was nearly offset by our sales of Top Kontrol.
Net Loss
As a result of the preceding, our net loss was ($64,441) during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, compared with ($61,286) for the same period of 2019. This $3,155, or 5.2%, increase in our net loss is the result of a significant increase in our general and administrative expenses, which was nearly offset by our sales of Top Kontrol.
Total Stockholders’ Equity.
Our stockholders’ equity was $135,967 as of December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal demands for liquidity are related to our efforts to generate sales, produce inventory, and for expenditures related to sales, regulatory compliance, and general corporate purposes. We intend to meet our liquidity demands, including capital expenditures related to the manufacture of inventory and the expansion of our business, primarily through cash flow provided by operations and sales of our securities.
We rely primarily on internally generated cash flow and available working capital to support operations and growth. As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any credit facilities. Although we believe that our current cash and anticipated cash receipts from Top Kontrol sales will be sufficient to meet our planned working capital requirements and capital expenditures over the next 12 months, we are always exploring additional sources of new capital. Without limiting our available options, future financings will most likely be through the sale of additional shares of our common stock. We may also include warrants, options, and/or rights in conjunction with any future issuances of our common stock. However, we can give no assurance that future financing will be available to us and, if available to us, in amounts or on terms acceptable to us.
We had net working capital of $135,967 as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $1,453, or 1.1%, from net working capital of $134,514 as of December 31, 2019. The ratio of current assets to current liabilities was 49-to-1 on December 31, 2020.
The following is a summary of cash provided by or used in each of the indicated types of activities during the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net cash used in operating activities during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 was ($109,059), an increase of $46,330, or 73.7%, from cash used in operating activities of ($62,831) during the same period of 2019. The increase in cash used in operating activities was primarily attributable to an increase in inventories of $48,993.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 was $65,894, compared to $-0- for the same period of 2019. The increase in cash inflow from financing activities was from our recently closed Series B Private Placement Offering. Through this offering, we sold 439,300 Units for $65,894, or $0.15 per Unit. Each Unit was comprised of the following securities:
Impact of the COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Pandemic
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, which causes the disease known as COVID-19, was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China. Since then, COVID-19 coronavirus has spread globally. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic and the U.S. government-imposed travel restrictions on travel between the United States, Europe, and many other countries worldwide. The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly negatively affected the global economy, significantly disrupted global supply chains, and created a significant disruption of the financial and retail markets, including a substantial disruption and dampening in consumer demand for the automotive industry, including specialty equipment manufacturers such as ourselves.
Because we began manufacturing and selling Top Kontrol during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, we cannot determine, compare, or estimate with any degree of accuracy to what extent the pandemic may be hindering our sales efforts. While we believe this pandemic has had a material impact on our business growth and launching Top Kontrol, we do not have enough operating history to accurately evaluate or quantify the extent this pandemic may have impacted the following areas of our business:
•
Raw material and component supply chains
•
Product sales
•
Training and educating prospective Top Kontrol Certified Technicians
•
Marketing and advertising efficiencies
In addition to the preceding, we believe that sales for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 were negatively impacted by the continuing COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, we have encountered numerous delays in establishing a group training and certification program necessary to educate and authorize automobile technicians to safely and properly install and repair our Top Kontrol product. It is simply not safe for groups of people to gather within the confines of small interior areas, which are typical of most automobile repair bays where we would typically perform this type of hands-on training.
Having a limited number of Top Kontrol Certified Technicians available to install Top Kontrol is significantly restricting the number of customer installations being performed, which is subsequently influencing retail customers to delay purchases until they can have it readily installed in their vehicle.
However, because we did not commence marketing and selling Top Kontrol before this pandemic, we have no historical perspective to quantify or speculate on the extent COVID-19 is having on our sales and overall financial condition.
Uncertainties regarding the economic impact of COVID-19 are likely to result in sustained market turmoil while businesses remain shuttered (or operating at diminished capacity). Many prospective customers remain home under government “lockdown” mandates, guidelines, and a general fear of leaving the safety of their homes, which may also negatively impact our business, financial condition, and cash flows for an unknown length of time.
Uncertainties regarding the economic impact of COVID-19 are likely to result in sustained market turmoil while businesses remain shuttered (or operating at diminished capacity). Many prospective customers remain home under government “lockdown” mandates, guidelines, and a general fear of leaving the safety of their homes, which may also negatively impact our business, financial condition, and cash flows for an unknown length of time.
Going Concern Consideration
Our independent registered public accounting firm has issued a going concern opinion in their audit report dated March 18, 2021, which can be found in our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”)
on March 18, 2021. This means that our auditors believe there is substantial doubt that we can continue as an ongoing business for the next 12 months.
Off-Balance Sheet Operations
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet activities or operations.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
The accompanying financial statements of SecureTech have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America. Because a precise determination of many assets and liabilities is dependent upon future events, the preparation of financial statements for a period necessarily involves the use of estimates which have been made using careful judgment. Actual results may vary from these estimates.
The worldwide spread of COVID-19 has resulted in a global slowdown of economic activity, which is likely to decrease demand for a wide variety of goods and services while also disrupting supply chains, sales channels, marketing activities, and general business operations for an unknown period of time until the disease is contained at local, regional, and worldwide levels. At this point, the extent to which COVID-19 may impact our financial condition or results of operations is uncertain, and as of the date of issuance of these financial statements, we are not aware of any specific event or circumstance that would require us to update our estimates, judgments, or adjust the carrying value of our assets or liabilities. These estimates may change as new events occur and additional information is obtained and is recognized in the financial statements as soon as they become known. Actual results could differ from those estimates and any such differences may be material to our financial statements.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
For purposes of the statement of cash flows, SecureTech considers highly liquid financial instruments purchased with a maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, SecureTech had no cash equivalents.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements” and ASC 825, Financial Instruments, requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. It establishes a fair value hierarchy based on the level of independent, objective evidence surrounding the inputs used to measure fair value. A financial instrument’s categorization within the fair value hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. It prioritizes the inputs into three levels that may be used to measure fair value:
Inventory and Cost of Sales
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or realizable value, using the weighted average cost method. When an impairment indicator suggests that the carrying amounts of inventories might not be recoverable, Management reviews such carrying amounts and estimates the net realizable value based on the most reliable evidence available at that time. An impairment loss is recorded if the net realizable value is less than the carrying value. Impairment indicators considered for these purposes are, among others, obsolescence, decrease in market prices, damage, and a firm commitment to sell.
Net Loss per Share Calculation
Basic net loss per common share is computed by dividing the net loss attributable to common stockholders by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted earnings per shares is computed similar to basic loss per share except that the denominator is increased to include the number of additional common shares that would have been outstanding if the potential common shares had been issued and if the additional common shares were dilutive. SecureTech excludes all potentially dilutive securities from its diluted net loss per share computation since their effect would be anti-dilutive because SecureTech recorded a loss for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Revenue Recognition
Effective January 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASC 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
SecureTech’s primary source of revenue is from the sale of our Top Kontrol product. We began selling Top Kontrol in late April 2020.
Top Kontrol requires installation by a Certified Top Kontrol Technician. To become a Certified Top Kontrol Technician, an automotive technician must complete a one-day hands-on course hosted by SecureTech. Failure to have Top Kontrol installed by a Certified Top Kontrol Technician voids the product’s limited liability warranty.
Because of this professional installation requirement, SecureTech generally sells its products to and through Certified Top Kontrol Technicians and Authorized Dealers. In the instances where SecureTech sells directly to the end-user, product installation is performed by authorized SecureTech personnel.
Revenue is recognized when performance obligations under the terms of a contract with our customers are satisfied. Revenue is recorded net of marketing allowances, volume discounts, and other forms of variable consideration. Generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of our product to the customer and payment has been received. SecureTech does not offer terms or credit to any of its customers.
Revenue Recognition; ASC 606 Five-Step Model
Under ASC 606, SecureTech recognizes revenue from the sale of service contracts by applying the following steps: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when each performance obligation is satisfied.
Revenue Recognition; General Right of Return
Customers are allowed to return goods that are defective (warranty returns). In some instances, customers may be allowed to return a limited number of units for periodic stock adjustment returns. Such stock adjustment returns would be limited to no more than 5% of their total units sold.
As is standard in the industry, we only will accept returns from active customers. If a customer ceases doing business with us, we have no further obligation to accept additional product returns from that customer.
Income Taxes
SecureTech accounts for income taxes pursuant to FASB ASC 740, Income Taxes. Under FASB ASC 740-10-25, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on temporary differences between the bases of certain assets and liabilities for income tax and financial reporting purposes. The deferred tax assets and liabilities are classified according to the financial statement classification of the assets and liabilities generating the differences.
SecureTech maintains a valuation allowance with respect to deferred tax assets. SecureTech establishes a valuation allowance based upon the potential likelihood of realizing the deferred tax asset and taking into consideration SecureTech’s financial position and results of operations for the current period. Future realization of the deferred tax benefit depends on the existence of sufficient taxable income within the carryforward period under the Federal tax laws.
Changes in circumstances, such as SecureTech generating taxable income, could cause a change in judgment about its ability to realize the related deferred tax asset. Any change in the valuation allowance will be included in income in the year of the change in estimate.
Election to Use Extended Transitional Period Under Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (“JOBS Act”)
We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards under Section 102(b)(2) of the JOBS Act, which allows us to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until those standards apply to private companies. As a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
There are various updates recently issued, most of which represented technical corrections to the accounting literature or application to specific industries and are not expected to have a material impact on SecureTech’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.