Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those made, projected or implied in the forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Please see “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for factors that could cause or contribute to such differences.
Overview
We are a dedicated contract development and manufacturing organization, or CDMO, solving complex formulation and manufacturing challenges for companies developing oral solid dose drug products. We leverage our formulation and development expertise to develop and manufacture pharmaceutical products using proprietary delivery technologies and know-how for partners who develop and commercialize or plan to commercialize these products. In 2020, we launched our clinical trials support services capabilities, which includes preparation of clinical trial supplies, as well as specialized services dedicated to the development and Good Manufacturing Practices, or GMP, of high-potency products. We operate a 97,000 square foot, DEA-licensed manufacturing facility in Gainesville, Georgia, as well as a 24,000 square foot development, high-potency product and clinical packaging facility in Gainesville, Georgia that we opened in October 2018. We currently develop and/or manufacture the following key products with our key commercial partners: Ritalin LA®, Focalin XR®, Verelan PM®, Verelan SR®, Verapamil PM and Verapamil SR, as well as supporting development stage products.
Our manufacturing and development capabilities include formulation, product development from formulation through clinical trial and commercial manufacturing, and specialized capabilities for solid oral dosage forms, extended release and controlled substance manufacturing, as well as high potency development and manufacturing. In a typical collaboration, we work with our partners to develop product candidates, or new formulations of existing product candidates, and may license certain intellectual property to such partners. We also typically exclusively manufacture and supply clinical and commercial supplies of these proprietary products and product candidates.
We have used cash flow generated by our business primarily to fund the growth of our CDMO business, fund our historical Acute Care business, which was spun off in November 2019, and to make payments under our credit facility. We believe our business will continue to contribute cash to fund our growth, make payments under our credit facility and other general corporate purposes.
Our consolidated results of operations and financial position included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K reflect the financial results of Baudax Bio as a discontinued operation for all periods presented. For additional information on the spin-off of Baudax Bio please read note 3 to our consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
COVID-19
We continue to closely monitor developments related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which continues to have adverse effects on the U.S. and world economies, including the commercial activities of our customers and their peers. While we are committed to continue providing essential pharmaceutical products to our customers, we are also taking all necessary measures to protect the health and safety of our employees. These developments include:
Operations. We have instituted protocols to have appropriate personnel work remotely and have implemented strict social distancing and other protective measures for those employees continuing to support essential operations at our work locations in order to ensure the health of our employees while continuing to provide critical products. Our sales, manufacturing and development efforts have continued since the outbreak of the pandemic. Our cost of sales has increased as a percentage of revenues in part due to lower commercial manufacturing volumes, and the related impact on fixed costs expensed through cost of sales, despite making reductions in the work force and implementing cost saving measures. There are also some incremental expenses associated with safe practices for our organization due to COVID-19.
Business Development. We have experienced lower than expected new development business growth, which we believe is primarily attributable to COVID-19. Concerns surrounding COVID-19 have resulted in our adoption of new methods for meeting and contacting customers, have slowed customer access, and have caused delays in plans for development services by some customers and prospects for a variety of reasons, such as concerns about the timing of clinical trials.
Manufacturing Demand. We believe that there has been lower end-user demand for some of the commercial products we manufacture for our customers due to the effects of COVID-19. Third party national data demonstrates that there has been a meaningful impact of COVID-19 on the reduction of total prescriptions filled by patients across most therapeutic areas, including chronic cardiovascular and pediatric medications.
Our sales and manufacturing operations have been disrupted as a result of the pandemic because of production slowdowns, stoppages, or decreased demand for the products we manufacture, and we expect such disruptions to continue through at least the first half of 2021. Given the uncertain scope and duration of the pandemic, the extent to which the pandemic will continue to impact our financial results remains uncertain in terms of manufacturing volumes and certain profit sharing results, even when our partners have not experienced loss of market share, in part due to reduced total prescription (TRx) rates for many chronic therapeutics. However, we will continue to monitor the situation closely, we have taken steps to reduce costs and drive more new business, and we are actively evaluating various ways to further conserve operational resources.
Financial Overview
Recent Developments
Some recent developments have occurred that have impacted and are expected to continue to impact full year expected results, including:
•
Third party data has shown a decrease in prescriptions filled during COVID-19 during 2020 for a number of the commercial products we manufacture for our customers. We continue to see the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in lower end-user demand for our manufacturing services and inventory rebalancing by our commercial partners with respect to these products, especially since the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impacts are not predictable at this time.
•
With regard to the previously reported return to the market of a competitor to one of our key customers for certain product strengths that had previously been out of the market, this product has recovered to an observed percentage of approximately 50% market share. While total unit volumes have declined during COVID-19, relative market share has remained steady for both parties. This has negatively impacted both anticipated manufacturing volumes and profit sharing for this key customer.
•
We received notification reported in the first quarter of 2020 from two of our customers of discontinuations for two commercial product lines. These discontinuances decreased revenues by approximately $5.7 million for 2020 compared to 2019, and we anticipate decreases in revenue of approximately $5 to $7 million for 2021 compared to 2020 related to these product discontinuances.
•
We have experienced slower than expected new project starts, which we believe is primarily attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic. Concerns surrounding COVID-19 have resulted in delays in plans for development services by some customers and prospects for a variety of reasons, such as concerns about timing of clinical trials, etc.
As a result of these recent events, we implemented operating improvement initiatives including two separate reduction in force actions during the first half of 2020 as well as other initiatives. We estimate that these initiatives will provide an annual savings of approximately $3.4 million in fiscal year 2021. Additional cost saving measures continue to be assessed.
Revenues
During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we recognized revenues from three revenue streams: manufacturing revenue, profit-sharing revenue and research and development revenue.
Manufacturing revenue
We recognize manufacturing revenue from the sale of products we manufacture for our commercial partners. Manufacturing revenues are recognized upon transfer of control of a product to a customer, generally upon shipment, based on a transaction price that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to as specified in the agreement with the commercial partner, which could include pricing and volume-based adjustments.
Profit-sharing revenue
We recognize profit-sharing or royalty revenue, collectively referred to as profit-sharing revenue, related to the sale of products by our commercial partners that incorporate our technologies. Profit-sharing revenues are generally recognized under the terms of the applicable license, development and/or supply agreement. For arrangements that include sales-based profit-sharing and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the profit-sharing relates, we recognize revenue when the related sales occur by the commercial partner. For arrangements that include sales-based profit-sharing and the license is not deemed to be the predominant item to which the profit-sharing relates, we recognize revenue when the performance obligation to which the profit-sharing has been allocated has been satisfied, which is upon transfer of control of a product to a customer. In these cases, significant judgment is required to calculate the estimated variable consideration from such profit-sharing using the expected value method based on historical commercial partner pricing and deductions. Estimated variable consideration is partially constrained due to the uncertainty of price adjustments made by our commercial partners, which are outside of our control. Factors causing price adjustments by our commercial partners include increased competition in the products’ markets, mix of volume between the commercial partners’ customers, and changes in government pricing.
Research and development revenue
Research and development revenue includes services associated with formulation, process development, clinical trial material and clinical trial support services, as well as custom development of manufacturing processes and analytical methods for a customer’s non-clinical, clinical and commercial products. Such revenues are recognized at a point in time or over time depending on the nature and particular facts and circumstances associated with the contract terms.
In contracts that specify milestones, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. Milestone payments related to arrangements under which we have continuing performance obligations are deferred and recognized over the period of performance. Milestone payments that are not within our control, such as submission for approval to regulators by a commercial partner or approvals from regulators, are not considered probable of being achieved until those submissions are submitted by the customer or approvals are received.
In contracts that require revenue recognition over time, we utilize input or output methods, depending on the specifics of the contract, that compare the cumulative work-in-process to date to the most current estimates for the entire performance obligation. Under these contracts, the customer typically owns the product details and process, which have no alternative use. These projects are customized to each customer to meet its specifications and typically only one performance obligation is included. Each project represents a distinct service that is sold separately and has stand-alone value to the customer. The customer also retains control of its product as the product is being created or enhanced by our services and can make changes to its process or specifications upon request.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred for our product and formulation development activities, including regulatory support. We expense research and development costs as incurred. Advanced payments for good and services that will be used in future research and development activities are initially recorded as prepaid expenses and expensed as the activity is performed or when the goods have been received. In 2018, these costs included salaries and related costs for personnel in research and development and regulatory functions. In the fourth quarter of 2018, we shifted the focus of these personnel to revenue-generating activities and, as such, these costs are included as a cost of sales beginning in the fourth quarter of 2018.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consists of salaries and related costs for corporate administrative, public company costs, business development personnel as well as legal, patent-related expenses and consulting fees. Public company costs include compliance, auditing services, tax services, insurance and investor relations. A significant portion of these public company costs related to a more complex organization with multiple segments in 2018 and 2019. These costs were lower in 2020 and are expected to remain lower in future periods, excluding non-cash expenses and new initiatives.
We expect our business development expenses to increase in 2021 as we continue to expand our sales team in various geographies, in anticipation of business growth from new formulation and development capabilities.
Amortization of intangible assets
We recognize amortization expense related to the intangible asset for our contract manufacturing relationships on a straight-line basis over an estimated useful life of six years.
Change in fair value of warrants
We have classified as liabilities certain warrants that contained a contingent net cash settlement feature upon a change in control. The fair value of these warrants was remeasured through settlement or expiration with changes in fair value recognized within the consolidated statements of operations. All remaining liability classified warrants were exercised in November 2019. A fair value determination at the time of the exercise occurred and is included in the change in warrant valuation for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest expense
Interest expense for the periods presented primarily relates to our Athyrium senior secured term loans, the amortization of related financing costs and interest expense on a promissory note with PNC Bank under the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP, of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act of 2020, collectively the PPP Loan.
Net operating losses and tax carryforwards
As of December 31, 2020, we had federal and state net operating loss carry forwards of approximately $130.6 million and $127.4 million, respectively. We also had federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $4.4 million available to offset future taxable income. U.S. tax laws limit the time during which these carryforwards may be utilized against future taxes. With the exception of the 2020, 2019, and 2018 federal net operating losses, which have an indefinite carry forward period, these federal and state net operating loss and federal and state tax credit carryforwards will begin to expire at various dates beginning in 2028, if not utilized. We believe that it is more likely than not that the deferred income tax assets associated with our U.S. operations will not be realized, and as such, there is a full valuation allowance against our U.S. deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue. The decrease of $32.7 million was primarily the result of customer ordering patterns in the prior year and the loss of Verapamil SR market share by a commercial partner in the first quarter of 2020 due to the re-entry of a competitor. Our commercial partner has sustained its market position for Verapamil SR capsules since the end of the first quarter of 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in decreased end-user demand, inventory rebalancing by our commercial partners and slower than expected new business starts. In addition, revenue declined due to the discontinuation of two commercial product lines by our commercial partners. Higher revenues from our clinical trial materials new business growth activities has partially offset the decrease, including a significant new commercial product tech transfer project.
Cost of sales. The increase of $3.1 million was not proportionate to the decrease in revenue primarily due to lower commercial manufacturing volumes and the related impact on fixed costs expensed through cost of sales, despite making reductions in the work force and implementing cost saving measures. Cost savings generated from these activities are expected to continue into 2021. Further contributing to cost of sales was increased cost of development sales on higher clinical trial material new business revenues.
Selling, general and administrative. The decrease of $1.8 million was primarily related to lower public company costs, which were partially offset by our new business efforts and the addition of the clinical trial support services to our early GMP offering in the second quarter of 2020.
Amortization of intangible assets. Amortization expense was $2.6 million for both periods, which was related to the amortization of the CDMO royalties and contract manufacturing relationships intangible asset over its estimated useful life.
Change in warrant valuation. Previously, certain warrants were outstanding whose fair value was remeasured each period with changes in fair value recognized in earnings. The last of those warrants were exercised in November 2019.
Interest expense. The increase of $0.2 million was primarily due to additional term loan borrowings under the Credit Agreement with Athyrium in the first quarter of 2019 offset by a decrease in the LIBOR base rate of interest on our term loans under the Credit Agreement.
Discontinued operations. In November 2019, our former Acute Care business was spun-out from us through our former wholly-owned subsidiary, Baudax Bio. As a result, that business’s results are included in the 2019 period but not the 2020 period.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Revenue. The increase of $21.9 million was primarily due to increased profit-sharing royalties recognized from one of our commercial partners and an increase in product sales to various commercial partners.
Cost of sales. The increase of $7.8 million was primarily due to product mix and expanded service and development capabilities as well as growth in manufacturing demand.
Research and development. There were no research and development expenses in 2019. Our research and development expenses were $4.4 million in 2018. In the fourth quarter of 2018, we shifted the focus of our development activities to support revenue generating activities and therefore such costs are now included in cost of sales above.
Selling, general and administrative. The increase of $5.6 million was primarily due to higher public company costs (including corporate initiatives), which increased by $4.1 million to $16.3 million in 2019 compared to $12.2 million in 2018. The remaining $1.5 million increase was driven by higher business development costs, as we expanded our sales team in various geographies in anticipation of business growth from new formulation and development capabilities.
Amortization of intangible assets. Amortization expense was $2.6 million for both periods, which was related to the amortization of the CDMO royalties and contract manufacturing relationships intangible asset over its estimated useful life.
Interest expense. The increase in interest expense was due to a higher principal balance on our Athyrium senior secured term loan and amortization of the related financing costs.
Income tax expense. As a result of recording a full valuation allowance, there was no income tax provision or benefit for 2019. For 2018, the income tax expense reflects the recording of a full valuation allowance in the fourth quarter of 2018. As discussed in note 15 to the consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that it is more likely than not that the deferred income tax assets associated with our U.S. operations will not be realized, and as such, there is a full valuation allowance against our U.S. deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, we had $23.8 million in cash and cash equivalents.
Since our inception, we have financed our operations and capital expenditures primarily from the issuance of equity and debt. During 2020, our capital expenditures were $7.6 million to scale and support our expansion of capabilities.
We are party to a credit agreement with Athyrium, or the Credit Agreement, which has been fully drawn. The Credit Agreement was recently amended on February 19, 2021 and currently requires us to repay the outstanding principal amount of $100.0 million on March 31, 2023. The amendment also changes certain other terms and covenants that allow the Company to pursue additional acquisitions and ease certain requirements surrounding the financial covenants. Additional details about the Credit Agreement and the recent amendment are provided in notes 10 and 18 to the consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We are party to a $3.3 million PPP Note which has a two-year term and matures on May 12, 2022. On October 6, 2020, we applied for forgiveness of the PPP Note and expect the full balance of the note to be forgiven during the first half of 2021, which would result in a $3.3 million gain on extinguishment of debt being recognized in earnings. However, no assurance can be given that the balance of the PPP Note will be forgiven, in part or in whole. Additional details are provided in note 10 to the consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We are also party to an amended common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital Fund LLC, or Aspire Capital. The amended agreement provided that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations set forth in the agreement, Aspire Capital was committed to purchase, at the Company’s sole election, up to an aggregate of $30.0 million or 4.7 million of additional shares of common stock. As of December 31, 2020, all available shares have been sold under the agreement. See note 11 to the consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
We may require additional financing and if we do, we may raise such additional funds through debt refinancing, bank or other loans, through strategic development, licensing activities, sale of assets and/or marketing arrangements or through public or private sales of equity or debt securities from time to time. Financing may not be available on acceptable terms, or at all, and our failure to raise capital when needed could materially adversely impact our growth plans and our financial condition or results of operations. Further, our ability to access capital market or otherwise raise capital may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Additional debt or equity financing, if available, may be dilutive to the holders of our common stock and may involve significant cash payment obligations and covenants that restrict our ability to operate our business or access to capital.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Continuing operations
Cash flows from operating activities during all three years represents our income or loss from continuing operations as adjusted for stock-based compensation, depreciation, non-cash interest expense, changes in fair value of warrants and amortization of intangibles, as well as changes in operating assets and liabilities. The decrease in cash flows from operations was primarily due to the increase in our net loss from continuing operations, partially offset by cash provided by decreases in accounts receivable, our contract assets and inventory due to lower revenue levels.
Net cash used in investing activities for each of the three years primarily relates to capital expenditures to scale and support our expansion of capabilities. Net cash used in investing activities for 2019 and 2018 also included offsetting purchases and maturities of short-term investments.
Net cash provided by financing activities included:
•
During 2020, net proceeds of $11.1 million from issuance of common stock through our common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital and $4.4 million from a PPP Note, offset by a $1.1 million repayment of the PPP Note, partially offset by $10.1 million to repay term loans with Athyrium and $1.1 million to pay employee tax withholdings upon vesting of equity awards.
•
During 2019, net proceeds of $43.6 million from issuance of term loans with Athyrium and $6.0 million from the exercise of options, partially offset by the contribution of $19.0 million to Baudax Bio in connection with the Separation, payment of $2.9 million of financing costs related to the issuance of term loans with Athyrium and $1.7 million to pay employee tax withholdings upon vesting of equity awards.
•
During 2018, proceeds of $10.0 million from issuance of terms loans with Athyrium, $17.0 million from issuance of common stock through our common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital and $1.8 million from the exercise of options, partially offset by $1.0 million to pay financing costs related to the issuance of term loans with Athyrium.
Discontinued operations
Net cash used in discontinued operations during 2020 was used to settle outstanding liabilities related to our Acute Care business and for 2019 and 2018 was used primarily to fund the research activities of our former Acute Care business.
Forward-looking factors
Our future use of operating cash and capital requirements will depend on many forward-looking factors, including the following:
•
the extent to which we in-license, acquire or invest in products, businesses and technologies;
•
the timing and extent of our manufacturing and capital expenditures;
•
our ability to maintain or expand our relationships and contracts with our commercial partners;
•
our ability to grow and diversify our business with new customers, including our ability to meet desired project outcomes with development customers;
•
our ability to regain profitability;
•
our ability to comply with stringent U.S. & foreign government regulation in the manufacture of pharmaceutical products, including cGMP and U.S. DEA requirements;
•
our ability to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or sale of certain assets;
•
the costs of preparing, submitting and prosecuting patent applications and maintaining, enforcing and defending intellectual property claims; and
•
the extent to which health epidemics and other outbreaks of communicable diseases, including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, could disrupt our operations or materially and adversely affect our business and financial conditions.
We might use existing cash and cash equivalents on hand, additional debt, equity financing, sale of assets or out-licensing revenue or a combination thereof to fund our operations or acquisitions. If we increase our debt levels, we might be restricted in our ability to raise additional capital and might be subject to financial and restrictive covenants. Our shareholders may experience dilution as a result of the issuance of additional equity or debt securities. This dilution may be significant depending upon the amount of equity or debt securities that we issue and the prices at which we issue any securities.
Contractual Commitments
The table below reflects our contractual commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Debt obligations consist of principal, an exit fee of 1% of that principal, and interest on $116.0 million of outstanding term loans under our credit facility with Athyrium in addition to principal and interest on $3.3 million of outstanding borrowings under the PPP Note. Because the Athyrium term loans bear interest at a variable rate based on LIBOR, we estimated future interest commitments utilizing the LIBOR rate as of December 31, 2020. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, the future interest obligations are not recorded on our consolidated balance sheet.
(2)
Purchase obligations consist of cancelable and non-cancelable purchase commitments related to inventory, capital expenditures and other goods or services. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, these obligations are not recorded on our consolidated balance sheets.
(3)
We are party to a seven-year operating lease for a development facility in Georgia that ends in 2025. See note 16 to the consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(4)
We have entered into employment agreements with certain of our named executive officers. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, these potential obligations are not recorded on our consolidated balance sheet. See note 9 to the consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We have determined that certain accounting policies and estimates are critical to the preparation of the financial statements. We have prepared the following additional disclosures to supplement our summary of significant accounting policies located in note 2 to the consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue recognition for variable consideration in sales-based profit-sharing arrangements
For sales-based profit-sharing where the license for intellectual property is not deemed to be the predominant item to which the profit-sharing relates, we recognize revenue upon transfer of control of the manufactured product. In these cases, significant judgment is required to calculate the estimated variable consideration from such profit-sharing using the expected value method based on historical commercial partner pricing and deductions.
We are required to exercise significant judgment to estimate the value of the variable consideration, which we partially constrain due to the uncertainty of price adjustments made by our commercial partners, which are outside of our control. Factors causing price adjustments by our commercial partners include increased competition in the products’ markets, mix of volume between the commercial partners’ customers, and changes in government pricing. If we were to increase or decrease the percentage value of the constraint by 5%, we would recognize a corresponding decrease or increase, respectively, to revenue and earnings of $0.5 million.
Impairment of goodwill
We are required to review, on an annual basis, the carrying value of goodwill to determine whether impairment may exist. The impairment analysis for goodwill consists of an optional qualitative assessment potentially followed by a quantitative analysis. If we determine that the carrying value of our reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment charge to goodwill is recorded for the excess.
The critical judgments involved in our annual qualitative test include an assessment of unfavorable events and a judgment whether those events put our goodwill at risk of impairment, which if determined to be at risk would require us to perform a quantitative test. The critical judgments and estimates in our quantitative test include selection and weighting of available valuation methods and the selection of assumptions that may be used in those methods.
In 2020, we concluded qualitatively that our goodwill was not at risk of impairment due to the substantial excess of fair value over the carrying value of our reporting unit that we observed in prior period quantitative testing. The carrying value of our goodwill was $4.3 million at December 31, 2020. Any changes to our judgments or estimates could result in a goodwill impairment of up to that amount in a future period.
Impairment of long-lived assets
We are required to review the carrying value of long-lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment or amortizable intangible assets, for recoverability whenever events occur or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of individual assets or asset groups may not be recoverable.
Assumptions and estimates used in the evaluation of impairment are subjective, and changes in these assumptions may negatively impact projected undiscounted cash flows, which could result in impairment charges in future periods. On an ongoing periodic basis, we evaluate our long-lived assets for indicators of impairment such as economic, governmental or regulatory events.
In 2020, we received notification from a commercial partner of a discontinuation of a commercial product line. As a result of this event, we recognized $966 of impairment expense related to property, plant and equipment associated with that product line.