ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere herein.
Critical Accounting Policies
The consolidated financial statements of PowerVerde, Inc. are prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires our management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that effect the amounts reported in the financial statements and related notes. Future events and their effects cannot be determined with absolute certainty. Therefore, the determination of estimates requires the exercise of judgment. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect its more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue from royalties and assembly services with a related party are unrelated to our planned operations. Royalties are recognized as earned in the period the sales to which the royalties relate occur. Manufacturing assembly services with a related party are recognized as revenue when the assembled product is shipped to the customer. Revenues recognized under these agreements amount to 100% of total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Common Stock Purchase Warrants
The Company accounts for common stock purchase warrants in accordance with ASC Topic 815- 40, Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (“ASC 815-40”). Based on the provisions of ASC 815- 40, the Company classifies as equity any contracts that (i) require physical settlement or net-share settlement, or (ii) gives the Company a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in its own shares (physical settlement or net-share settlement). The Company classifies as assets or liabilities any contracts that (i) require net-cash settlement including a requirement to net cash settle the contract if an event occurs and if that event is outside the control of the Company), or (ii) give the counterparty a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in shares (physical settlement or net-share settlement). All outstanding warrants as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, were classified as equity.
Intellectual Property
	The Company reviews intangible assets with finite lives for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The Company uses an estimate of the undiscounted cash flows over the remaining life of its long-lived assets, or related group of assets where applicable, in measuring whether the assets to be held and used will be realizable. In the event of impairment, the Company would discount the future cash flows using its then estimated incremental borrowing rate to estimate the amount of the impairment. 	
Stock-based compensation.
We account for stock-based compensation based on ASC Topic 718-Stock Compensation which requires expensing of stock options and other share-based payments based on the fair value of each stock option awarded. The fair value of each stock option is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. This model requires management to estimate the expected volatility, expected dividends, and expected term as inputs to the valuation model.
Overview
From January 1991 until October 2005, the Company devoted substantially all of its efforts and resources to research and development related to its unsuccessful Biotech Business, in particular the study of biological oxidation and antioxidation directed to the development of potential therapeutic products for the treatment of various diseases and conditions. In the most recent years, the Company’s research focused mainly on targeted antioxidant therapeutics and nutraceuticals. The Company is a development stage company, has never generated any substantial revenue from product sales and has relied primarily on equity financing, licensing revenues, and various debt instruments for its working capital. The Company has been unprofitable since its inception.
Following the cessation of material Biotech Business operations in October 2005, the Company turned its primary focus to seeking an appropriate merger partner for its public shell. This resulted in the February 2008 Merger with Vyrex. In March 2009, we assigned most of our Biotech intellectual property other than our rights under existing licensing agreements (the “Biotech IP”) to an investor in exchange for his agreement to pay all future expenses relating to the Biotech IP and to pay us 20% of any net proceeds received from future sale and/or licensing of the Biotech IP. We do not expect this arrangement to generate material revenues.
Since the Merger, we have focused on the development and testing of our electric power systems, and since 2008 we have focused on their applicability to thermal and formerly natural gas pipeline operations. We have abandoned the pipeline opportunities in terms of focusing on the thermal applications. The Company’s business is subject to significant risks, including the risks inherent in our research and development efforts, uncertainties associated with obtaining and enforcing patents and intense competition. See “Risk Factors.”
Except as specifically noted to the contrary, the following discussion relates only to PowerVerde since, as a result of the Merger, the only historical financial statements presented for the Company in periods following the Merger are those of the operating entity, PowerVerde.
Results of Operations
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
We had no revenues in 2020 other than $40,000 from assembly revenues under the assembly agreement with our one customer, Liberty Plugins Inc. In 2019, we generated $24,000 in assembly revenues. In both years, we had substantial expenses due to our ongoing research and development activities and efforts to commercialize our systems, as well as substantial administrative expenses associated with our status as a public company. Our research and development expenses decreased by $104,360 (47.7%) in 2020 compared to 2019, and our general and administrative expenses increased by $106,295 (48.9%). The increase in general and administrative expenses is primarily due to the increase in legal fees and employee salaries. Our interest expense increased by $101,986 (306%) due to the higher balance of notes outstanding in 2020. Our net loss increased by 3.6% in 2020. Substantial net losses will continue until we are able to successfully commercialize and market our systems, as to which there can be no assurance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations since inception principally through the sale of debt and equity securities. Also, from 2012-18 we received material amounts of Biotech IP licensing fees. As of December 31, 2020, we had a working capital deficit of $237,593 as compared to a working capital deficit of $63,638 as of December 31, 2019. This decrease in working capital is due primarily to increased operating expenses financed through related and nonrelated party convertible notes payable.
Our Biotech IP license agreement expired in March 2018 due to the expiration of our underlying patents. Consequently, we have no further material source of revenues. We are generating some revenue by using our employee to provide part-time skilled manufacturing services to a third party under the Liberty Agreement; however, we expect this arrangement to generate no more than $4,000 per month. This arrangement generated revenues of $40,000 in 2020 and $24,000 in 2019.
Our proposed Merger with 374Water, which is scheduled to close on March 31, 2021, would be based on our raising a minimum of $6.25 million in net proceeds through the sale of Series D Preferred Stock convertible into common stock at a price of $.30 per share. We believe that this funding will be sufficient to fund our post-Merger business plan; however, there can be no assurance that we will timely raise the required equity capital, that the Merger will be consummated, or if consummated the Merger will generate profitable operations for the Company. As of the date of this Report, we are holding $1,636,545 in escrow for purposes of the private placement required for the Merger.
We continue to seek funding from private equity and debt investors, as we need to promptly raise substantial additional capital in order to finance our plan of operations. There can be no assurance that we will be able to promptly raise the necessary funds. If we do not promptly raise the necessary funds, we may be forced to cease operations.