ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020, are not necessarily indicative of results that may occur in future fiscal years. Some of the statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are based on management’s beliefs and assumptions and on information currently available to our management and involve significant elements of subjective judgment and analysis. Words such as “expects,” “will,” “anticipates,” “targets,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “seeks,” “estimates,” “potential,” “should,” “could,” variations of such words, and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Our actual results and the timing of events may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such a difference include those discussed under the caption “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements” and in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These and many other factors could affect our future financial and operating results. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events after the date of this Annual Report.
Overview
SCYNEXIS, Inc. is pioneering innovative medicines to potentially help millions of patients worldwide in need of new options to overcome and prevent difficult-to-treat and drug-resistant infections. We are developing our lead product candidate, ibrexafungerp, as a broad-spectrum, intravenous (IV)/oral agent for multiple fungal indications in both the community and hospital settings. In December 2020, we announced that we had received the acceptance letter from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for our New Drug Application (NDA) for oral ibrexafungerp for the treatment of vulvovaginal candidiasis (VVC, also known as vaginal yeast infection) with a Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) action goal date of June 1, 2021. The FDA has conditionally approved “Brexafemme” as the brand name for oral ibrexafungerp for vaginal yeast infections. We are also continuing late-stage clinical development for the prevention of recurrent VVC as well as the treatment of life-threatening invasive fungal infections in hospitalized patients.
Ibrexafungerp, the first representative of a novel class of antifungal agents called triterpenoids and designated by the suffix “-fungerp”, is a structurally distinct glucan synthase inhibitor and has shown in vitro and in vivo activity against a broad range of human fungal pathogens such as Candida and Aspergillus species, including multidrug-resistant strains, as well as Pneumocystis, Coccidioides, Histoplasma and Blastomyces species. Candida and Aspergillus species are the fungi responsible for approximately 85% of all invasive fungal infections in the United States (U.S.) and Europe. To date, we have characterized the antifungal activity, pharmacokinetics, and safety profile of the oral and IV formulations of ibrexafungerp in multiple in vitro, in vivo, and clinical studies. The FDA has granted Qualified Infectious Disease Product (QIDP) and Fast Track designations to ibrexafungerp for the indications of VVC (including the treatment of VVC episodes and the prevention of recurrent VVC), invasive candidiasis (IC) (including candidemia), and invasive aspergillosis (IA), and has granted Orphan Drug designations for the IC and IA indications. These designations may provide us with additional market exclusivity and expedited regulatory paths.
Ibrexafungerp Update
We recently announced that the FDA has accepted for filing our NDA for ibrexafungerp for the treatment of VVC, also known as vaginal yeast infections. The FDA has granted this application Priority Review, a designation which is granted to applications for potential drugs that, if approved, would be significant improvements in the safety or effectiveness of the treatment of serious conditions when compared to standard applications. Under the PDUFA, the FDA has set a target action date of June 1, 2021. Additionally, the FDA has communicated that it is not currently planning to hold an advisory committee meeting to discuss the application. The NDA is supported by positive results from two Phase 3, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multi-center studies (VANISH-303 and VANISH-306), in which oral ibrexafungerp demonstrated statistically superior efficacy and a favorable tolerability profile in women with VVC.
Enrollment is complete in the CANDLE study, a Phase 3, multi-center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of oral ibrexafungerp for the prevention of recurrent VVC, for which there is no approved therapy in the U.S. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our timelines for reaching our targeted enrollment size in the CANDLE study were slightly extended and we now anticipate both top-line data and a potential supplemental NDA submission for the prevention of recurrent VVC in the first half of 2022, resulting in a potential approval in late 2022.
Enrollment is ongoing in our refractory invasive fungal infections (rIFI) program, which comprises two open-label Phase 3 studies (FURI and CARES) designed to support a potential future NDA submission through the Limited Population Pathway for Antibacterial and Antifungal Drugs (LPAD), as well as our Phase 2 study (SCYNERGIA study) of oral ibrexafungerp in combination with voriconazole (SoC) in patients with IA. Similar to interim analyses of data previously reported, we intend to analyze the data of patients that have completed the treatment course in our FURI and CARES studies and announce these findings when complete.
We have successfully completed preclinical testing of our liposomal IV formulation of ibrexafungerp and we are advancing the program into human trials in healthy volunteers. The first trial is being conducted as a Phase 1, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of the IV liposomal formulation of ibrexafungerp in healthy subjects. The study is being conducted in South Africa and dosing started in March 2021.
Corporate Update
On December 2, 2020, we amended our license agreement with Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp. (Merck), dated May 24, 2013. The amendment eliminates two cash milestone payments that we would have paid to Merck upon the first filing of a NDA, triggered by the FDA acceptance for filing of our NDA for ibrexafungerp for the treatment of VVC, and first marketing approval in the U.S., anticipated in June 2021 for our NDA for ibrexafungerp for the treatment of VVC. Such cash milestone payments would have been creditable against future royalties owed to Merck on net sales of ibrexafungerp. With the amendment, these milestones will not be paid in cash and, accordingly, credits will not accrue. Pursuant to the amendment, we will also forfeit the credits against future royalties that it had accrued from a prior milestone payment already paid to Merck. All other key terms of the license agreement are unchanged.
On December 17, 2020, we completed a public offering (the December 2020 Public Offering) of our common stock and warrants pursuant to our effective shelf registration. We sold an aggregate of (a) 8,340,000 shares of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share, (b) pre-funded warrants, in lieu of common stock, to purchase 5,260,000 shares of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share, and (c) two series of warrants, which will accompany the common stock or pre-funded warrants, to purchase up to an aggregate of 13,600,000 shares of our common stock and received approximately $79.5 million in net proceeds.
In February 2021, we partnered with Amplity Inc. (Amplity) for the potential upcoming commercial launch of ibrexafungerp for the treatment of VVC. Under the terms of the 5-year agreement, we will utilize Amplity’s commercial execution expertise and resources for sales force, remote engagement, training, market access and select operations services. We will maintain full ownership of ibrexafungerp and control of all strategic aspects of the launch. Amplity is deferring a portion of its direct service costs in the first two years (2021 and 2022), which we will repay over three years starting in 2023. Amplity has the potential to earn a performance-based success fee in the 2023-2025 time frame by exceeding certain revenue targets.
On February 11, 2021, we entered into an Exclusive License and Collaboration Agreement (the Agreement) with Hansoh (Shanghai) Health Technology Co., Ltd., and Jiangsu Hansoh Pharmaceutical Group Company Limited (collectively, Hansoh), pursuant to which Hansoh obtains an exclusive license from us to research, develop and commercialize ibrexafungerp in the Greater China region, including mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan. Under the terms of the Agreement, Hansoh shall be responsible for the development, regulatory approval and commercialization of ibrexafungerp in Greater China. We received a $10.0 million upfront payment and will also be eligible to receive up to $112.0 million in development and commercial milestones, plus low double-digit royalties on net product sales. The obligation to pay royalties with respect to sales in a specified region will continue until the later of the date of expiration of all intellectual property and regulatory exclusivity for the product in the region and ten years from the first commercial sale, unless earlier terminated by Hansoh with advanced notice for convenience or under other specified circumstances.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business
A novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) was first identified in December 2019, and subsequently declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020. The full extent of the future impacts of COVID-19 on our operations is uncertain and a prolonged outbreak could have an adverse effect on our business.
We continue to see enrollment across our ongoing studies but have observed that the pandemic has resulted in some delays to some of our clinical studies, particularly in our CANDLE study, with top-line data now expected in the first half of 2022, as the initiation of new investigational sites can be delayed due to the diversion of their resources away from necessary start-up activities, and by limiting the ability of investigational sites to conduct all activities associated with our ongoing studies. For example, the circumstances can hinder the investigational sites’ ability to screen patients for enrollment. We are collaborating with our investigational sites to implement measures to minimize disruptions to patients and ensure continued access to treatment, in accordance with health authority guidance.
With respect to manufacturing and supply, we currently have sufficient drug supply for our ongoing clinical studies. Our third-party contract manufacturers continue to operate at or near normal levels and, at this time and subject to further COVID-19 implications, we do not anticipate any disruptions to our drug supply chain. Additionally, our employees have been transitioned to a work-from-home policy and this has not had any material impact on our internal operating abilities.
The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our business, financial results, liquidity and cash flows will depend largely on future developments. Any potential delays in clinical studies as a result of the impact of COVID-19, particularly on our CANDLE study, could result in the recognition of research and development expense for these studies in periods later than
originally anticipated and could potentially further extend our cash runway. As of December 31, 2020, we had $93.0 million in cash and cash equivalents, and we may utilize our common stock purchase agreement entered into on April 10, 2020 with Aspire Capital Fund, LLC (Aspire Capital) in order to provide additional liquidity. Our ability to acquire necessary capital may be negatively impacted by the economic environment if the pandemic is prolonged.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 health pandemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of potential impacts on our business, our clinical trials, our activities dependent on regulatory authorities, healthcare systems or the global economy as a whole. We will continue to monitor the COVID-19 situation closely.
Liquidity
We have operated as a public entity since we completed our initial public offering in May 2014, which we refer to as our IPO. We also completed a follow-on public offering of our common stock in April 2015 and public offerings of our common stock and warrants in June 2016, March 2018, December 2019, and December 2020. We have received an aggregate of $253.2 million in net proceeds from the issuance of our common stock in these six offerings. Our principal source of liquidity is cash and cash equivalents, which totaled $93.0 million as of December 31, 2020. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 691,304 shares of our common stock and received net proceeds of $4.8 million under our at-the-market (ATM) facility, sold 125,000 shares of our common stock and received net proceeds of $0.6 million under our common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital, and in April 2020, we received a cash receipt of $3.1 million from a third party for the sale of a portion of our unused New Jersey Net Operating Losses (NOLs) and research and development credits.
We have incurred net losses since our inception, including the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, our accumulated deficit was $326.6 million. We expect we will continue to incur significant research and development expense as we continue to execute our research and drug development strategy, but that our research and development expenses will decrease primarily given the completion of the VANISH Phase 3 registration program. Consistent with our operating plan, we also expect that we will continue to incur significant selling, general and administrative expenses to support our public reporting company operations, and that our selling, general and administrative expenses will increase to support a potential commercial launch for the VVC indication and our ongoing operations. As a result, we will need additional capital to fund our operations, which we may obtain through one or more of equity offerings, debt financings, other non-dilutive third-party funding (e.g., grants, and New Jersey Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer (NOL) Program), strategic alliances and licensing or collaboration arrangements. We may offer shares of our common stock pursuant to our effective shelf registrations and the common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital.
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
Revenue consists of the amortization of a non-refundable upfront payment received under our collaboration arrangement with R-Pharm.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense consists of expenses incurred while performing research and development activities to discover, develop, or improve potential product candidates we seek to develop. This includes conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, manufacturing and other development efforts, and activities related to regulatory filings for product candidates. We recognize research and development expenses as they are incurred. Our research and development expense primarily consists of:
•
costs related to executing preclinical studies and clinical trials, including related drug formulation, manufacturing and other development;
•
salaries and personnel-related costs, including benefits and any stock-based compensation for personnel performing research and development functions;
•
fees paid to clinical research organizations (CROs), vendors, consultants and other third parties who support our product candidate development and intellectual property protection;
•
other costs in seeking regulatory approval of our products; and
•
allocated overhead.
Ibrexafungerp was the only key research and development project during the periods presented. We expect to continue to incur significant research and development expense for the foreseeable future as we continue our effort to develop ibrexafungerp, and to potentially develop our other product candidates, subject to the availability of additional funding.
The successful development of product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or costs required to complete the remaining development of any product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of product candidates.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense consists primarily of salaries and personnel-related costs, including employee benefits and any stock-based compensation. This includes personnel in executive, accounting and finance, commercial, human resources, business development, and administrative support functions. Other expenses include facility-related costs not otherwise allocated to research and development expense, professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and legal services, consulting costs for general and administrative purposes, information systems maintenance and marketing efforts.
Other Expense (Income)
Substantially all of our other expense (income) during the periods reported consists of costs associated with:
•
fair value adjustments to our warrant and derivative liabilities;
•
interest expense;
•
amortization of debt issuance costs and discount;
•
other income associated with research and development tax credits;
•
interest income associated with our held-to-maturity short-term investments
•
other expense and;
•
the expense recognized for the extinguishment of debt.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit consists of U.S. federal and state income taxes. To date, we have not been required to pay U.S. federal income taxes because of our current and accumulated net operating losses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $3.1 million in income tax benefit associated with the sale of our NOLs and research and development credits.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and period-to-period percentage change (dollars in thousands):
Revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2019, revenue consisted of the amortization of a non-refundable upfront payment received under our collaboration arrangement with R-Pharm and was fully amortized in 2019.
Research and Development. For the year ended December 31, 2020, research and development expenses decreased to $36.5 million from $38.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $1.9 million, or 4.9%, was primarily driven by a milestone payment made in 2019 to Merck upon initiation of the Phase 3 VVC registration study, a decrease of $4.2 million in clinical development expense, a decrease of $1.0 million in preclinical expense, offset in part by an increase of
$4.5 million in chemistry, manufacturing, and controls (CMC), an increase of $1.1 million in salary and consulting related expense, an increase of $1.1 million in regulatory expense, and a net increase in other research and development expense of $0.6 million.
The $4.2 million decrease in clinical development expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily driven by a decrease of $9.2 million in costs associated with the VANISH Phase 3 VVC program that was substantially complete by the beginning of the third quarter of 2020, a decrease of $0.8 million in expense associated with the SCYNERGIA study, a decrease of $0.4 million in expense associated with two drug-drug interaction clinical studies to support the NDA submission for the treatment of VVC indication, offset in part by an increase of $4.6 million in costs associated with the CANDLE Phase 3 study, an increase of $0.5 million in expense associated with certain Phase 1 studies to support the NDA submission for the treatment of VVC indication, a $0.6 million increase in expense associated with the FURI and CARES studies, and a net increase in other clinical expenses of $0.5 million. The $4.5 million increase in CMC for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily driven by increased costs associated with the development and manufacture of drug product for ongoing and planned clinical studies as well as commercial batches necessary for a potential commercial launch of ibrexafungerp in the second half of 2021. The $1.1 million increase in salary and consulting related expense is primarily due to the increase in full time employees from the comparable prior period. The $1.1 million increase in regulatory expense was primarily due to the additional costs incurred during the period for the preparation and filing of the NDA submission for the treatment of VVC.
Selling, General and Administrative. For the year ended December 31, 2020, selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $14.6 million from $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $4.0 million, or 37.4%, was primarily driven by a $1.5 million increase in commercial and business development expense, a $1.3 million increase in other professional service expense, a $0.9 million increase in salary and other compensation related costs, and a net increase in other selling, general and administrative expenses of $0.3 million. The $1.5 million increase in commercial and business development expense is primarily due to the costs incurred in preparation of the potential commercial launch of ibrexafungerp for the treatment of VVC in the second half of 2021.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a $1.8 million loss on extinguishment of debt associated with the conversion of a portion of our April 2020 6.0% Convertible Senior Notes (April 2020 Notes) and, with respect to the 2019 period, a $0.8 million loss on extinguishment of debt associated with the repayment of the term loan with Solar and a $0.2 million loss on debt extinguishment upon the conversion of a portion of our March 2019 6.0% Convertible Senior Notes (March 2019 Notes).
Amortization of Debt Issuance Costs and Discount. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, amortization of debt issuance costs and discount was $1.2 million. The 2020 and 2019 debt issuance costs and discount comprised an allocated portion of the advisory fee and other issuance costs associated with our convertible debt and the fair value of the bifurcated derivative liability.
Interest Income. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $0.2 million and $0.8 million, respectively, in interest income associated with our short-term investments. The decrease in interest income was primarily due to the decrease in interest rate returns earned in comparison to the comparable period and the maturity of all our short-term investments during the current period.
Interest Expense. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $1.2 million and $1.0 million, respectively, in interest expense associated with our convertible debt. The increase from the prior comparable period is primarily due to the additional interest expense recognized for the April 2020 Notes.
Other Income. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $0.3 million and $0.5 million in other income associated with certain research and development tax credits.
Other Expense. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $0.6 million in expense associated with the noncash consideration associated with the common stock purchase agreement entered into with Aspire Capital in April 2020.
Warrant Liabilities Fair Value Adjustment. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized losses of $5.2 million and $4.5 million, respectively, for the fair value adjustment for warrant liabilities primarily due to the increase in our stock price during the periods.
Derivative Liabilities Fair Value Adjustment. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized gains of $2.3 million and $1.6 million, respectively, in the fair value adjustment related to the derivative liabilities primarily due to the decrease in our stock price during the period.
Income Tax Benefit. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a $3.1 million income tax benefit associated with the sale of a portion of our NOLs and research and development credits. This sale was structured through the New Jersey Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer (NOL) Program.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $93.0 million, compared to cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $48.4 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase in our cash and cash equivalents was primarily due to the funds raised in our December 2020 Public Offering of our common stock and warrants and through our ATM and Aspire facilities, the sale of our April 2020 Notes, the cash receipt of $3.1 million received in 2020 for the sale of a portion of our New Jersey NOLs, offset in part by the continued development costs associated with our lead product candidate, ibrexafungerp.
We have incurred net losses since our inception, including the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, our accumulated deficit was $326.6 million. We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for at least the next several years. As a result, we will need additional capital to fund our operations, which we may obtain through one or more of equity offerings, debt financings, or other non-dilutive third-party funding (e.g., grants, New Jersey Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer (NOL) Program), strategic alliances and licensing or collaboration arrangements. We may offer shares of our common stock pursuant to our Form S-3 shelf registration statements. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we received net proceeds of $4.8 million, under our ATM facility.
In April 2020 and March 2019, we sold to Puissance Life Science Opportunities Fund VI (Puissance) $10.0 million and $16.0 million aggregate principal amount of our convertible senior notes (Notes), respectively. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, included in this Annual Report for further details.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the significant sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Operating Activities
The $11.2 million increase in net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to increases in costs associated with ibrexafungerp development efforts. Consistent with our operating plan, we expect that our research and development expenses will decrease primarily given the completion of the VANISH Phase 3 registration program and we expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to increase to support a potential commercial launch for the treatment of VVC and our ongoing operations.
Net cash used in operating activities of $49.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisted of the $55.2 million net loss adjusted for non-cash charges that included the loss on change in fair value of the warrant liabilities of $5.2 million and stock-based compensation expense of $2.2 million, the gain on change in fair value of the derivative liabilities of $2.3 million, the loss on extinguishment of debt of $1.8 million, and the amortization of debt issuance costs and discount of $1.2 million, plus a net unfavorable change in operating assets and liabilities of $3.2 million. The net unfavorable change in operating assets and liabilities included a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $2.3 million and an increase in prepaid expenses, other assets, and deferred costs of $0.9 million. The $2.3 million decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses was primarily due to the decrease in accounts payable of $2.5 million as of December 31, 2020. The $0.9 million increase in prepaid expenses, other assets, and deferred costs is primarily due to a $2.9 million increase for a receivable that was fully collected in February 2021, offset in part by a $1.2 million decrease in prepaid research and development costs associated with drug product shipped during the period.
Net cash used in operating activities of $38.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily consisted of the $53.7 million net loss adjusted for non-cash charges that included the loss on change in fair value of the warrant liabilities of $4.5 million and stock-based compensation expense of $1.8 million, the gain on change in fair value of the derivative liability of $1.6 million, the loss on extinguishment of debt of $1.0 million, and the amortization of debt issuance costs and discount of $1.2 million, plus a net favorable change in operating assets and liabilities of $8.3 million. The net favorable change in operating assets and liabilities included an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $5.2 million primarily due to the increase in accounts payable and a decrease in prepaid expenses, other assets, and deferred costs of $3.3
million. The $3.3 million decrease in prepaid expenses, other assets, and deferred costs is primarily due the cash receipt of $6.7 million received in 2019 for the sale of a portion of our NOLs through the New Jersey Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer (NOL) Program.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities of $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisted primarily of purchases and maturities of short-term investments of $14.2 million and $20.7 million, respectively.
Net cash provided by investing activities of $26.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, consisted of purchases and maturities of short-term investments of $39.5 million and $65.7 million, respectively.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $94.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisted primarily of gross proceeds from common stock of $90.6 million, primarily as a result of our December 2020 public offering of common stock and warrants in addition to the gross proceeds from common stock sold under our ATM and Aspire facilities, partially offset by related underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses totaling $5.9 million. Additionally, pursuant to the April 2020 Notes, we issued and sold to Puissance $10.0 million aggregate principal amount of our April 2020 Notes, resulting in $9.5 million in net proceeds after deducting an advisory fee and other issuance costs.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $42.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, consisted primarily of gross proceeds from common stock of $46.3 million, primarily as a result of our December 2019 public offering of common stock and warrants in additional to the gross proceeds from common stock sold under our ATM facilities, partially offset by related underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses totaling $2.9 million. Additionally, pursuant to the note purchase agreement, we issued and sold to Puissance $16.0 million aggregate principal amount of our March 2019 Notes, resulting in $14.7 million in net proceeds after deducting an advisory fee and other issuance costs, and we used the net proceeds to pay the remaining outstanding Solar term loan in full. As part of the payment of the outstanding balance of the Solar term loan, we paid $0.8 million in debt extinguishment costs which comprised the remaining unamortized discount and issuance costs associated with the Solar term loan prior to repayment.
Future Funding Requirements
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate significant revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval of and commercialize ibrexafungerp. In addition, we expect to incur expenses in connection with our ongoing development activities, particularly as we continue the research, development and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our product candidates. We anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing future operations.
Based upon our existing operating plan, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, the sale of a portion of our New Jersey NOLs, the upfront payment from Hansoh, and anticipated sales of Brexafemme will enable us to fund our operating requirements into 2023. These funds will also be sufficient to enable us to commercially launch Brexafemme for the treatment of vaginal yeast infections, if approved, and complete the development activities for the CANDLE study. However, we are continually evaluating our operating plan and assessing the optimal cash utilization for our ibrexafungerp development strategy. We have based our estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of product candidates, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses necessary to complete the development of product candidates.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the progress, costs, and the clinical research and development of ibrexafungerp;
•
the outcome, costs and timing of seeking and obtaining FDA and any other regulatory approvals;
•
the ability of our product candidates to progress through clinical development successfully;
•
our need to expand our research and development activities;
•
the costs associated with securing, establishing and maintaining commercialization and manufacturing capabilities;
•
our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
•
our need and ability to hire additional management and scientific and medical personnel;
•
our need to implement additional, as well as to enhance existing, internal systems and infrastructure, including financial and reporting processes and systems; and
•
the economic and other terms, timing and success of our existing licensing arrangements and any collaboration, licensing or other arrangements into which we may enter in the future.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenue from product sales, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of net proceeds from equity offerings, debt financings, or other non-dilutive third-party funding (e.g., grants, New Jersey Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer (NOL) Program), strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of our common stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing, similar to our previous loan agreement with Solar or the convertible senior notes we sold in March 2019 and April 2020, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through sales of assets, other third-party funding, strategic alliances and licensing or collaboration arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented we did not have, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under SEC rules.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reported periods. We evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our assumptions and estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, included in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Research and Development Accruals
We are required to estimate our expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with CROs, clinical site agreements, vendors, and consultants in connection with conducting ibrexafungerp clinical trials and preclinical studies and other development activities. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided to us under such contracts. Our objective is to reflect the appropriate development and trial expenses in our consolidated financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which the services and efforts are expended by our service providers.
For clinical trials, we account for these expenses according to the progress of the trial as measured by actual hours expended by CRO personnel, investigator performance or completion of specific tasks, patient progression, or timing of various aspects of the trial. For preclinical development services performed by outside service providers, we determine accrual estimates through financial models, taking into account development progress data received from outside service providers and discussions with our knowledgeable internal personnel and service provider personnel. During the course of a clinical trial or preclinical study or development project, we adjust our rate of trial or project expense recognition if actual results differ from our estimates. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date within our consolidated financial statements based on the facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in our reporting changes in estimates in any particular period. We have not experienced any significant adjustments to our estimates to date.
Stock-Based Compensation
We record the fair value of stock options issued as of the grant date as compensation expense. We recognize compensation expense over the requisite service period, which is equal to the vesting period.
Stock-based compensation expense has been reported in our statements of operations as follows (dollars in thousands):
On December 31, 2020, the aggregate intrinsic value of outstanding options to purchase shares of our common stock was $0.1 million, based upon the $7.65 closing sales price per share of our common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Global Market on that date.
Determination of the Fair Value of Stock-based Compensation Grants
We calculate the fair value of stock-based compensation arrangements using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions, including volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our stock options, the risk free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock options, and the fair value of the underlying common stock on the date of grant. In applying these assumptions, we considered the following factors:
•
we estimate expected volatility based on the volatility of our own common stock trading history;
•
the assumed dividend yield is based on our expectation of not paying dividends on our underlying common stock for the foreseeable future;
•
we determine the average expected life of stock options based on the simplified method in accordance with SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Nos. 107 and 110, as our common stock has a limited trading history. We expect to use the simplified method until we have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate expected term;
•
we determine the risk-free interest rate by reference to implied yields available from U.S. Treasury securities with a remaining term equal to the expected life assumed at the date of grant; and
•
we recognize forfeitures as they are incurred.
The assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are set forth below:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the outstanding warrants associated with the June 2016, March 2018, December 2019, and December 2020 public offerings as liabilities measured at fair value. The fair values of these warrants have been determined using the Black-Scholes valuation model. We determine the risk-free interest rate by reference to implied yields available from U.S. Treasury securities and utilize the remaining term of the warrant as the expected term. We estimate expected volatility using the historical volatility of our common stock given we have sufficient history to support the expected terms of the warrants. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements on this Annual Report for further details.
Convertible Debt and Derivative Liabilities
For the convertible notes, we account for the bifurcated embedded conversion option, inclusive of the interest make-whole provision and make-whole fundamental change provision, as long-term derivative liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet. The derivative liabilities are remeasured at each reporting period using the binomial lattice model with changes in fair value recorded in the consolidated statements of operations in other (income) expense. We used the binomial lattice valuation model to value the derivative liabilities at inception and on subsequent valuation dates. This model incorporates transaction details such as stock price, contractual terms, dividend yield, risk-free rate, historical volatility, credit rating, market credit spread, and estimated yield. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements on this Annual Report for further details.