ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes, prepared in accordance with United States (“U.S.”) generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), included in this Form 10-K. When reviewing the discussion, you should keep in mind the substantial risks and uncertainties that characterize our business. In particular, we encourage you to review the risks and uncertainties described under Item 1A., “Risk Factors,” of this Form 10-K. These risks and uncertainties could cause actual results to differ materially from those forecasted in forward-looking statements or implied by past results and trends. Forward-looking statements are statements that attempt to project or anticipate future developments in our business; we encourage you to review the discussion of forward-looking statements under “Cautionary Statement for Purposes of the “Safe Harbor” Provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995,” at the beginning of this report. These statements, like all statements in this report, speak only as of the date of this report (unless another date is indicated), and we undertake no obligation to update or revise such statements as a result of future developments. Unless otherwise specified, any reference to a “year” is to a fiscal year ended January 31st.
Business Overview
SeaChange International, Inc., a Delaware corporation founded on July 9, 1993, is an industry leader in the delivery of multiscreen, advertising and premium OTT video management solutions headquartered in Waltham, Massachusetts. Our software products and services facilitate the aggregation, licensing, management and distribution of video and advertising content for service providers, telecommunications companies, satellite operators, broadcasters, and other content providers. We sell our software products and services worldwide, primarily to service providers including: operators, such as Liberty Global, plc., Altice NV, Cox Communications, Inc. and Rogers Communications, Inc.; telecommunications companies, such as Verizon Communications, Inc., AT&T, Inc. and Frontier Communications Corporation; satellite operators such as Dish Network Corporation; and broadcasters.
Our software products and services are designed to empower video providers to create, manage and monetize the increasingly personalized, highly engaging experiences that viewers demand. Using our products and services, we believe customers can increase revenue by offering services such as VOD programming on a variety of consumer devices, including televisions, smart phones, PCs, tablets and OTT streaming players. Our solutions enable service providers to offer other interactive television services that allow subscribers to receive personalized services and interact with their video devices, thereby enhancing their viewing experience. Our products also allow our customers to insert advertising into broadcast and VOD content.
SeaChange serves an exciting global marketplace where multiscreen viewing is increasingly required, consumer device options are evolving rapidly, and viewing habits are ever-shifting. The primary driver of our business is enabling the delivery of video content in the changing multiscreen television environment. We have expanded our capabilities, products and services to address the delivery of content to devices other than television set-top boxes, namely PCs, tablets, smart phones and OTT streaming players. We believe that our strategy of expanding into adjacent product lines will also position us to further support and maintain our existing service provider customer base. Providing our customers with more scalable software platforms enables them to further reduce their infrastructure costs, improve reliability and expand service offerings to their customers. Additionally, we believe we are well positioned to capitalize on new customers entering the multiscreen marketplace and increasingly serve adjacent markets. Our core technologies provide a foundation for software products and services that can be deployed in next generation video delivery systems capable of increased levels of subscriber activity across multiple devices.
We have implemented restructuring programs and cost saving initiatives during the past three years to improve operations and optimize our cost structure. In fiscal 2020, we streamlined our operations and closed our service organizations in Ireland and the Netherlands, for which we realized annualized cost savings of approximately $6.0 million. In the first half of fiscal 2021, we reduced our headcount across all departments in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, for which we expect approximately $7.6 million of annualized savings. Additionally, in the second
quarter of fiscal 2021 we transferred our technical support services to our Poland location in an effort to further reduce cost.
In February 2019, we acquired Xstream A/S, a leading OTT media cloud platform provider with its primary operations in Warsaw, Poland. Xstream provides a managed service, OTT video solution that serves more than five million active subscribers globally. Xstream’s MediaMaker video platform has enhanced the SeaChange end-to-end video framework. We have used the acquisition of Xstream to accelerate our penetration in OTT and new market segments and a fully cloud-based end-to-end video platform that operates in a hosted managed service environment.
In February 2019, we entered into a cooperation agreement (the “Cooperation Agreement”) with TAR Holdings LLC and Karen Singer (collectively, “TAR Holdings”). As of the date of the Cooperation Agreement, TAR Holdings beneficially owned approximately 20.6% of our outstanding common stock. Pursuant to the Cooperation Agreement executed on February 28, 2019, we agreed to set the size of the Board at up to eight members, appointed Robert Pons to the Board as a Class II Director with an initial term that expired at the 2019 annual meeting of stockholders, and appointed Jeffrey Tuder to the Board as a Class III Director with an initial term that expired at the 2020 annual meeting of stockholders. Messrs. Pons and Tuder were subsequently re-elected in the 2019 and 2020 annual meeting of stockholders, respectively. On January 8, 2021, our Chief Executive Officer resigned, and Mr. Pons was subsequently appointed Executive Chairman and Principal Executive Officer in the interim.
In March 2019, our Board approved and adopted a tax benefits preservation plan (the “Tax Benefits Preservation Plan”) to deter acquisitions of our common stock that would potentially limit our ability to use NOLs to reduce our potential future federal income tax obligations. In connection with the Tax Benefits Preservation Plan, we declared a dividend of one preferred share purchase right for each share of our common stock issued and outstanding as of March 15, 2019 to our stockholders of record on that date. The Tax Benefits Preservation Plan was approved by our stockholders at our 2019 annual meeting of stockholders.
In February 2021, the Company filed a Registration Statement on Form S-3 with the SEC, which registered an indeterminate number of Securities using a “shelf” registration or continuous offering process. Under this shelf registration, we may, from time to time, sell any combination of the securities in one or more offerings up to a total aggregate offering price of $200 million. The shelf registration was declared effective on March 16, 2021.
In connection with the shelf registration statement, the Company entered into an underwriting agreement with Aegis Capital Corp. on March 30, 2021, to issue and sell 10,323,484 shares of common stock, $0.01 par value per share, at a public offering price of $1.85 per share (the “Offering”). The Offering closed on April 1, 2021 and resulted in approximately $17.6 million in proceeds, net of underwriting discounts and commissions of 6.5%, or $0.12025 per share of common stock, and estimated offering expenses of approximately $0.2 million. In addition to the Offering, the Company also granted the underwriters a 45-day option to purchase up to an additional 1,548,522 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $1.85 per share, less underwriting discounts and commissions.
In March 2021, we entered into a Sublease Termination Agreement (the “Termination Agreement”) to our current headquarters office lease at 500 Totten Pond Road, Waltham, Massachusetts that provides for an early termination of such sublease effective March 21, 2021. In connection with the early termination of the sublease the Company will pay the sublandlord a termination payment of approximately $430 thousand against an obligation of approximately $2.8 million. Prior to the execution of the Termination Agreement, the sublease had been scheduled to expire in February 2025. As a result of the Termination Agreement, we expect annualized savings of approximately $600 thousand in facilities costs for each of the next four years.
Summary of Results of Operations
The following discussion summarizes the key factors our management believes are necessary for an understanding of our consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2021 and 2020.
Revenue and Gross Profit
The components of our total revenue and gross profit are described in the following table:
International revenue accounted for 69% and 53% of total revenue in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. The increase in international sales as a percentage of total revenue in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020, is primarily attributable to a decrease in U.S. revenue driven at a higher rate than international revenue by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Product Revenue
Product revenue includes software licenses and hardware and is included in product revenue in our consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. Software licenses include our newer go to market Framework solution and our Legacy software. Product revenue decreased by $33.3 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic as our customers and prospective customers held off on making new technology investments and deployment decisions in favor of supporting their existing operations and infrastructure through the on-going uncertainty, resulting in lower sales. Also contributing to this decrease is the slower than anticipated migration of Legacy software customers to Framework products as our customers curbed spending and tightened budgets.
Service Revenue
Service revenue includes annual support contracts and professional services and is included in service revenue in our consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. Service revenue decreased by $11.8 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to our shift in sales to Framework, resulting in a decrease in our legacy professional services revenue related to our individual product sales and upgrades as well as a reduction in maintenance and support revenue provided on post-warranty contracts associated with decommissioned legacy products.
Gross Profit and Margin
Cost of revenue consists primarily of the cost of resold third-party products and services, purchased components and subassemblies, labor and overhead, testing and implementation, and ongoing maintenance of complete systems.
Our gross profit margin decreased by 20% in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to lower revenue generated as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic coupled with the inability to proportionately lower certain fixed costs in order to maintain a higher margin. Product profit margin decreased by 38% in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 also primarily due to lower perpetual license revenue generated as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Service profit margin increased by 9% in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to a reduction in third-party expenses and headcount driven by the COVID-19 pandemic while still recognizing legacy revenue.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in software development and engineering functions as well as contract labor costs, depreciation of development and test equipment and an allocation of related facility expenses. The following table provides information regarding the change in research and development expenses during the periods presented:
Research and development expenses decreased by $2.2 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to a $1.3 million decrease in labor and compensation costs associated with the reduction in headcount, a $0.5 million decrease in facility expenses, and a reduction in other research and development expenditures in relation to our cost-saving efforts driven by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing expenses consist of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel engaged in selling and marketing functions, as well as commissions, travel expenses, certain promotional expenses and an allocation of related facility expenses. The following table provides information regarding the change in selling and marketing expenses during the periods presented:
Selling and marketing expenses decreased by $5.8 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to a $3.5 million decrease in labor and compensation costs associated with the reduction in headcount, a $1.5 million decrease in tradeshow and travel expenses, and a reduction in other selling and marketing expenditures in relation to our cost-saving efforts driven by the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, legal, human resources, information technology and administrative functions, as well as legal and accounting services, insurance premiums and an allocation of related facilities expenses. The following table provides information regarding the change in general and administrative expenses during the periods presented:
General and administrative expenses decreased by $5.5 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to a $2.2 million decrease in labor and compensation costs associated with the reduction in headcount, a $1.6 million decrease in professional fees, a $0.4 million decrease in travel expenses, and a reduction in other general expenditures in relation to our cost-saving efforts driven by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Severance and Restructuring Costs
Severance consists of employee-related severance charges not related to a restructuring plan. Restructuring costs consist of charges related to restructuring including employee-related severance charges, remaining lease obligations and termination costs, and the disposal of equipment.
Severance and restructuring costs decreased by $2.0 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2020, we closed our service organizations in Ireland and the Netherlands for which we realized $6.0 million in annualized cost savings. The severance costs in fiscal 2021 were primarily related to the reduction in headcount driven by the COVID-19 pandemic for which we expect approximately $7.6 million of annualized cost savings.
Loss on Sale of Fixed Assets
In December 2019, the Company sold its corporate headquarters in Acton, MA for $0.5 million, net of disposal costs. At the time of the sale, the Company disposed of all building and land related assets as well as non-building related assets. The net book value of all assets disposed of was $5.9 million. We recorded a net loss on the sale of the fixed assets of $5.4 million in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss in fiscal 2020.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
The table below provides detail regarding our other (expense) income, net:
Gain on Sale of Investment in Affiliate
In connection with the sale of our investment in Layer3 TV, Inc. (“Layer 3”), a company in which we had a cost-method investment, we received $4.6 million in fiscal 2018. We were entitled to additional payments of up to $2.1 million, subject to satisfaction of provisions associated with the transaction, of which we received $0.2 million in fiscal 2019. We recorded a gain on sale of investment in affiliate of $0.2 million in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss in fiscal 2019 related to this payment. We received our final Layer3 payment of $1.8 million in fiscal 2020, which was partially offset by a $0.3 million loss on an unrelated investment. We recorded a net gain on sale of investment in affiliate of $1.5 million in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss in fiscal 2020.
Foreign Exchange Loss, Net
Foreign exchange loss, net, was $0.8 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $2.1 million in fiscal 2020. Our foreign exchange loss, net, is primarily due to the revaluation of intercompany notes.
Income Tax Provision
We recorded an income tax expense of $0.1 million and less than $0.1 million in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. Our tax expense was largely driven by foreign withholding taxes. Our effective tax rate in fiscal 2021 and in future periods may fluctuate, as a result of changes in our jurisdictional forecasts where losses cannot be benefitted due to the existence of valuation allowances on our deferred tax assets, changes in actual results versus our estimates, or changes in tax laws, regulations, accounting principles, or interpretations thereof.
Use of Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures
We define non-GAAP (loss) income from operations as U.S. GAAP net loss adjusted for stock-based compensation expenses, amortization of intangible assets, non-operating expense professional fees, severance and other restructuring costs, loss on the sale of fixed assets, other (expense) income, net, and income tax provision. We discuss non-GAAP (loss) income from operations in our quarterly earnings releases and certain other communications, as we believe non-GAAP (loss) income from operations is an important measure that is not calculated according to U.S. GAAP. We use non-GAAP (loss) income from operations in internal forecasts and models when establishing internal operating budgets, supplementing the financial results and forecasts reported to our Board of Directors, determining a component of bonus compensation for executive officers and other key employees based on operating performance and evaluating short-term and long-term operating trends in our operations. We believe that the non-GAAP (loss) income from operations financial measure assists in providing an enhanced understanding of our underlying operational measures to manage the business, to evaluate performance compared to prior periods and the marketplace, and to establish operational goals. We believe that the non-GAAP financial adjustments are useful to investors because they allow investors to evaluate the effectiveness of the methodology and information used by management in our financial and operational decision-making.
Non-GAAP (loss) income from operations is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information provided in accordance with U.S. GAAP. This non-GAAP financial measure may not be computed in the same manner as similarly titled measures used by other companies. We expect to continue to incur expenses similar to the financial adjustments described above in arriving at non-GAAP income (loss) from operations and investors should not infer from our presentation of this non-GAAP financial measure that these costs are unusual, infrequent or non-recurring.
The following table includes the reconciliations of our U.S. GAAP net loss, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, to our non-GAAP (loss) income from operations for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2021 and 2020:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table includes key line items of our consolidated statements of cash flows:
Historically, we have financed our operations and capital expenditures primarily with our cash and investments. Our cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and marketable securities totaled $6.3 million at January 31, 2021.
In fiscal 2020, we incurred $3.4 million in restructuring charges, which was inclusive of $2.1 million of charges in connection with closing our Ireland and Netherlands service organizations, for which we realized annualized cost savings of $6.0 million. In fiscal 2021, we incurred $1.5 million in severance charges, including $1.1 million of expense in relation to the reduction in headcount driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, for which we expect approximately $7.6 million in annualized cost savings.
We believe that existing cash and investments and cash expected to be provided by future operating and investing activities, augmented by the plans highlighted above, are adequate to satisfy our working capital, capital expenditure requirements and other contractual obligations for at least the next 12 months.
If our expectations are incorrect, we may need to raise additional funds to fund our operations, to take advantage of unanticipated strategic opportunities or to strengthen our financial position. In the future, we may enter into other arrangements for potential investments in, or acquisitions of, complementary businesses, services or technologies, which could require us to seek additional equity or debt financing. If adequate funds are not available or are not available on acceptable terms, we may not be able to follow through with our operational plans, take advantage of market opportunities to develop new products or to otherwise respond to competitive pressures, or invest in complementary businesses or technologies.
On February 5, 2021, we filed a Registration Statement on Form S-3 with the SEC, which registered an indeterminate number of Securities using a “shelf” registration or continuous offering process. Under this shelf registration, we may, from time to time, sell any combination of the securities in one or more offerings up to a total aggregate offering price of $200 million. The shelf registration was declared effective on March 16, 2021.
In connection with the shelf registration statement, the Company entered into an underwriting agreement with Aegis Capital Corp. on March 30, 2021, to issue and sell 10,323,484 shares of common stock, $0.01 par value per share, at a public offering price of $1.85 per share (the “Offering”). The Offering closed on April 1, 2021 and resulted in approximately $17.6 million in proceeds, net of underwriting discounts and commissions of 6.5%, or $0.12025 per share of common stock, and estimated offering expenses of approximately $0.2 million. In addition to the Offering, the Company also granted the underwriters a 45-day option to purchase up to an additional 1,548,522 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $1.85 per share, less underwriting discounts and commissions.
In March 2021, we entered into the Termination Agreement to our current headquarters office lease at 500 Totten Pond Road, Waltham, Massachusetts that provides for an early termination of such sublease effective March 21, 2021. In connection with the early termination of the sublease the Company will pay the sublandlord a termination payment of approximately $430 thousand against an obligation of approximately $2.8 million. Prior to the execution of the Termination Agreement, the sublease had been scheduled to expire in February 2025. As a result of the Termination Agreement, we expect annualized savings of approximately $600 thousand in facilities costs for each of the next four years.
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $9.4 million for fiscal 2021 and was primarily the result of our $21.8 million net loss, our operating activity non-cash adjustments, including $1.7 million in depreciation and amortization expense, $1.2 million in stock-based compensation expense, and $0.8 million in realized and unrealized foreign currency transaction losses, and changes in our operating assets and liabilities, including a $6.4 million decrease in accounts receivable, a $8.0 million decrease in unbilled receivables, and a $1.2 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets and other assets partially offset by a $2.2 million decrease in accounts payable, and a $3.5 million decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities, and a $0.9 million decrease in deferred revenue.
Net cash used in operating activities was $14.8 million for fiscal 2020 and was primarily the result of our $8.9 million net loss offset by a $5.4 million loss on the sale of fixed assets, a $1.5 million net gain on sale of investment in affiliate and other investments, and changes in our operating assets and liabilities, including a $17.8 million increase in unbilled receivables primarily related to Framework partially offset by a $7.1 million decrease in accounts receivable due to the timing of payments and a $4.6 million decrease in deferred revenue.
Changes in accounts receivable, unbilled receivables, accounts payable and accrued expenses were generally due to timing of customer and vendor invoicing and payments as well as the timing of Framework engagements.
Net cash provided by investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $4.0 million and $3.8 million for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net cash provided by investing activities in fiscal 2021 was due to $4.4 million in proceeds from the sales and maturities of marketable securities partially offset by $0.3 million in purchases of property and equipment. Net cash provided by investing activities in fiscal 2020 was primarily due to the $5.8 million of net proceeds from marketable
securities and the $1.5 million of net proceeds from the sale of investment in affiliate partially offset by $3.8 million in cash paid for the acquisition of Xstream A/S.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $2.5 million and $0.5 million in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net cash provided by financing activities in fiscal 2021 was primarily from the $2.4 million proceeds from the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) loan. Net cash provided by financing activities in fiscal 2020 was primarily from proceeds received for the issuance of common stock partially offset by repurchases of common stock.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
In the first quarter of fiscal 2021, concerns related to the spread of COVID-19 began to create global business disruptions as well as disruptions in our operations and to create potential negative impacts on our revenues and other financial results. COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020. The extent to which COVID-19 will continue to impact our financial condition or results of operations is currently uncertain and depends on factors including the impact on our customers, partners, and vendors and on the operation of the global markets in general. Due to our business model, the effect of COVID-19 on our results of operations may also not be fully reflected for some time.
We are currently conducting business with substantial modifications to employee travel, employee work locations, virtualization or cancellation of customer and employee events, and remote sales, implementation, and support activities, among other modifications. These decisions may delay or reduce sales and harm productivity and collaboration. We have observed other companies and governments making similar alterations to their normal business operations, and in general, the markets are experiencing a significant level of uncertainty at the current time. Virtualization of our team’s sales activities could foreclose future business opportunities, particularly as our customers limit spending, which could negatively impact the willingness of our customers to enter into or renew contracts with us. The pandemic has impacted our ability to complete certain implementations, negatively impacting our ability to recognize revenue, and could also negatively impact the payment of accounts receivable and collections. We continue to realize our on-going cost optimization efforts in response to the impact of the pandemic. We may take further actions that alter our business operations as the situation evolves. As a result, the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the effects of the operational alterations we have made in response on our business, financial condition, liquidity, and financial results cannot be predicted at this time.
On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed into law the “Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”)”. The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. We continue to examine the impact that the CARES Act may have on our business, including the extent of our PPP loan forgiveness eligibility as noted below.
The Paycheck Protection Program
On May 5, 2020, the Company entered into a promissory note (the “Note”) with Silicon Valley Bank (the “Lender”) evidencing an unsecured loan in an aggregate principal amount of $2,412,890 pursuant to the PPP under the CARES Act administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”).
Interest accrues on the Note at a fixed rate of one percent (1%) per annum, with the payment of the first ten months of interest and principal deferred. The Note has an initial term of two years, is unsecured and is guaranteed by the SBA. The Company applied to the Lender for forgiveness of the Note in March 2021 with the amount which may be forgiven equal to the sum of qualifying expenses, including payroll costs, covered rent obligations, and covered utility payments incurred by the Company during the twenty-four week period beginning on May 7, 2020, calculated in accordance with the terms of the CARES Act. Management believes we have properly satisfied all eligibility requirements for full forgiveness, however, we cannot provide assurance that the loan will be forgiven.
Subject to any forgiveness under the PPP, the Note will mature on May 5, 2022. Beginning on the seventeenth-month anniversary of the date of the Note, the Company is required to make equal monthly payments of principal and interest until maturity. The Note may be prepaid at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties. The Note provides for customary events of default including, among others, those relating to breaches of the Company’s
obligations under the Note, including a failure to make payments, any bankruptcy or similar proceedings involving the Company, and certain material effects on the Company’s ability to repay the Note. The Note may be accelerated upon the occurrence of an event of default.
Tax Benefits Preservation Plan
On March 4, 2019, we entered into the Tax Benefits Preservation Plan in the form of a stockholder rights agreement (“Rights Agreement”) and issued a dividend of one preferred share purchase right (a “Right”) for each share of common stock payable on March 15, 2019 to the stockholders of record of such shares on that date. Each Right entitles the registered holder, under certain circumstances, to purchase from us one one-hundredth of a share of Series A Participating Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Preferred Shares”), of the Company, at a price of $8.00 per one one-hundredth of a Preferred Share represented by a Right (the “Purchase Price”), subject to adjustment. The description and terms of the Rights are set forth in the Rights Agreement.
The Rights are not exercisable until the Distribution Date (as defined in the Rights Agreement). Until a Right is exercised, the holder thereof, as such, will have no rights as a stockholder of the Company, including, without limitation, the right to vote or to receive dividends.
At any time prior to ten (10) business days after the time any Person becomes an Acquiring Person (as defined in the Rights Agreement), the Board may redeem the Rights in whole, but not in part, at a price of $0.0001 per Right (the “Redemption Price”). The redemption of the Rights may be made effective at such time, on such basis and with such conditions as the Board in its sole discretion may establish. Immediately upon any redemption of the Rights, the right to exercise the Rights will terminate and the only right of the holders of Rights will be to receive the Redemption Price.
The Rights will expire on the earlier of (i) the time at which the Rights are redeemed, (ii) the time at which the Rights are exchanged, (iii) the consummation of a reorganization transaction entered into by the Company resulting in stock transfer restrictions similar to the Rights Agreement, (iv) the close of business on the effective date of the repeal of Section 382 (as defined in the Rights Agreement) or if the Rights Agreement is no longer necessary for the preservation of NOLs, (v) the date on which the Board determines that the Rights Agreement is no longer necessary to preserve NOLs, (vi) the beginning of the taxable year to which the Board determines that none of the NOLs may be carried forward or (vii) the close of business on March 4, 2022 (the “Final Expiration Date”).
On June 28, 2019, we entered into an amendment to the Rights Agreement, between us and Computershare Trust Company, N.A., as rights agent, for the purpose of modifying the definition of “Final Expiration Date” to delete the extension of the Final Expiration Date in the event any person becomes an Acquiring Person (as defined in the Rights Agreement).
On August 8, 2019, we entered into an amendment No. 2 to the Rights Agreement, between us and Computershare Trust Company, N.A., as rights agent, for the purpose of modifying the definition of “Acquiring Person” to not include TAR Holdings and their respective affiliates and associates, provided the aggregate beneficial ownership of TAR Holdings does not exceed 25.0% of the Company securities then outstanding.
Inflation Risk
During the last two years, inflation and changing prices have not had a material effect on our business. We are unable to predict whether inflation or changing prices will materially affect our business in the foreseeable future.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K in fiscal year 2020 or fiscal 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for
making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results could differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
The significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements are described in Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to our consolidated financial statements set forth in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K. We believe the following critical accounting policies reflect the most significant estimates, judgments and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
We consider the following accounting policies to be both those most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and those that require the most subjective judgment:
•
Revenue recognition:
•
Allowance for doubtful accounts;
•
Accounting for goodwill and other intangible assets;
•
Accounting for income taxes;
•
Accounting for stock-based compensation; and
•
Management’s going concern assessment
Revenue Recognition
Overview
Our revenue is derived from sales of software licenses and associated third party hardware and support services, as well as professional services and support fees related to our software licenses.
The Company recognizes revenue from contracts with customers using a five-step model, which is described below:
•
identify the customer contract;
•
identify performance obligations that are distinct;
•
determine the transaction price;
•
allocate the transaction price to the distinct performance obligations; and
•
recognize revenue as the performance obligations are satisfied.
Identify the customer contract
A customer contract is generally identified when there is approval and commitment from both the Company and its customer, the rights have been identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability and consideration is probable.
Identify performance obligations that are distinct
A performance obligation is a promise to provide a distinct good or service or a series of distinct goods or services. A good or service that is promised to a customer is distinct if the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer, and a company’s promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract.
Determine the transaction price
The transaction price is the amount of consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring goods or services to a customer, excluding sales and VAT taxes that are collected on behalf of government agencies.
Allocate the transaction price to distinct performance obligations
The transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation based on the relative standalone selling prices (“SSP”) of the goods or services being provided to the customer. Our contracts typically contain multiple performance obligations, for which we account for individual performance obligations separately, if they are distinct.
Recognize revenue as the performance obligations are satisfied
We enter into contracts that include combinations of license, support, professional services, and third-party products, which are accounted for as separate performance obligations with differing revenue recognition patterns. Revenue is recognized when or as control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers. Our software licenses are primarily delivered on a perpetual basis, whereby the customer receives rights to use the software for an indefinite time period or a specified term and delivery and revenue recognition occurs at the point in time when the customer has the ability to download or access the software. Our customers may also contract with us for a Software as a Service (“SaaS”) type license, whereby the customer only has a right to access the software for a defined term. SaaS licenses are recognized ratably over the subscription period beginning on the date the license is made available to customers.
Our services revenue is comprised of support services and professional services. Support services consist of software upgrades on a when-and-if available basis, telephone support, bug fixes or patches and general hardware maintenance support. Revenue related to support services is recognized ratably over the term of the contract. Professional services are recognized as the services are performed.
Revenues attributable to third party products typically consist of hardware and related support contracts. Hardware products are typically recognized when control is transferred to the customer, which is defined as the point in time when the client can use and benefit from the hardware. In situations where the hardware is distinct and it is delivered before services are provided and is functional without services, control is transferred upon delivery or acceptance by the customer. Revenue attributable to third-party support contracts is recognized ratably over the term of the contract.
Significant Judgments
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment. Once we determine the performance obligations, we determine the transaction price, which includes estimating the amount of variable consideration to be included in the transaction price, if any. We then allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract based on the SSP. The corresponding revenue is recognized as the related performance obligations are satisfied.
Judgment is required to determine the SSP for each distinct performance obligation. We determine SSP based on the price at which the performance obligation is sold separately and the methods of estimating SSP under the guidance of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606-10-32-33. If the SSP is not observable through past transactions, we estimate the SSP, taking into account available information such as market conditions, expected margins, and internally approved pricing guidelines related to the performance obligations. In February 2019, we began selling a new software bundle called Framework in addition to our legacy software products and services. Our legacy products were historically sold on a standalone basis and therefore the SSP and revenue recognition may differ from Framework. A typical Framework deal licenses our software products and services, including upgrades for one fixed price. Management considers the pricing of our Framework perpetual licenses as highly variable and uncertain and we do not have a history of selling the Framework software on a standalone basis. We recognize the portion of the transaction price allocated to Framework software on a residual basis, as we have at least one performance obligation for which the SSP is observable. The Company notes that both hardware and support services represent observable pricing. The SSP for our Legacy software is also recognized on a residual basis, as we have observable SSP for the associated support services sold with the software license based on historical observable data of selling support contracts on a standalone basis. We may also license our software as a SaaS type license, whereby our customer only has a right to access the software over a specified time period and the service includes technical support and unspecified upgrades and bug fixes. We recognize the full value of the contract ratably over the contractual term of the SaaS license.
Our services revenue is comprised of software license implementation services, engineering services, training and reimbursable expenses. We have concluded that services are distinct performance obligations, with the exception of engineering services. Engineering services may be provided on a standalone basis or bundled with a license when providing custom development.
We utilize the cost-plus margin method to determine the SSP for our Framework support services offerings and hardware sales. For Framework support services, we calculate the average cost of support to within a small range to arrive at an average expected cost. Legacy support services are priced as a percentage of the list price of the related software license and hardware. Historically, we determined the SSP of the support services based on this pricing relationship and observable data from standalone sales of support contracts. The expected cost-plus margin for hardware is based on the cost of the hardware from third parties, plus a reasonable markup that the Company believes is reflective of a market-based reseller margin.
The SSP for services in time and materials contracts is determined by observable prices in standalone services arrangements. We estimate the SSP for fixed price services based on estimated hours adjusted for historical experience at time and material rates charged in standalone services arrangements. Revenue for fixed price services is recognized over time as the services are provided based on an input measure of hours incurred to total estimated hours.
Some of our contracts have payment terms that differ from the timing of revenue recognition, which requires us to assess whether the transaction price for those contracts include a significant financing component. We have elected the practical expedient that permits an entity to not adjust for the effects of a significant financing component if we expect that at the contract inception, the period between when the entity transfers a promised good or service to a customer and when the customer pays for that good or service, will be one year or less. For those contracts in which the period exceeds the one-year threshold, this assessment, as well as the quantitative estimate of the financing component and its relative significance, requires judgment. We estimate the significant financing component provided to our customers with extended payment terms by determining the present value of the future payments by applying an average standard industry discount rate that reflects the customer’s creditworthiness.
Payment terms with customers typically require payment 30 days from invoice date. Our agreements with customers do not provide for any refunds for services or products and therefore no specific reserve for such is maintained. In the infrequent instances where customers raise a concern over delivered products or services, we have endeavored to remedy the concern and all costs related to such matters have been insignificant in all periods presented.
We occasionally enter into amendments to previously executed contracts that may constitute contract modifications. The amendments are assessed to determine if (1) the additional products and services are distinct from the product and services in the original arrangement; and (2) the amount of consideration expected for the added products and services reflects the SSP of those products and services. A contract modification meeting both criteria is accounted for as a separate contract. An amendment or contract modification not meeting both criteria is considered a change to the original contract and is accounted for on either a prospective basis as a termination of the existing contract and the creation of a new contract or a cumulative catch-up basis.
Contract Balances
Contract assets consist of unbilled revenue, which is recognized as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms, either at periodic intervals or upon achievement of contractual milestones. Unbilled receivables expected to be billed and collected within one year are classified as current assets or long-term assets if expected to be billed and collected after one year.
Costs to Obtain and Fulfill a Contract
We recognize an asset for the incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer if we expect the benefit of those costs to be longer than one year. We have determined that commissions and special incentive payments (“Spiffs”) for hardware and software maintenance and support and professional services paid under our sales incentive programs meet the requirements to be capitalized under ASC 340-40. Costs to obtain a contract are amortized as selling and marketing expense over the expected period of benefit in a manner that is consistent with the transfer of the related goods or services to which the asset relates. The judgments made in determining the amount of costs incurred include whether the commissions are in fact incremental and would not have occurred absent the customer contract and the estimate of the amortization period. The commissions and Spiffs related to professional services are amortized over time as work is completed. The commissions and Spiffs for hardware and software maintenance are amortized over the life of the contract. These costs are periodically reviewed for impairment. We determined that no impairment of these assets existed as of January 31, 2021 or 2020. We have elected to apply the practical expedient and recognize the incremental costs of obtaining contracts as an expense when incurred if the amortization period of the assets that we otherwise would have recognized is one year or less.
Allowances for Doubtful Accounts
We evaluate our customers’ financial condition, require advance payments from certain of our customers and maintain reserves for potential credit losses. We perform ongoing credit evaluations of our customers’ financial condition but generally do not require collateral. For some international customers, we may require an irrevocable letter of credit to be issued by the customer before the purchase order is accepted. We monitor payments from customers and assess any collection issues. We maintain an allowance for specific doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments and record these allowances as a charge to general and administrative expenses in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We base our general allowances for doubtful accounts on historical collections and write-off experience, current trends, credit assessments, and other analysis of specific customer situations. We charge off trade accounts receivables against the allowance after all means of collection have been exhausted and the potential for recovery is considered remote. Recoveries of trade receivables previously charged off are recorded when received.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
We record goodwill when consideration paid in a business acquisition exceeds the value of the net assets acquired. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable at that time but such estimates are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. Assumptions may be incomplete or inaccurate, and unanticipated events or circumstances may occur, which may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually and more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. We have determined that there is a single reporting unit for the purpose of conducting the goodwill impairment assessment. A goodwill impairment is recorded if the amount by which our carrying value exceeds our fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. Factors that could lead to a future impairment include material uncertainties such as a significant reduction in projected revenues, a deterioration of projected
financial performance, future acquisitions and/or mergers, and a decline in our market value as a result of a significant decline in our stock price.
Intangible assets are recorded at their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. We amortize acquired intangible assets over their estimated useful lives based on the pattern of consumption of the economic benefits or, if that pattern cannot be readily determined, on a straight-line basis.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets primarily consist of property, plant and equipment and intangible assets with finite lives. Long-lived assets are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or group of assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of long-lived assets or groups of assets is assessed based on a comparison of the carrying amount to the estimated future undiscounted cash flows. If estimated future undiscounted net cash flows are less than the carrying amount, the asset is considered impaired and expense is recorded at an amount required to reduce the carrying amount to fair value. Determining the fair value of long-lived assets includes significant judgment by management, and different judgments could yield different results.
We assess the useful lives and possible impairment of existing recognized long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that indicate that it is more likely than not that an impairment has occurred. We test intangible assets with definite lives for impairment by comparing the carrying amount to the sum of the net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its net undiscounted cash flows, then an impairment loss is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds its fair value. We use a discounted cash flow approach or other methods, if appropriate, to assess fair value. Factors considered important which could trigger a review include:
•
significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results;
•
significant changes in the manner of use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business;
•
identification of other impaired assets within a reporting unit;
•
significant negative industry or economic trends;
•
a significant decline in our stock price for a sustained period; and
•
a decline in our market capitalization relative to net book value.
Determining whether a triggering event has occurred involves significant judgment.
Income Taxes
Income taxes comprise current and deferred income tax. Income taxes are recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss except to the extent that it relates to items recognized directly within equity or in other comprehensive loss. Income taxes payable, which is included in accrued expenses in our consolidated balance sheets, is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the year, using tax rates enacted or substantially-enacted at the reporting date, and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous years.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized, using the balance sheet method, for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and the amounts used for taxation purposes. Deferred tax is not recognized for the following temporary differences: the initial recognition of goodwill, the initial recognition of assets and liabilities in a transaction that is not a business combination and that affects neither accounting nor taxable profit, and differences relating to investments in subsidiaries to the extent that they probably will not reverse in the foreseeable future. Deferred tax is measured at the tax rates that are expected to be applied to temporary differences when they reverse, based on the laws that have been enacted or substantially-enacted by the reporting date.
A deferred tax asset is recognized for unused tax losses, tax credits and deductible temporary differences, to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which they can be utilized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income in the countries where the deferred tax assets originated and during the periods when the deferred tax assets become deductible. Management considers the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, and tax planning strategies in making this assessment.
We operate in multiple jurisdictions with complex tax policy and regulatory environments. In certain of these jurisdictions, we may take tax positions that management believes are supportable, but are potentially subject to successful challenge by the applicable taxing authority. These interpretational differences with the respective governmental taxing authorities can be impacted by the local economic and fiscal environment. We evaluate our tax positions and establish liabilities in accordance with the applicable accounting guidance on uncertainty in income taxes. We review these tax uncertainties in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the progress of tax audits, and adjust them accordingly.
Our policy is to classify interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits, if and when required, as a component of income tax provision (benefit), in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We have made a policy election to treat the Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (“GILTI”) tax as a period expense.
Because there are several estimates and assumptions inherent in calculating the various components of our tax provision, certain changes or future events such as changes in tax legislation, geographic mix of earnings, completion of tax audits or earnings repatriation plans could have an impact on those estimates and our effective tax rate.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock options and other stock-based awards granted to employees and directors based on their fair value on the date of the grant and recognize compensation expense of those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We apply the straight-line method of expense recognition to all awards with only service-based vesting conditions and apply the graded-vesting method to all awards with both service-based and performance-based vesting conditions, commencing when achievement of the performance condition becomes probable. We apply the graded-vesting method to awards with market conditions that include graded-vesting features.