Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
OVERVIEW
Sales and costs of Seaboard’s segments are significantly influenced by worldwide fluctuations in commodity prices and changes in foreign political and economic conditions. Accordingly, sales, operating income and cash flows can fluctuate significantly from year to year. As each segment operates in a distinct industry and a different geographic location, management evaluates their operations separately. Seaboard’s reporting segments are based on information used by Seaboard’s CEO to determine allocation of resources and assess performance, in his capacity as chief operating decision maker.
Seaboard’s operations have been both directly and indirectly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. At the onset of the pandemic in March and April of 2020, Seaboard experienced a change in product mix, including a significant decline in volume and prices for food service business due to restaurant closings, less demand for transportation due to customers temporarily shut down due to government orders and capital market volatility. Seaboard saw improvement in its third and fourth quarter 2020 results though challenges remain. Seaboard continues to encounter partially staffed shifts, lock downs or curfews in some geographic regions and the impacts from commodity market volatility. The near and long-term impacts of COVID-19 on Seaboard’s operations and the global economy are unknown and impossible to predict with any level of certainty.
Pork Segment
The Pork segment primarily produces hogs to process and sells fresh and frozen pork products throughout the U.S. and to foreign markets. Sales prices are directly affected by both domestic and worldwide supply and demand for pork products and other proteins. Feed accounts for the largest input cost in raising hogs and is materially affected by price changes for corn and soybean meal. Market prices for hogs purchased from third parties for processing at the plant also represent a major cost factor. Within the portfolio of Seaboard’s businesses, management believes profitability of the Pork segment is most susceptible to commodity price fluctuations. As a result, this segment’s operating income and cash flows can materially fluctuate from year to year, significantly affecting Seaboard’s consolidated operating income and cash flows. This segment is Seaboard’s most capital-intensive segment, representing approximately 58% of Seaboard’s total fixed assets, in addition to approximately 48% of total inventories, as of December 31, 2020. With the plant generally operating at capacity, Seaboard is continually looking for ways to enhance the plant’s operational efficiency, while also looking to increase margins by introducing new, higher value products. This segment also produces biodiesel for sale to third parties. Sales prices are affected by the supply and demand of diesel and environmental credit initiatives.
CT&M Segment
The CT&M segment provides integrated agricultural commodity trading, processing and logistics services. The majority of the CT&M segment’s sales are derived from sourcing agricultural commodities from multiple origins which are delivered to third-party and affiliate customers in various international locations. The execution of these purchase and delivery transactions have long cycles of completion, which may extend for several months with a high degree of price volatility. As a result, these factors can significantly affect sales volumes, operating income, working capital and related cash flows from period to period. This segment represents approximately 46% of Seaboard’s total inventories as of December 31, 2020. This segment owns three vessels, but the majority of the trading business is transacted with chartered ships. Consolidated and non-consolidated affiliates operate the grain processing business in foreign countries that are, in most cases, lesser developed. Foreign operations can be significantly impacted by changes in local crop production, political instability and local government policies, as well as fluctuations in economic and industry conditions and foreign currency exchange rates. This segment’s sales are also significantly affected by fluctuating prices of various commodities, such as wheat, corn and soybean meal. Exports from various countries can exacerbate volatile market conditions that may have a significant impact on this segment’s sales and operating income. Profit margins are sometimes protected by using commodity derivatives and other risk management practices. The CT&M segment has invested in several entities in recent years and continues to seek opportunities to expand its business.
Marine Segment
The Marine segment provides cargo shipping services in the U.S., the Caribbean and Central and South America. Fluctuations in economic conditions and political instability in the regions or countries in which this segment operates may affect trade volumes and operating profits. In addition, cargo rates can fluctuate depending on regional supply and demand for shipping services. Since the Marine segment time-charters the majority of its ocean cargo vessels, it is affected by fluctuations in charter hire rates as well as fuel costs. This segment continues to explore ways to increase volumes on existing routes while seeking opportunities to broaden its route structure in the regions it serves.
Sugar and Alcohol Segment
The Sugar and Alcohol segment produces and processes sugar and alcohol in Argentina, primarily to be marketed locally. The Sugar and Alcohol segment’s sales and operating income are significantly affected by local and worldwide sugar and alcohol prices. Domestic sugar production levels in Argentina affect the local price. Global sugar price fluctuations, to a lesser extent, have an impact in Argentina as well. The currency exchange rate can have an impact on reported U.S. dollar sales, operating income and cash flows.
Power Segment
The Power segment is an independent power producer in the Dominican Republic. Spot market rates are impacted by fuel prices and the various producers supplying power to the grid. While fuel is this segment’s largest cost component and is subject to price fluctuations, higher fuel costs generally have been passed on to customers.
Turkey Segment
The Turkey segment, accounted for using the equity method, produces turkeys to process and sells turkey products. Sales prices are directly affected by both domestic and worldwide supply and demand for turkey products and other proteins. Feed accounts for the largest input cost in raising turkeys and is materially affected by price changes for corn and soybean meal. As a result, commodity price fluctuations can significantly affect the profitability and cash flows of Butterball.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Summary of Sources and Uses of Cash
As of December 31, 2020, Seaboard had cash and short-term investments of $1.5 billion and additional total working capital of $737 million. Cash and short-term investments as of December 31, 2020 decreased $18 million from December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily the result of $259 million of capital expenditures and $69 million of long-term debt payments, partially offset by $291 million of cash from operations. Cash from operating activities increased $120 million primarily due to higher adjusted earnings partially offset by uses of cash for working capital.
As of December 31, 2020, $52 million of the $1.5 billion of cash and short-term investments were held by Seaboard’s foreign subsidiaries. Historically, Seaboard has considered substantially all foreign profits as being permanently invested in its foreign operations, including all cash and short-term investments held by foreign subsidiaries. Seaboard intends to continue permanently reinvesting the majority of these funds outside the U.S. as current plans do not demonstrate a need to repatriate them to fund Seaboard’s U.S. operations. For any planned repatriation to the U.S., Seaboard would record applicable deferred taxes for state or foreign withholding taxes.
Capital Expenditures, Acquisitions and Other Investing Activities
During 2020, Seaboard invested $259 million in property, plant and equipment, of which $207 million was in the Pork segment and $27 million in the Power segment. The Pork segment expenditures were primarily for the expansion of the Oklahoma pork processing plant and the modifications of an idle ethanol plant and its related assets in Hugoton, Kansas. The Power segment expenditures were primarily for its power generating barge under construction. All other capital expenditures were primarily of a normal recurring nature such as replacements of machinery and equipment and general facility modernizations and upgrades.
The total budget for 2021 capital expenditures is approximately $456 million, with $340 million planned in the Pork segment and $25 million in the Power segment to complete the new barge and interconnection for existing barge at a different site. The Pork segment budgeted approximately $173 million to complete modifications to convert an acquired idle ethanol facility to a renewable diesel plant with operations currently expected to begin in 2022, and the remainder to new projects, including biogas recovery projects. Certain projects or purchases were delayed due to COVID-19, so overall capital expenditures are expected to be higher than last year. Management anticipates paying for these capital expenditures from a combination of available cash, the use of available short-term investments and Seaboard’s available borrowing capacity.
Seaboard has acquired businesses in 2020, 2019 and 2018, and intends to continue to look for opportunities to further grow and diversify its operations, but there are no definitive plans at this time. Also, from time to time, Seaboard may fund capital calls and issue borrowings for its equity method investments based on the specific facts and circumstances. During 2020, Seaboard contributed $8 million to non-consolidated affiliates for working capital needs.
Financing Activities
The following table presents a summary of Seaboard’s available borrowing capacity. During 2020, Seaboard entered into a committed line of credit agreement for $250 million of additional liquidity for working capital and general corporate purposes.
Seaboard has debt of $763 million, which includes term loans of $714 million and foreign subsidiary obligations of $49 million. Subsequent to year-end, Seaboard repaid $46 million of foreign subsidiary obligations. Seaboard has capacity under its debt covenants to undertake additional debt financings of approximately $1.3 billion as of December 31, 2020. See Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion of debt.
Management intends to continue seeking opportunities for expansion in the industries in which Seaboard operates, utilizing existing liquidity, available borrowing capacity and other financing alternatives. The terms and availability of such financing may be impacted by economic and financial market conditions, as well as Seaboard's financial condition and results of operations at the time Seaboard seeks such financing, and there can be no assurances that Seaboard will be able to obtain such financing on terms that will be acceptable or advantageous. Accordingly, management believes Seaboard’s combination of internally generated cash, liquidity, capital resources and borrowing capabilities will be adequate for its existing operations and any currently known potential plans for expansion of existing operations for the next twelve months.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Several of Seaboard’s segments have long-term contractual obligations, including non-cancelable lease agreements and purchase commitments. See Notes 6 and 9 to the consolidated financial statements for discussion on purchase commitments and leases, respectively.
The following table provides a summary of Seaboard’s long-term contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(a) Interest payments in the table above include expected cash payments for interest on variable and fixed rate long term debt. Variable interest rates are based on interest rates as of December 31, 2020.
(b) Retirement benefit payments in the table above represent expected benefit payments for various non-qualified pension plans and supplemental retirement arrangements as discussed in Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements, which are unfunded obligations that are deemed to be employer contributions. No contributions are planned at this time to the qualified pension plan.
(c) U.S. federal income tax payable on mandatory deemed repatriation pursuant to the 2017 Tax Act.
Deferred income taxes and certain other long-term liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets are not included in the table above as management is unable to reliably estimate the timing of the payments for these items.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Prior period financial information included in this Form 10-K has been adjusted for the effect of a change in method in accounting for inventory in the Pork segment. See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion of this change in accounting principle and the related impact to the financial statements.
Net sales for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $7.1 billion, $6.8 billion and $6.6 billion, respectively. The increase for 2020 compared to 2019 primarily reflected higher volumes of certain commodities in the CT&M segment and higher volumes for pork products and hogs sold in the Pork segment, partially offset by lower cargo volumes in the Marine segment and lower spot prices and generation in the Power segment. The increase for 2019 compared to 2018 primarily reflected higher volumes of certain commodities in the CT&M segment and higher prices for pork products sold in the Pork segment, partially offset by lower biodiesel revenue in the Pork segment and lower volumes and prices of sugar and alcohol sold in the Sugar and Alcohol segment.
Operating income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $245 million, $110 million and $236 million, respectively. The increase for 2020 compared to 2019 primarily reflected lower derivative contract losses and higher margins on pork product sales in the Pork segment and higher margins on third-party sales and derivative contract gains in the CT&M segment, partially offset by lower revenues in the Power segment. The decrease for 2019 compared to 2018 primarily reflected derivative contract losses and lower margins on biodiesel sales in the Pork segment, lower alcohol margins in the Sugar and Alcohol segment and higher voyage costs in the Marine segment.
Pork Segment
Net sales for the Pork segment increased $90 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily the result of higher volumes of pork products, market hogs and biodiesel sold and the recognition of more federal blender’s credits than the prior year, partially offset by lower biodiesel prices.
Operating income for the Pork segment increased $71 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily due to lower derivative contract losses, higher pork product sales, lower costs for feed and third-party hogs, more income associated with the federal blender’s credits received, and no expense related to the withdrawal liability from a multi-employer pension fund recorded in 2019 as discussed below, partially offset by higher plant processing costs and lower margins on biodiesel sales. Seaboard sells pork to international customers located in China, among other countries, and incremental tariffs, the duration of which is uncertain, continue to have a negative impact on earnings. Management is unable to predict market prices for pork products, the cost of feed or third-party hogs, the prices of biodiesel or the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic for future periods. For 2021, it currently appears that overall costs will be higher than in 2020 because of higher grain prices. Based on these conditions, management cannot predict if this segment will be profitable in 2021.
Loss from affiliates has decreased primarily due to the STF plant processing more hogs and utilizing more capacity. STF’s operations began in September 2017 with a second shift commencing in October 2018.
Net sales for the Pork segment increased $77 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The increase was primarily the result of higher volumes and prices of market hogs sold, higher prices and volumes for pork products sold and the recognition of the federal blender’s credits of $60 million in 2019 for biodiesel production in tax years 2018 and 2019, partially offset by lower biodiesel prices and volumes. In December 2019, the President of the U.S. signed into law the Further Consolidated Appropriations Act that extended the federal blender’s credits through 2022. In the first quarter of 2018, the Pork segment received $42 million of revenue related to 2017 biodiesel production.
Operating income for the Pork segment decreased $84 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease was primarily due to derivative contract losses, lower margins on biodiesel sales and a $14 million expense related to the withdrawal liability from a multi-employer pension fund as discussed in Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements, partially offset by higher margins on pork product sales and the increase in federal blender’s credits received. Margins on pork product sales increased as higher sales prices were only partially offset by higher production and processing costs.
CT&M Segment
Net sales for the CT&M segment increased $322 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase primarily reflected higher volumes of certain commodities to third-party customers, including sales from a business acquired in October 2019, and higher corn, soybean and other commodity prices, partially offset by lower volumes to affiliates.
Operating income for the CT&M segment increased $56 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase primarily reflected higher margins on third-party sales, including margins for a business acquired in October 2019, from higher prices and volumes, derivative contract gains of $20 million related to mark-to-market adjustments and lower selling, general and administrative expenses. Due to worldwide commodity price fluctuations, the uncertain political and economic conditions in the countries in which this segment operates, the volatility in the commodity markets and the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, management is unable to predict sales and operating results for this segment for future periods. However, management anticipates positive operating income for this segment in 2021, excluding the effects of marking to market derivative contracts.
Had Seaboard not applied mark-to-market accounting to its derivative instruments, operating income for this segment would have been lower by $15 million in 2020 and higher by $5 million and $3 million in 2019 and 2018 respectively. While management believes its commodity futures, options and foreign exchange contracts are primarily economic hedges of its firm purchase and sales contracts or anticipated sales contracts, Seaboard does not perform the extensive record-keeping required to account for these transactions as hedges for accounting purposes. Accordingly, while the changes in fair value of the derivative instruments were marked to market, the changes in value of the firm purchase or sales contracts were not. As products are delivered to customers, these existing marked-to-market adjustments should be primarily offset by realized margins or losses as revenue is recognized over time and therefore, these marked-to-market adjustments could reverse in fiscal 2021. Management believes eliminating these marked-to-market adjustments provides a more reasonable presentation to compare and evaluate period-to-period financial results for this segment.
Net sales for the CT&M segment increased $244 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The increase primarily reflected higher volumes of certain commodities for third-party customers, including sales for a business acquired in January 2018 with certain entities on a three-month lag and another business acquired in October 2019, and higher wheat, corn and other commodity prices, partially offset by lower affiliate volumes and sales prices.
Operating income for the CT&M segment increased $16 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The increase primarily reflected higher margins on third-party sales, partially offset by higher selling, general and administrative costs related to the business acquired.
Marine Segment
Net sales for the Marine segment decreased $56 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily the result of lower cargo volumes, partially offset by slightly higher rates due to a change in cargo mix with more refrigerated containers that generally have a higher freight rate. The Marine segment’s results were significantly impacted in the second quarter of 2020 with a decrease of $67 million in sales compared to the same period in 2019 due to less demand with many of Marine’s customers temporarily shut down due to government orders associated with COVID-19.
Operating income for the Marine segment increased $17 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily the result of lower fuel costs due to the decrease in price and consumption and lower other
voyage costs and terminal costs related to the reduction in cargo volumes. Management cannot predict fuel costs, cargo volumes and cargo rates, the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic or to what extent changes in economic conditions in markets served will affect net sales or operating income for future periods. However, management anticipates positive operating income for this segment in 2021.
Net sales for the Marine segment increased $4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The increase was primarily the result of a change in cargo mix, with more refrigerated containers that generally have a higher rate, partially offset by lower cargo volumes.
Operating income for the Marine segment decreased $21 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease was primarily the result of higher voyage costs related to charter hire rates, terminal costs and fuel costs. The reduced global sulfur emissions cap from 3.5% to 0.5% became effective on January 1, 2020 and resulted in higher fuel costs as purchases of low-sulfur fuel began in late 2019.
Sugar and Alcohol Segment
Net sales for the Sugar and Alcohol segment decreased $15 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease primarily reflected lower volumes and prices of alcohol sold as a result of less demand for fuels with the lengthy COVID-19 pandemic lockdown, partially offset by higher sugar prices. Sugar and alcohol sales are denominated in Argentine pesos, and an increase in local sales prices may be offset by exchange rate changes in the Argentine peso against the U.S. dollar. This segment’s functional currency is the U.S. dollar, which will continue to be effective as long as the Argentine economy is considered highly inflationary.
Operating income for the Sugar and Alcohol segment increased $18 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase primarily reflected higher margins on sugar due to higher prices and lower alcohol and sugar production costs. Management cannot predict local sugar and alcohol prices, the volatility in the currency exchange rate or the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic for future periods. Based on these conditions, management cannot predict if this segment will be profitable in 2021.
Net sales for the Sugar and Alcohol segment decreased $63 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease primarily reflected lower volumes and prices of sugar and alcohol sold.
Operating income for the Sugar and Alcohol segment decreased $25 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease primarily reflected lower margins on alcohol, partially offset by lower selling, general and administrative expenses.
Power Segment
Net sales for the Power segment decreased $53 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease primarily reflected lower spot market rates as a result of lower fuel prices and lower production related to more power generation from lower variable-cost producers.
Operating income for the Power segment decreased $24 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to lower revenues, partially offset by lower fuel costs due to lower prices and fuel consumption. Management cannot predict fuel costs, the extent that spot market rates will fluctuate compared to fuel costs or other power producers, or the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic for future periods. Based on these conditions, management cannot predict if this segment will be profitable in 2021. Financial results are expected to be lower during the period of interconnection for the existing barge at a new site.
Net sales for the Power segment decreased $5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease primarily reflected lower spot market rates as a result of lower fuel prices.
Operating income for the Power segment increased $6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to lower fuel costs, partially offset by lower revenues.
Income from affiliates decreased as the Power segment sold its 29.9% interest in an electricity generation facility during 2019.
Turkey Segment
The Turkey segment, accounted for using the equity method, represents Seaboard’s investment in Butterball. The decrease in loss from affiliate for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily the result of higher sales attributable to more whole bird volumes and increased prices related to a stronger sales mix of value-added products sold and less interest expense, partially offset by higher live and production costs. The increase in loss from affiliate for 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily the result of higher production and other costs, including interest, partially offset by higher prices for turkey products sold. Management is unable to predict market prices for turkey products, the cost of feed or the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic for future periods. Based on these conditions, management cannot predict if this segment will be profitable in 2021.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $7 million compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily the result of lower costs related to Seaboard’s deferred compensation program, recovery of bad debt expense and lower travel costs and other cost reduction efforts, partially offset by higher personnel costs, which included higher pension settlement charges in 2020. The deferred compensation program costs are offset by the effect of the mark-to-market on investments recorded in other investment income (loss). SG&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $22 million compared to 2018. The increase was primarily the result of increased personnel-related costs, including higher costs related to Seaboard’s deferred compensation program and the businesses acquired.
Interest Expense
Interest expense totaled $19 million, $36 million and $44 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The decrease in interest expense for 2020 compared to 2019 primarily related to lower interest rates on outstanding debt and increased capitalized interest related to ongoing capital expenditure investments. The decrease in interest expense for 2019 compared to 2018 primarily related to lower interest rates on outstanding debt for the Sugar and Alcohol segment and more capitalized interest related to capital expenditure investments, partially offset by higher debt outstanding related to the Term Loan due 2028 amended in September 2018.
Interest Income
Interest income totaled $22 million, $30 million and $14 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The decrease for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to less interest earned on debt securities. The increase for 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to increased investments in debt securities.
Other Investment Income (Loss), Net
Other investment income (loss), net totaled $84 million, $225 million and ($152) million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The changes primarily reflect mark-to-market fluctuations on short-term investments.
Foreign Currency Gains (Losses), Net
Foreign currency gains (losses), net totaled ($31) million, $0 million and $4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in foreign currency losses for 2020 compared to 2019 primarily reflected losses in the euro, Zambian kwacha and South African rand, among fluctuations of other currency exchange rates in several foreign countries. The decrease in foreign currency gains for 2019 compared to 2018 primarily reflected losses in the Argentine peso, partially offset by fluctuations of other currency exchange rates.
Income Tax Expense
The 2020 effective tax rate was higher than the 2019 effective tax rate primarily due to decreased tax-exempt income and federal investment tax credits, partially offset by a decrease in foreign tax expense related to a change in the mix of domestic and foreign earnings as compared to the prior year. The 2019 effective tax rate was lower than the 2018 effective tax rate primarily due to increased federal investment tax credits and more tax-exempt income from the retroactive
extension of the federal blender’s credits in December 2019 for both 2018 and 2019. Also, the 2018 rate was impacted by the change in tax classification of a wholly owned subsidiary from a partnership to a corporation and an adjustment to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“2017 Tax Act”) income tax liability. See Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements for further information on Seaboard’s income taxes.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
This discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon Seaboard’s consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires Seaboard to make estimates, judgments, and assumptions that can have a meaningful effect on the reporting of consolidated financial statements. See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of significant accounting policies. Management has identified the accounting estimates believed to be the most important to the portrayal of Seaboard’s financial condition and results, and that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Management has reviewed these critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
Accrued Pension Liability - The measurement of Seaboard’s pension liability and related expense is dependent on a variety of assumptions and estimates regarding future events. These assumptions include discount rates, assumed rate of return on plan assets, compensation increases, mortality rates and retirement rates. The discount rate and return on plan assets are important elements of liability and expense measurement and are reviewed on an annual basis. The effect of decreasing both the discount rate and assumed rate of return on plan assets by 50 basis points would be an increase in pension expense of approximately $4 million per year. The effects of actual results differing from the assumptions (i.e. gains or losses) are primarily accumulated in accrued pension liability and amortized over future periods if it exceeds the 10% corridor and, therefore, could affect Seaboard’s recognized pension expense in such future periods, as permitted under GAAP. See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of the pension rates and assumptions.
Income Taxes - Income taxes are determined by management based on current tax regulations in the various worldwide taxing jurisdictions in which Seaboard conducts its business. In various situations, accruals have been made for estimates of the tax effects for certain transactions, business structures, the estimated reversal of timing differences and future projected profitability of Seaboard’s various business units based on management’s interpretation of existing facts, circumstances and tax regulations. Should new evidence come to management’s attention that could alter previous conclusions, if tax laws change or if taxing authorities disagree with the positions taken by Seaboard, the change in estimate could result in a material adverse or favorable impact on the financial statements. An increase in the future U.S. federal income tax rate of 5% would increase tax expense on the reversal of timing differences by approximately $27 million as a one-time adjustment, which would be fully reflected in the period of enactment.