Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The information in this MD&A should be read together with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes set forth in Part II, Item 8, as well as the discussion included in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All amounts and percentages are approximate due to rounding and all dollars are in millions, except per share amounts.
Business and Reportable Segments
Sealed Air is in business to protect, to solve critical packaging challenges and to make our world better than we found it. Our materials, automated equipment and services maximize food safety and security and product protection while minimizing waste. We serve an array of end markets including protein, foods, fluids, medical and life sciences, pet care, e-Commerce and logistics, and industrials. In the markets we serve, we leverage our differentiated materials, equipment and services; iconic brands; well-established customer relationships; and global scale and market access. Our portfolio of packaging solutions includes Cryovac® brand food packaging, Sealed Air® brand protective packaging, Autobag® brand automated packaging systems, Bubble Wrap® brand packaging, and SEE Automation solutions.
The Company’s segment reporting structure consists of two reportable segments, Food and Protective, and a Corporate category. One of the components of our Reinvent SEE business transformation is to enhance the operational efficiency of the Company by acting as “One SEE”. To that end, organizations and teams focused solely on Food or Protective have merged to bring focus on the strategic direction of the total Company. Karl Deily stepped down from his position as Senior Vice President and Chief Commercial Officer effective as of December 31, 2020 and will continue to serve the Company in an advisory role until his retirement on April 2, 2021. Effective January 1, 2021, Sealed Air's regional leaders, consisting of the President of Asia Pacific (“APAC”), the President of Europe, Middle East and Africa (“EMEA”), and the President of the Americas, assumed Mr. Deily's responsibilities on a regional basis, reporting directly to the President and Chief Executive Officer. Notwithstanding these actions, the Company's chief operating decision maker continues to review and assess performance and make operating decisions based on the Food and Protective reporting structure. We continue to conclude that Food and Protective represents our reportable segments under FASB ASC Topic 280 as of December 31, 2020.
The Company’s Food and Protective segments are considered reportable segments under FASB ASC Topic 280. Our reportable segments are aligned with similar groups of products and customers. Corporate includes certain costs that are not allocated to or monitored by the reportable segments' management. See Note 6, “Segments,” for additional information.
In the second quarter 2020, we renamed our reporting segments from Food Care to Food and from Product Care to Protective. This segment reporting name change aligns with our use internally and in the markets we serve. There was no change in the composition of the segments and no impact on prior period results of our reporting segments.
Business Environment and Overview
We employ sales, marketing and customer service personnel throughout the world who sell and market our products to and through a large number of distributors, fabricators, converters, e-Commerce and mail order fulfillment firms, and contract packaging firms as well as directly to end-users such as food processors, food service businesses, supermarket retailers, lodging, retail pharmaceutical companies, healthcare facilities, medical device manufacturers, and other manufacturers. We generally do not impose annual minimum purchase volume requirements on our distributors. Returns from our distributors in 2020 were not material. In 2020, 2019 or 2018, no customer or affiliated group of customers accounted for 10% or more of our consolidated net sales.
On a consolidated basis, there is minimal seasonality in the business, with net sales slightly lower in the first quarter and slightly higher towards the end of the third quarter through the fourth quarter. Our consolidated results of operations typically trend directionally the same as our net sales seasonality. In 2021, we expect our results of operations to trend higher in the second half of the year compared to the first half, largely due to the effects of higher raw material costs along with the timing of corresponding recovery in our selling prices. Formula based pricing lags raw material cost movement by approximately six months. Approximately one-third of Food's sales are subject to formula based pricing, predominantly within North America and APAC. Formula based pricing does not comprise a significant portion of sales in our Protective segment. Historically, net sales in our Food segment have tended to be slightly lower in the first quarter and slightly higher towards the end of the third quarter through the fourth quarter, due to holiday events. Net sales in our Protective segment have also tended to be slightly lower in the first quarter and higher in the mid-third quarter and through the fourth quarter due to the holiday shopping season. However, the extent and timing of our results of operations may be difficult to predict if significant one-time transactions, events or non-recurring charges were to impact our business. Cash flow from operations has tended to be lower in the first quarter and higher in the fourth quarter, reflecting seasonality of sales and working capital changes, including the timing of certain annual incentive compensation payments.
Throughout 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in anomalies to historical seasonality trends generated by changes in end-consumer behavior, such as an increase in e-Commerce sales, or temporary closures or productivity reductions within our customers' operations. We cannot predict the impact to the markets we serve or the timing or extent of sales due to the prolonged impact or future spread or worsening of the COVID-19 pandemic or future restrictions on commercial activities by governmental agencies to limit future spread of the virus. In addition to COVID-19, other factors may also outweigh the effects of seasonal changes in our net earnings results including, but not limited to, changes in raw materials and other costs, timing of pricing actions, foreign exchange rates, interest rates, taxes and the timing and amount of acquisition synergies and restructuring and other non-recurring charges.
Competition for most of our packaging products is based primarily on packaging performance characteristics, automation, service and price. Since competition is also based upon innovations in packaging technology, we maintain ongoing research and development programs to enable us to maintain technological leadership. Competition is both global and regional in scope and includes numerous smaller, local competitors with limited product portfolios and geographic reach.
Our net sales are sensitive to developments in our customers’ business or market conditions, changes in the global economy, and the effects of foreign currency translation. Our costs can vary materially due to changes in input costs, including petrochemical-related costs (primarily resin costs), which are not within our control. Consequently, our management focuses on reducing those costs that we can control and using petrochemical-based and other raw materials as efficiently as possible. We also believe that our global presence helps to mitigate the impact on the total Company of localized changes in business conditions.
We manage our businesses to generate substantial operating cash flow. We believe that our operating cash flow will permit us to continue to spend on innovative research and development and to invest in our business by means of capital expenditures for property, equipment and acquisitions. Moreover, we expect that our ability to generate substantial operating cash flow should provide us with the flexibility to repay debt and to return capital to our stockholders.
Each issue of our outstanding senior notes imposes limitations on our operations and those of specified subsidiaries. Our Credit Facility contains customary affirmative and negative covenants for credit facilities of this type, including limitations on our indebtedness, liens, investments, restricted payments, mergers and acquisitions, dispositions of assets, transactions with affiliates, amendment of documents and sale leasebacks, and a covenant specifying a maximum leverage ratio of debt to EBITDA. We expect continued compliance with our debt covenants including the covenant leverage ratio over the next 12 months. See Note 14, “Debt and Credit Facilities” for further details.
Non-U.S. GAAP Information
We present financial information that conforms to U.S. GAAP. We also present financial information that does not conform to U.S. GAAP, as our management believes it is useful to investors. In addition, non-U.S. GAAP financial measures are used by management to review and analyze our operating performance and, along with other data, as internal measures for setting annual budgets and forecasts, assessing financial performance, providing guidance and comparing our financial performance with our peers. Non-U.S. GAAP financial measures also provide management with additional means to understand and evaluate the core operating results and trends in our ongoing business by eliminating certain expenses and/or gains (which may not occur in each period presented) and other items that management believes might otherwise make comparisons of our ongoing business with prior periods and peers more difficult, obscure trends in ongoing operations or reduce management’s ability to make useful forecasts. Non-U.S. GAAP information does not purport to represent any similarly titled U.S. GAAP information and is not an indicator of our performance under U.S. GAAP. Investors are cautioned against placing undue reliance on these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures. Further, investors are urged to review and consider carefully the adjustments made by management to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure to arrive at these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures, described below.
The non-U.S. GAAP financial metrics exclude certain specified items (“Special Items”), including restructuring charges and restructuring associated costs, certain transaction and other charges related to acquisitions and divestitures, gains and losses related to acquisitions and divestitures, special tax items or tax benefits (collectively, “Tax Special Items”) and certain other items. We evaluate unusual or Special Items on an individual basis. Our evaluation of whether to exclude an unusual or special item for purposes of determining our non-U.S. GAAP financial measures considers both the quantitative and qualitative aspects of the item, including among other things (i) its nature, (ii) whether or not it relates to our ongoing business operations, and (iii) whether or not we expect it to occur as part of our normal business on a regular basis.
When we present Non-U.S. GAAP forward-looking guidance, we do not also provide guidance for the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures, as they are not available without unreasonable effort due to the high variability, complexity, and low visibility with respect to certain Special Items, including gains and losses on the disposition of businesses,
the ultimate outcome of certain legal or tax proceedings, foreign currency gains or losses resulting from the volatile currency market in Argentina, and other unusual gains and losses. These items are uncertain, depend on various factors, and could be material to our results computed in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as Earnings before Interest Expense, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization, adjusted to exclude the impact of Special Items. Management uses Adjusted EBITDA as one of many measures to assess the performance of the business. Additionally, Adjusted EBITDA is the performance metric used by the Company's chief operating decision maker to evaluate performance of our reportable segments. Adjusted EBITDA is also a metric used to determine performance in the Company's Annual Incentive Plan. We do not believe there are estimates underlying the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA, other than those inherent in our U.S. GAAP results of operations, which would render the use and presentation of Adjusted EBITDA misleading. While the nature and amount of individual Special Items vary from period to period, we believe our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA is applied consistently to all periods and, in conjunction with other U.S. GAAP and non-U.S. GAAP financial measures, Adjusted EBITDA provides a useful and consistent comparison of our Company's performance to other periods.
The following table shows a reconciliation of U.S. GAAP Net Earnings from continuing operations to non-U.S. GAAP Total Company Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations:
(1)Includes depreciation and amortization adjustments of $(0.8) million and $(2.4) million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The Company may also assess performance using Adjusted EBITDA Margin. Adjusted EBITDA Margin is calculated as Adjusted EBITDA divided by net sales. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA Margin is a useful measure to assess the profitability of sales made to third parties and the efficiency of our core operations.
Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted Earnings Per Share
Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted Earnings Per Share (“Adjusted EPS”) are also used by the Company to measure total company performance. Adjusted Net Earnings is defined as U.S. GAAP net earnings from continuing operations excluding the impact of Special Items. Adjusted EPS is defined as our Adjusted Net Earnings divided by the number of diluted shares outstanding. We believe that Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted EPS are useful measurements of Company performance, along with other U.S. GAAP and non-U.S. GAAP financial measures, because they incorporate non-cash items of depreciation
and amortization, including stock-based compensation, which impact the overall performance and net earnings of our business. Additionally, Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted EPS reflect the impact of our Adjusted Tax Rate and interest expense on a net and per share basis. While the nature and amount of individual Special Items vary from period to period, we believe our calculation of Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted EPS is applied consistently to all periods and, in conjunction with other U.S. GAAP and non-U.S. GAAP financial measures, Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted EPS provide a useful and consistent comparison of our Company's performance to other periods.
The following table shows a reconciliation of U.S. GAAP Net Earnings and Diluted Earnings per Share from continuing operations to Non-U.S. GAAP Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted EPS from continuing operations.
(1)Net earnings per common share are calculated under the two-class method.
(2)Includes pre-tax Special Items, less Tax Special Items and the tax impact of Special Items as seen in the following calculation of non-U.S. GAAP Adjusted income tax rate.
Adjusted Tax Rate
We also present our adjusted income tax rate (“Adjusted Tax Rate”). The Adjusted Tax Rate is a measure of our U.S. GAAP effective tax rate, adjusted to exclude the tax impact from the Special Items that are excluded from our Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted EPS metrics as well as expense or benefit from any special taxes or Tax Special Items. The Adjusted Tax Rate is an indicator of the taxes on our core business. The tax circumstances and effective tax rate in the specific countries where the Special Items occur will determine the impact (positive or negative) to the Adjusted Tax Rate. While the nature and amount of Tax Special Items vary from period to period, we believe our calculation of the Adjusted Tax Rate is applied consistently to all periods and, in conjunction with our U.S. GAAP effective income tax rate, the Adjusted Tax Rate provides a useful and consistent comparison of the impact that tax expense has on our Company's performance.
The following table shows our calculation of the non-U.S. GAAP Adjusted income tax rate:
(1)For the year ended December 31, 2020, Tax Special Items reflect net benefits from audit settlements and retroactive application of new GILTI regulations, offset by withholding expense related to cash repatriation initiatives. For the year ended December 31, 2019, Tax Special Items reflect net benefits from tax optimization initiatives and research and development credits. For the year ended December 31, 2018, the Tax Special Items included $222 million of expense for the one-time tax on unrepatriated earnings (U.S. Tax Reform Transition Tax), partially offset by the release of valuation allowances associated with tax initiatives
(2)The tax rate used to calculate the tax impact of Special Items is based on the jurisdiction in which the item was recorded.
Organic and Constant Dollar Measures
In our “Net Sales by Geographic Region,” “Net Sales by Segment” and in some of the discussions and tables that follow, we exclude the impact of foreign currency translation when presenting net sales information, which we define as “constant dollar” and we exclude acquisitions in the first year after closing, divestiture activity and the impact of foreign currency translation when presenting net sales information, which we define as “organic.” Changes in net sales excluding the impact of foreign currency translation and/or acquisition and divestiture activity are non-U.S. GAAP financial measures. As a worldwide business, it is important that we consider the effects of foreign currency translation when we view our results and plan our strategies. Nonetheless, we cannot control changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Consequently, when our management analyzes our financial results including performance metrics such as sales, cost of goods sold or selling, general and administrative expense, to measure the core performance of our business, we may exclude the impact of foreign currency translation by translating our current period results at prior period foreign currency exchange rates. We also may exclude the impact of foreign currency translation when making incentive compensation determinations. As a result, our management believes that these presentations are useful internally and may be useful to investors.
Refer to these specific tables presented later in our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for reconciliations of these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.
Free Cash Flow
In addition to net cash provided by operating activities, we use free cash flow as a useful measure of performance and an indication of the strength and ability of our operations to generate cash. We define free cash flow as cash provided by operating activities less capital expenditures (which is classified as an investing activity). Free cash flow is not defined under U.S. GAAP. Therefore, free cash flow should not be considered a substitute for net income or cash flow data prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Free cash flow does not represent residual cash available for discretionary expenditures, including certain debt servicing requirements or non-discretionary expenditures that are not deducted from this measure.
Refer to the specific tables presented later in our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations under Analysis of Historical Cash Flow for reconciliations of these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.
Executive Summary for 2020
COVID-19 presented new challenges for Sealed Air's global operations throughout 2020. While focusing on the health and safety of our employees, suppliers and customers globally, we continue to operate and serve customers' needs, with only limited facility closures as a result of initial government orders in response to the pandemic. Our local, regional and corporate crisis management teams remain active and business continuity plans remain in effect.
Since March 2020, there has been an imbalance across our end-markets due to changes in consumer behaviors, modifications made by our customers, governmental restrictions and other COVID-19 related factors. Within our Food reporting segment, there has been strong demand in retail channels with continuing softness in food service. Food processors are working hard to meet increased retail demand while balancing labor shortages and social distancing within their operations. In Protective, e-Commerce, retail and logistics exhibited strength throughout the year due to shifts in consumer behavior. The growth in e-Commerce, logistics and fulfillment was offset by industrial end-markets which were soft during the year.
In 2020, we launched our SEE Automation Solutions strategy. We seek to solve our customers’ automation needs and provide a differentiated value proposition to our customers including automated equipment, services and materials. With SEE
Automation, we are taking an integrated solutions approach and looking for opportunities to help customers eliminate waste, simplify processes, remove people from harm's way and drive 'touchless' operations. Across both our segments, capital-intensive equipment and automated solutions were negatively impacted during the first half of 2020 by the slowdown on capital expenditures by our customers, as well as order and installation delays due to social distancing measures. However, our equipment and automated solutions business increased in the second half of 2020 as customers resumed essential purchases and began to invest in automation.
We continue to execute our Reinvent SEE business transformation, focused on the 4P'SSM: Performance, People, Products, Process and Sustainability. During the year, Reinvent SEE delivered incremental Adjusted EBITDA benefits of $118 million. The full year benefits to Adjusted EBITDA from Reinvent SEE were partially offset by negative foreign currency impacts and higher expenses associated with labor inflation, incentive compensation and investments in the business. We expect the Reinvent SEE business transformation to deliver incremental cost benefits to Adjusted EBITDA of approximately $65 million in 2021 compared to 2020. We also expect that the capabilities and governance processes established through the Reinvent SEE business transformation will transition well into our SEE Operating Model and an on-going continuous improvement system and enable us to generate additional savings and growth opportunities beyond 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred approximately $31 million, or $23 million net of tax, in restructuring and restructuring associated charges primarily related to our Reinvent SEE business transformation initiatives. Cash payments, including restructuring payments related to our Reinvent SEE business transformation and legacy programs, were $74 million. See Note 12, “Restructuring Activities,” for additional details regarding each of the Company’s restructuring programs.
In 2020, the Company's net sales increased $112 million or 2% to $4,903 million, primarily driven by incremental contributions from the 2019 acquisition of Automated Packaging Systems. Foreign currency had a negative impact on net sales of $82 million or 2%. Food's net sales decreased $55 million or 2% in 2020. The decrease was driven by the impact of unfavorable foreign currency. Excluding currency headwinds, Food net sales increased $27 million or 1% on favorable volume and pricing trends and contributions from two small acquisitions made in 2019. In Protective, net sales increased $167 million or 9%, including $166 million from the Automated Packaging Systems acquisition noted above. See Note 3, “Revenue Recognition, Contracts with Customers,” for additional details regarding revenue recognition.
Impact of COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (“COVID-19”) outbreak as a global pandemic. Additionally, many international heads of state, including the President of the United States, declared the COVID-19 outbreak to be a national emergency in their respective countries. In response to these declarations and the rapid spread of COVID-19 across many countries, governmental agencies around the world (including federal, state and local governments in the U.S.) implemented varying degrees of restrictions on social and commercial activities to promote social distancing in an effort to slow the spread of the illness. These measures, as well as future measures, had and will continue to have a significant adverse impact upon many sectors of the global economy. Additionally, the virus continues to spread in some parts of the world, including regions of the U.S.
We continue to monitor the impact that COVID-19 has on all aspects of our business and geographies, including the impact on our employees, customers, suppliers, business partners and distribution channels. Our crisis management teams, which are comprised of cross functional and regional leaders, continue to assess the evolving situation and implement business continuity plans at both the regional and headquarter levels. See Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” above for additional risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We cannot predict the impact on our operations or markets we serve due to the future spread or worsening of the COVID-19 pandemic or future restrictions on commercial activities by governmental agencies to limit the spread of the virus.
Employee Health and Safety and Business Continuity
The health and safety of Sealed Air’s employees, suppliers and customers globally continues to be the Company’s top priority. Safety measures remain in place at Sealed Air sites such as: enhanced cleaning procedures, employee temperature checks, use of personal protective equipment for location-dependent workers, social distancing measures within operating sites, remote work arrangements for non-location dependent employees, visitor access restrictions and limitations on travel.
In remote working environments, we continue our efforts to mitigate information technology risks including failures in the physical infrastructure or operating systems that support our businesses and customers, or cyber attacks and security breaches of our networks or systems. Additionally, we continue to execute all activities related to our internal control over financial
reporting in our remote environment. There has not been any change in our internal control over financial reporting during the year ended December 31, 2020 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
Supply Chain and Operations
Sealed Air's global operations continue to operate and serve customers' needs. We experienced limited facility closures in 2020 as a result of initial government orders in response to the pandemic. Additionally, in some jurisdictions, we have at times reduced production capacity due to local social distancing requirements which limit the number of employees at any given time in our facilities. These instances have not had a material impact on our operations to date. We continue to closely monitor our location-dependent operations.
The impact of COVID-19 has resulted in approximately $16 million in unanticipated net expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020. These costs included additional personal protective gear, cleaning and other health and hygiene supplies and related expenses; higher employment costs related to COVID-19; and incremental freight due to sourcing changes along with other higher manufacturing related costs, net of direct government assistance.
The health of our workforce, and our ability to meet staffing needs in our manufacturing facilities, distribution of our products and other critical functions are key to our operations.
Markets We Serve
Early during the implementation of initial commercial and social restrictions due to the pandemic, employees within “Food and Agriculture” and “Transportation and Logistics” sectors, including their respective supply chains such as packaging material providers, were deemed “Essential Critical Infrastructure Workers” by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and similarly by other international governmental agencies. These designations covered the majority of Sealed Air employees and allowed us to continue operations in order to serve our customers.
Some sectors, such as industrial goods, capital-intensive equipment and parts of the food industry including food service and restaurants have experienced adverse impacts as a result of the pandemic. Early in the pandemic, sales of capital-intensive equipment that serves food market segments was negatively impacted due to customers' re-evaluation of investments and delays due to restrictions on third-party visitors and installations in light of current social distancing measures. However, our equipment solutions business increased in the second half of the year as customers began to resume essential investments. Some end-segments of our business experienced increased demand from shifts in consumer behavior, including e-Commerce and fulfillment within our Protective segment.
Liquidity and Financial Position
As of December 31, 2020, Sealed Air had approximately $1.7 billion of liquidity available, comprised of $549 million in cash and $1,146 million of undrawn, committed credit facilities. The Company does not have long-term debt maturing until August 2022. See Note 10, “Accounts Receivable Securitization Programs” and Note 14, “Debt and Credit Facilities” for further details.
Highlights of Financial Performance
Below are the highlights of our financial performance for the three years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
# Denotes a variance greater than or equal to 100% or equal to or less than (100)%.
(1)See “Non-U.S. GAAP Information” for a reconciliation of U.S. GAAP net earnings from continuing operations to non-U.S. GAAP Total Company Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations.
(2)See “Non-U.S. GAAP Information” for a reconciliation of U.S. GAAP net earnings and diluted earnings per share from continuing operations to our non-U.S. GAAP Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted EPS from continuing operations.
Foreign Currency Translation Impact on Consolidated Financial Results
Since we are a U.S. domiciled company, we translate our foreign currency-denominated financial results into U.S. dollars. Due to the changes in the value of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, translating our financial results from foreign currencies to U.S. dollars may result in a favorable or unfavorable impact. Historically, the most significant currencies that have impacted the translation of our consolidated financial results are the euro, the Australian dollar, the Mexican peso, the British pound, the Canadian dollar, the New Zealand dollar, the Brazilian real and the Chinese renminbi.
The following table presents the approximate favorable or (unfavorable) impact foreign currency translation had on certain of our consolidated financial results:
Net Sales by Geographic Region
The following tables present the components of the change in net sales by geographic region for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 2019 and for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with 2018.
(1) Our volume reported above includes the net impact of changes in unit volume as well as the period-to-period change in the mix of products sold.
Net Sales by Segment
The following tables present the components of change in net sales by our segment reporting structure for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 2019 and for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with 2018.
(1)Our volume reported above includes the net impact of changes in unit volume as well as the period-to-period change in the mix of products sold.
Food
2020 compared with 2019
As reported, net sales decreased $55 million, or 2%, in 2020 compared with 2019. Foreign currency had a negative impact of $82 million. On a constant dollar basis, net sales increased $27 million, or 1%, in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to the following:
•favorable price of $14 million, primarily in South America driven by U.S. dollar-based indexed pricing, partially offset by formula-based pricing declines in North America;
•higher volume of $7 million, primarily driven by increased demand for retail protein packaging and equipment sales, partially offset by a decline in global food service sales driven by COVID-19 stay-at-home restrictions; and
•contributions from acquisition activities of approximately $7 million.
2019 compared with 2018
As reported, net sales decreased $28 million, or 1% in 2019 compared with 2018. Foreign currency had a negative impact of $107 million. On a constant dollar basis, net sales increased $80 million, or 3% in 2019 compared with 2018 primarily due to the following:
•favorable price of $33 million, primarily in South America driven by U.S. dollar-based indexed pricing, partially offset by North America, which was driven by formula-based pricing;
•higher volume of $30 million, primarily in North America, South America and APAC, partially offset by EMEA; and
•contributions from acquisition activities of $17 million.
Protective
2020 compared with 2019
As reported, net sales increased $167 million, or 9%, in 2020 compared with 2019. The impact of foreign currency translation during the year was negligible. The increase in sales in 2020 compared with 2019 was primarily due to the following:
•the contribution of $166 million in sales from the Automated Packaging Systems acquisition through July 2020, which represents the 12 month anniversary of the acquisition; and
•higher volume of $16 million, primarily in North America and APAC due to increased demand in e-Commerce, fulfillment and automated equipment, partially offset by global softness in industrial end-markets due to COVID-19.
This was partially offset by:
•unfavorable price of $15 million, primarily in North America.
2019 compared with 2018
As reported, net sales increased $86 million, or 5%, in 2019 compared with 2018. On a constant dollar basis, net sales increased $116 million, or 6% in 2019 compared with 2018 primarily due to the following:
•$178 million increase in sales due to acquisitions of Automated Packaging Systems and AFP, Inc. (in the case of AFP, Inc., through the first anniversary of the 2018 acquisition); and
•favorable price of $10 million, primarily in North America.
This was partially offset by:
•lower volume of $72 million, primarily driven by macroeconomic headwinds, particularly in the industrial sector.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales for the years ended December 31, were as follows:
2020 compared with 2019
As reported, cost of sales increased by $68 million or 2.1% in 2020 as compared to 2019. Cost of sales was impacted by favorable foreign currency translation of $60 million. As a percentage of net sales, cost of sales decreased by 10 basis points, from 67.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 67.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to productivity improvements resulting from our Reinvent SEE business transformation initiatives and lower input costs during the year. Improvements were partially offset by the impact of inflationary cost increases including non-material and labor costs and additional expenses related to COVID-19 (including personal protective gear, cleaning and other health and hygiene-related supplies and expenses), higher employment costs and incremental freight due to sourcing changes along with other higher manufacturing related costs.
2019 compared with 2018
As reported, cost of sales was relatively flat in 2019 as compared to 2018. Cost of sales was impacted by favorable foreign currency translation of $98 million. On a constant dollar basis, cost of sales increased $94 million, or 3%, primarily on a higher sales base. As a percentage of net sales, cost of sales decreased by 100 basis points, from 68.3% for the year ended December 31, 2018 to 67.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to improvements resulting from our Reinvent SEE business transformation initiatives, including productivity improvements and restructuring savings, as well as lower input costs benefiting our price/cost spread.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses for the years ended December 31, are included in the table below.
2020 compared with 2019
As reported, SG&A expenses decreased $143 million, or 16%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. SG&A expenses were impacted by favorable foreign currency translation of $6 million. On a constant dollar basis, SG&A expenses decreased approximately $137 million, or 15%. The decrease was primarily driven by a $59 million charge related to a settlement agreement with Novipax in 2019 (See Note 20, “Commitments and Contingencies,” for additional details regarding the Novipax settlement) as well as lower restructuring associated costs and lower professional service fees, including legal fees, associated with Special Items. Travel and entertainment related expenses within SG&A were $19 million lower in 2020 compared to the prior year, primarily resulting from COVID-19 stay-at-home orders and travel restrictions. SG&A has also benefited from reductions driven by our Reinvent SEE business transformation, including restructuring associated savings. These improvements were partially offset by the impact of higher incentive compensation expense and labor cost inflation.
2019 compared with 2018
As reported, SG&A expenses increased $133 million, or 17%, in 2019 as compared to 2018. SG&A expenses were impacted by favorable foreign currency translation of $16 million. On a constant dollar basis, SG&A expenses increased approximately $150 million, or 19%. The increase in SG&A expenses is a result of $60 million in restructuring associated charges primarily related to our Reinvent SEE business transformation initiatives, the $59 million charge associated with the Novipax settlement, incremental SG&A expense from recent acquisitions, including Automated Packaging Systems and AFP, of $39 million and $11 million due to higher incentive compensation expense. Restructuring associated charges described above primarily relate to fees paid to third-party consultants in support of our Reinvent SEE business transformation and costs related to property consolidations resulting from Reinvent SEE. These expenses were partially offset by benefits attributable to our Reinvent SEE business transformation initiatives.
Amortization Expense of Intangible Assets Acquired
Amortization expense of intangible assets acquired for the years ended December 31, were as follows:
The increase in amortization expense of intangibles for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in amortization for capitalized software and the full year impact of intangible amortization associated with the acquisition of Automated Packaging Systems in August 2019.
The increase in amortization expense of intangibles for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to the acquisition of Automated Packaging Systems. The most significant impact on year over year increase in amortization expense was backlog acquired in the Automated Packaging Systems purchase which was amortized over 5 months. The Company also acquired intangibles related to technology, trademarks and tradenames and customer relationships from Automated Packaging Systems.
See Note 5, “Acquisitions,” for additional details regarding the Company's recent acquisition activity.
Reinvent SEE Business Transformation and Restructuring Activities
See Note 12, “Restructuring Activities,” for additional details regarding the Company’s restructuring programs discussed below.
In December 2018 the Sealed Air Board of Directors approved a three-year restructuring program related to the Reinvent SEE business transformation.
Sealed Air has combined the program associated with the Reinvent SEE business transformation with its previously existing restructuring program (as combined, “Program”) that was largely related to the elimination of stranded costs following the sale of Diversey. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Program generated incremental cost benefits of $118 million. Current year benefits include $104 million related to reductions in operating costs, $33 million of which is related to restructuring actions, and $14 million in benefits related to actions impacting price/cost spread. Since the inception of the Program in 2018, we expect the total cost benefits to approximate $355 million by the end of 2021, which implies additional expected cost benefits of approximately $65 million in 2021. We expect the Program spend for the full year 2021 to be in the range of $25 million and $45 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded restructuring expense of $11 million. This was primarily incurred during the second quarter of 2020. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company recorded net restructuring income of $1 million, which was primarily driven by the reversal of headcount-reduction accruals incurred earlier in the year. Throughout the year restructuring expense was highest in North America, which comprised $8 million of the full year expense. We also recorded $20 million in restructuring associated costs for the year ended December 31, 2020. Restructuring associated costs primarily relate to fees paid to third-party consultants in support of the Reinvent SEE business transformation.
The actual timing of future costs and cash payments related to the Program described above are subject to change due to a variety of factors that may cause a portion of the costs, spending and benefits to occur later than expected. In addition, changes in foreign exchange rates may impact future costs, spending, benefits and cost synergies.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net includes the stated interest rate on our outstanding debt, as well as the net impact of capitalized interest, interest income, the effects of terminated interest rate swaps and the amortization of capitalized senior debt issuance costs and credit facility fees, bond discounts, and terminated treasury locks.
Interest expense, net for the years ended December 31, was as follows:
(1)On August 1, 2019, Sealed Air Corporation, on behalf of itself and certain of its subsidiaries, and Sealed Air Corporation (US) entered into an amendment to its existing senior secured credit facility with Bank of America, N.A., as agent, and the other financial institutions party thereto. The amendment provided for a new incremental term facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $475 million, to be used, in part, to finance the acquisition of Automated Packaging Systems. See Note 14, "Debt and Credit Facilities," for further details.
(2)On July 12, 2018, the Company and certain of its subsidiaries entered into a third amended and restated credit agreement with respect to its existing senior secured credit facility. See Note 14, “Debt and Credit Facilities,” for further details.
(3)In November 2019, the Company issued $425 million of 4.00% Senior Notes due 2027 and used the proceeds to retire the existing $425 million of 6.50% Senior Notes due 2020. See Note 14, "Debt and Credit Facilities," for further details.
Other Income (Expense), net
Equity investments
We hold strategic investments in other companies. These investments are accounted for under the measurement alternative, described in ASC 321, for equity investments that do not have readily determinable fair values. These investments are measured at cost, less impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for identical or similar investments of the same issuer. We do not exercise significant influence over these companies. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an increase in the fair value of these investments of $15 million. The increase in fair value was directly related to an additional round of equity issuance from one investee, issued during the fourth quarter 2020. We concluded this was an observable price change in an orderly transaction for a similar investment of the same issuer. See Note 16, "Fair Value Measurements, Equity Investments and Other Financial Instruments," for further details.
Brazil Tax Credits
Cryovac Brasil Ltda., a Sealed Air subsidiary, received a final decision from the Brazilian court regarding a claim in which Sealed Air contended that certain indirect taxes paid were calculated on an incorrect amount. During the second quarter of 2019, the Company filed a return claim for the tax years of 2015 through 2018; as such, the Company has recorded a $4.8 million gain within other income (expense), net on the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the year ended December 31, 2019. As a result of this case, the Company has been utilizing credits on indirect tax payments since the claim was filed. Pending future and final judicial decisions to be made by the Brazilian Supreme Court, the Company may be able to claim an overpayment of indirect taxes paid prior to 2015, including for the tax years 2010 - 2014 for which the Company has prepared documentation.
Loss on debt redemption
In November 2019, Sealed Air issued $425 million of 4.00% Senior Notes due December 2027. The proceeds were used to repurchase $425 million 6.50% Senior Notes due December 2020. We recognized a $16 million pre-tax loss on the transaction. The loss was primarily driven by the breakage fee on the bond redemption. See Note 14, "Debt and Credit Facilities," for further details.
See Note 23, “Other Income (Expense), net,” for the components of other income (expense), net.
Income Taxes
The table below shows our effective income tax rate (“ETR”).
Our effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 22.7%. The difference between the Company's effective income tax rate and the U.S. statutory rate of 21% related primarily to state income tax expense and foreign earnings subject to higher tax rates, offset by the benefit from global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”) regulations issued by the IRS in 2020, research credits, and a reduction in valuation allowance due to increased profitability in EMEA.
Our effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was 20.7%. The difference between the Company's effective income tax rate and the U.S statutory rate of 21% related primarily to benefits related to tax optimization initiatives associated with the Reinvent SEE business transformation and restructuring activities, prior year research credits and a reduction in valuation allowance, offset by expense related to unrecognized tax benefits and the GILTI provisions.
Our effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2018 was 67.2%. The 2018 effective tax rate includes the benefit of a lower U.S. corporate income tax rate of 21% and also reflects $222 million of expense for tax related to the one-time mandatory tax on previously deferred foreign earnings of U.S. subsidiaries under TCJA (“Transition Tax”). The difference between the Company’s effective income tax rate and the U.S. statutory rate of 21% related primarily to the Transition Tax associated with TCJA, the GILTI provisions enacted as part of TCJA, state income taxes, and foreign earnings subject to higher tax rates, offset by tax benefit for reduction in valuation allowance related to tax initiatives.
Our effective income tax rate depends upon the realization of our net deferred tax assets. We have deferred tax assets related to accruals not yet deductible for tax purposes, state and foreign net operating loss carryforwards, tax credits, employee benefit items, intangibles and other items.
The IRS completed its field examination of our U.S. federal income tax returns for the years 2011 through 2014 in the third quarter of 2020. As previously disclosed, the IRS has proposed to disallow for the 2014 taxable year the entirety of the deduction of the approximately $1.49 billion in settlement payments made pursuant to the Settlement agreement (as defined in Note 20, “Commitments and Contingencies”) and the resulting reduction of our U.S. federal tax liability by approximately $525 million. We continue to believe that we have meritorious defenses to the proposed disallowance and have filed a protest with the IRS. Although, we expected to enter the IRS administrative appeals process in late 2020 or early 2021, upon receipt of our protest, the IRS determined that it needed additional information before transferring the matter to the IRS administrative appeals process. We are currently responding to requests for further information from the IRS and, at this time, cannot predict when we will enter the IRS administrative appeals process, when such process will conclude, or the outcome of such process. It is possible that future developments in this matter could have a material impact on the uncertain tax position balances and results of operations, including cash flows, within the next twelve months.
We have established valuation allowances to reduce our deferred tax assets to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Our ability to utilize our deferred tax assets depends in part upon our ability to carryback any losses created by the deduction of these temporary differences, the future income from existing temporary differences, and the ability to generate future taxable income within the respective jurisdictions during the periods in which these temporary differences reverse. If we are unable to generate sufficient future taxable income in the U.S. and certain foreign jurisdictions, or if there is a significant change in the time period within which the underlying temporary differences become taxable or deductible, we could be required to increase our valuation allowances against our deferred tax assets. Conversely, if we have sufficient future taxable income in jurisdictions where we have valuation allowances, we may be able to reduce those valuation allowances. We reported a net increase in our valuation allowance for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $10 million, primarily related to foreign net operating losses. See Note 19, “Income Taxes,” for additional information.
We reported a net benefit for unrecognized tax benefits in the year ended December 31, 2020 of $1 million, primarily related to North America tax positions. Interest and penalties on tax assessments are included in income tax expense.
Net Earnings from Continuing Operations
Net earnings from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, are included in the table below.
For 2020, net earnings were unfavorably impacted by $14 million of Special Items after tax, which were primarily the result of restructuring and other restructuring associated costs primarily related to our Reinvent SEE business transformation of $31 million ($23 million net of taxes) and charges related to acquisition integrations and divestiture activities of $7
million ($5 million net of taxes), partially offset by an increase in the fair value of equity investments of $15 million ($11 million net of taxes). Tax Special Items included the benefit of $12 million, primarily due to benefits from audit settlements and retroactive application of new global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”) regulations.
For 2019, net earnings were unfavorably impacted by $145 million of Special Items after tax, which were primarily the result of restructuring and other restructuring associated costs primarily related to our Reinvent SEE business transformation of $102 million ($76 million net of taxes), a $59 million ($44 million net of taxes) charge related to the Novipax settlement, loss on debt redemption and refinancing activities of $16 million ($12 million net of taxes) and charges related to acquisition integrations and divestiture activities of $15 million ($11 million net of taxes).
For 2018, net earnings were unfavorably impacted by $251 million of Special Items. Special Items primarily related to Tax Special Items including $222 million of expense for the one-time Transition Tax, partially offset by the release of valuation allowances associated with tax initiatives. In addition, net earnings were unfavorably impacted by Special Items expenses primarily related to restructuring and other restructuring associated costs of $64 million ($50 million net of taxes), charges related to the sale of Diversey of $21 million ($14 million net of taxes) and charges related to acquisition integrations and divestiture activities of $13 million ($10 million net of taxes), partially offset by gain on class-action litigation proceeds of $15 million ($12 million net of taxes).
Gain (Loss) on Sale of Discontinued Operations, net of tax
Gain (loss) on sale of discontinued operations, net of tax for the years ended December 31, are included in the table below.
During 2020, we recorded a net gain of $19 million on the sale of discontinued operations. The gain primarily relates to changes in balance sheet positions associated with the settlement and release reached with Diversey related to a clawback claim connected with the sale of the business. See Note 20, “Commitments and Contingencies,” for additional information.
During 2019, we recorded a net loss of $31 million on sale of discontinued operations. The loss relates primarily to changes in balance sheet positions associated with the sale of Diversey including tax-related indemnification reserves and other receivable or payable positions arising from the sale.
During 2018, we recorded an additional net gain on the sale of Diversey of $43 million, which was related to the final net working capital settlement as well as the release of tax indemnity reserves upon expiration of the statute of limitations.
Adjusted EBITDA by Segment
The Company evaluates performance of the reportable segments based on the results of each segment. The performance metric used by the Company's chief operating decision maker to evaluate performance of our reportable segments is Adjusted EBITDA. We allocate and disclose depreciation and amortization expense to our segments, although depreciation and amortization are not included in the segment performance metric Adjusted EBITDA. We also allocate and disclose restructuring and other charges and impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets by segment, although it is not included in the segment performance metric Adjusted EBITDA since restructuring and other charges and impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets are categorized as Special Items. The accounting policies of the reportable segments and Corporate are the same as those applied to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
See “Non-U.S. GAAP Information” for a reconciliation of U.S. GAAP net earnings from continuing operations to non-U.S. GAAP Total Company Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations.
The following is a discussion of the factors that contributed to the change in Adjusted EBITDA by segment in the year ended December 31, as compared with the prior year.
Food
2020 compared with 2019
On a reported basis, Adjusted EBITDA increased $18 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. Adjusted EBITDA was impacted by unfavorable foreign currency translation of $20 million. On a constant dollar basis, Adjusted EBITDA increased $38 million, or 6%, in 2020 compared with the same period in 2019 primarily due to the impact of:
•Reinvent SEE benefits of $79 million driven by actions reducing operating costs by $69 million, including restructuring savings of $21 million and improvements to price/cost spread of $10 million; and
•lower input costs resulting in favorable price/cost of $19 million.
These increases were partially offset by:
•higher operating costs of $49 million, including labor inflation, higher incentive compensation and investments in the business; and
•unfavorable product mix of $11 million.
2019 compared with 2018
On a reported basis, Adjusted EBITDA increased $52 million in 2019 as compared to 2018. Adjusted EBITDA was impacted by unfavorable foreign currency translation of $21 million. On a constant dollar basis, Adjusted EBITDA increased $73 million or 13% in 2019 compared with the same period in 2018 primarily due to the impact of:
•Reinvent SEE benefits of $109 million driven by actions reducing operating costs by $89 million, including restructuring savings of $39 million, and improvements to price cost spread of $20 million;
•other price/cost spread drivers of $20 million; and
•business growth including $10 million from higher volume.
These increases were partially offset by:
•higher operating costs of $66 million, including labor inflation, higher incentive compensation, investments in the business and other manufacturing costs.
Protective
2020 compared with 2019
On a reported basis, Adjusted EBITDA increased $58 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. Adjusted EBITDA was impacted by favorable foreign currency translation of $1 million. On a constant dollar basis, Adjusted EBITDA increased $57 million, or 16%, in 2020 compared with the same period in 2019 primarily due to the impact of:
•Reinvent SEE benefits of $39 million driven by actions reducing operating costs of $34 million, including restructuring savings of $12 million and improvements to price cost spread of $5 million;
•contributions of $31 million from seven months of incremental Adjusted EBITDA from the Automated Packaging Systems acquisition; and
•the prior year impact of a $7 million non-cash inventory step-up charge associated with the Automated Packaging Systems acquisition.
These increases were partially offset by:
•higher operating costs of $12 million, including labor inflation, higher incentive compensation expense and investments in the business;
•unfavorable price/cost spread of $5 million; and
•unfavorable product mix of $3 million.
2019 compared with 2018
On a reported basis, Adjusted EBITDA increased $31 million in 2019 as compared to 2018. Adjusted EBITDA was impacted by unfavorable foreign currency translation of $6 million. On a constant dollar basis, Adjusted EBITDA increased $37 million, or 12%, in 2019 compared with the same period in 2018 primarily due to the impact of:
•Reinvent SEE benefits of $59 million driven by actions reducing operating costs of $42 million, including restructuring savings of $28 million, and improvements to price cost spread of $17 million;
•other price cost spread drivers of $26 million; and
•contributions from recent acquisitions of $14 million, which is net of the $7 million one-time non-cash inventory step-up charge associated with the Automated Packaging Systems acquisition.
These increases were partially offset by:
•higher operating costs of approximately $34 million, including labor inflation, higher incentive compensation expense, other manufacturing costs and investment in the business; and
•lower volume of $28 million, primarily driven by macroeconomic headwinds, particularly in the industrial sector.
Corporate
2020 compared with 2019
Corporate expenses decreased by $10 million on an as reported basis and $7 million on a constant dollar basis as compared with the same period in 2019, primarily driven by currency transaction gains in 2020 compared to currency transaction losses in 2019.
2019 compared with 2018
Corporate expenses increased by $8 million on an as reported basis and $9 million on a constant dollar basis as compared with the same period in 2018, primarily driven by currency transaction losses associated with emerging market currencies strengthening against the U.S. dollar.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Principal Sources of Liquidity
Our primary sources of cash are the collection of trade receivables generated from the sales of our products and services to our customers and amounts available under our existing lines of credit, including our senior secured credit facility, and our accounts receivable securitization programs. Our primary uses of cash are payments for operating expenses, investments in working capital, capital expenditures, interest, taxes, stock repurchases, dividends, debt obligations, restructuring expenses and other long-term liabilities. We believe that our current liquidity position and future cash flows from operations will enable us to fund our operations, including all of the items mentioned above, in the next twelve months.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $549 million, of which approximately $304 million, or 55%, was located outside of the U.S. As of December 31, 2020, we had an immaterial amount of cash trapped outside of the U.S. We believe our U.S. cash balances and committed liquidity facilities available to U.S. borrowers are sufficient to fund our U.S. operating requirements and capital expenditures, current debt obligations and dividends. The Company does not expect that in the near term cash located outside of the U.S. will be needed to satisfy its obligations, dividends and other demands for cash in the U.S.
Material Commitments and Contingencies
Settlement Agreement Tax Deduction
The information set forth in Note 20, “Commitments and Contingencies,” under the caption “Settlement Agreement Tax Deduction” is incorporated herein by reference.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our principal contractual obligations and sets forth the amounts of required or contingently required cash outlays in 2021 and future years:
(1)Current portion of long-term debt is exclusive of present value discounting for finance lease obligations of $1.4 million. Long-term debt is inclusive of capitalized lender fees of $18.1 million and debt discounts of $1.9 million, and exclusive of present value discounting for finance lease obligations of $5.0 million.
(2)Includes interest payments required under our senior notes issuances and Amended Credit Facility only. The interest payments included above for our Term Loan A were calculated using the following assumptions:
•interest rates based on stated LIBOR rates as of December 31, 2020; and
•all non-U.S. dollar balances are converted using exchange rates as of December 31, 2020.
(3)Refer to Note 4, “Leases,” of the Notes for detail related to contractual obligations related to finance and operating leases.
(4)Obligations related to defined benefit pension plans and other post-employment benefit plans have been excluded from the table above, due to factors such as the retirement of employees, the performance of plan assets and economic and actuarial assumptions, as it is not reasonably possible to estimate when these obligations will become due. Refer to Note 17, “Profit Sharing, Retirement Savings Plans and Defined Benefit Pension Plans,” and Note 18, “Other Post-Employment Benefits and Other Employee Benefit Plans,” for additional information related to these plans.
Other Principal Contractual Obligations
Sealed Air has other principal contractual obligations which include agreements to purchase an estimated amount of goods, including raw materials, or services, including energy, assumed in the normal course of business. These obligations are enforceable and legally binding and specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased, minimum or variable price provisions and the approximate timing of the purchase. We may purchase additional goods or services above the minimum requirements of these obligations and, as a result use additional cash. The amounts included in the
table above represent estimates of the minimum amounts we are obligated to pay, or reasonably likely to pay under these agreements. See Note 20, “Commitments and Contingencies,” of the Notes for additional information.
Liability for Unrecognized Tax Benefits
At December 31, 2020, we had liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits and related interest of $381 million. Given the inherent uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash outflows associated with some of our liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits, we are not able to make reasonable estimates of the period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authority. See Note 19, “Income Taxes,” of the Notes for further discussion.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have reviewed our off-balance sheet arrangements and have determined that none of those arrangements has a material current effect or is reasonably likely to have a material future effect on our Consolidated Financial Statements, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Income Tax Payments
We expect tax payments to be approximately $111 million in 2021. Future payments are uncertain and dependent on a number of factors including the amount of future taxable income and the results of on-going audits by various taxing authorities, including the IRS.
Contributions to Defined Benefit Pension Plans
We maintain defined benefit pension plans for some of our U.S. and our non-U.S. employees. We currently expect our contributions to these plans to be approximately $18 million in 2021. Additionally, we expect benefits related to our defined benefit pension plan paid directly by the Company to be $4 million in 2021. Future contributions are uncertain and rely on a number of factors including performance of underlying assets, future cash out flows of the plans, actuarial assumptions and funding discussions with boards charged with governance for some of our international plans. Refer to Note 17, “Profit Sharing, Retirement Savings Plans and Defined Benefit Pension Plans,” for additional information related to these plans.
Environmental Matters
We are subject to loss contingencies resulting from environmental laws and regulations, and we accrue for anticipated costs associated with investigatory and remediation efforts when an assessment has indicated that a loss is probable and can be reasonably estimated. These accruals do not take into account any discounting for the time value of money and are not reduced by potential insurance recoveries, if any. We do not believe that it is reasonably possible that the liability in excess of the amounts that we have accrued for environmental matters will be material to our consolidated financial position and results of operations. We reassess environmental liabilities whenever circumstances become better defined or we can better estimate remediation efforts and their costs. We evaluate these liabilities periodically based on available information, including the progress of remedial investigations at each site, the current status of discussions with regulatory authorities regarding the methods and extent of remediation and the apportionment of costs among potentially responsible parties. As some of these issues are decided (the outcomes of which are subject to uncertainties) or new sites are assessed and costs can be reasonably estimated, we adjust the recorded accruals, as necessary. We believe that these exposures are not material to our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. We believe that we have adequately reserved for all probable and estimable environmental exposures.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The following table summarizes our accumulated cash and cash equivalents:
See “Analysis of Historical Cash Flow” below.
Accounts Receivable Securitization Programs
At December 31, 2020, we had $146 million available to us and no outstanding borrowings under our U.S. and European accounts receivable securitization programs. At December 31, 2019, we had $127 million available to us and no outstanding borrowings under the such programs.
Our trade receivable securitization programs represent borrowings secured by outstanding customer receivables. Therefore, the use and repayment of borrowings under such programs are classified as a financing activities in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. We do not recognize the cash flow within operating activities until the underlying invoices have been paid by our customer. The trade receivables that served as collateral for these borrowings are reclassified from trade receivables, net to prepaid expenses and other current assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 10, “Accounts Receivable Securitization Programs” for further details.
Accounts Receivable Factoring Agreements
We account for our participation in our customers' supply chain financing arrangements and our trade receivable factoring program in accordance with ASC 860 which allows the ownership transfer of accounts receivable to qualify for sale treatment when the appropriate criteria are met. As such, the Company excludes the balances sold under such programs from Trade receivables, net on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We recognize cash flow from operating activities at the point the receivables are sold under such programs. See Note 11, “Accounts Receivable Factoring Agreements” for further details.
Gross amounts received under these programs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $466 million, of which $157 million was received in the fourth quarter. Gross amounts received under these programs for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $351 million, of which $105 million was received in the fourth quarter. If these programs had not been in effect for the year ended December 31, 2020, we would have been required to collect the invoice amounts directly from the relevant customers in accordance with the agreed payment terms. Approximately $114 million in incremental trade receivables would have been outstanding at December 31, 2020 if collection on such invoice amounts were made directly from our customers on the invoice due date and not through our customers' supply chain financing arrangements or our factoring program.
The increase in gross amounts factored under these programs from 2019 to 2020 primarily relates to usage of our trade receivable factoring program, which was implemented late in 2019 and utilized throughout 2020. During the fourth quarter 2020, we increased the maximum amount available to be sold under that factoring program from $20 million per month to $35 million per month.
Payments received through customers' supply chain financing arrangements tend to be higher in the fourth quarter. The increased use of our trade receivable factoring program had a favorable impact on cash provided by operating activities during the year.
Lines of Credit
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had a $1 billion revolving credit facility. We had no outstanding borrowings under the facility at December 31, 2020 and $89 million of outstanding borrowings under the facility at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $7 million and $10 million, respectively, available under various lines of credit extended to our subsidiaries. See Note 14, “Debt and Credit Facilities,” for further details.
LIBOR Phase Out
In July 2017, the United Kingdom's Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates LIBOR, announced that it intends to phase out LIBOR by the end of 2021. An alternative to LIBOR has been contemplated in many of our LIBOR-linked instruments and other financial obligations, including our senior secured credit facility. We do not expect the phase-out of LIBOR to have a material disruption or impact on our financing or liquidity. In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-04 to ease the potential burden in accounting for reference rate reform; however, neither the LIBOR phase out or the recently issued ASU is expected to have a material impact on the Company.
Covenants
At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with our financial covenants and limitations, as discussed in “Covenants” within Note 14, “Debt and Credit Facilities”. As a result of our acquisition of Automated Packaging Systems, the maximum covenant leverage ratio of debt to EBITDA under our senior secured credit facility was temporarily increased to 5.00 to 1.00 through September 30, 2020. The maximum covenant leverage ratio has returned to 4.50 to 1.00 after September 30, 2020. At
December 31, 2020, our leverage ratio of debt to EBITDA, as calculated under the covenant, was 2.80 to 1.00. We expect to be in continued compliance with our debt covenants including the covenant leverage ratio over the next 12 months.
See “Covenants” in Note 14, “Debt and Credit Facilities,” for further details.
Supply Chain Financing Programs
As part of our ongoing efforts to manage our working capital and improve our cash flow, we work with suppliers to optimize our purchasing terms and conditions, including extending payment terms. We also facilitate a voluntary supply chain financing program to provide some of our suppliers with the opportunity to sell receivables due from us (our accounts payables) to participating financial institutions at the sole discretion of both the suppliers and the financial institutions. These programs are administered by participating financial institutions. Should the supplier choose to participate in the program, it will receive payment from the financial institution in advance of agreed payment terms; our responsibility is limited to making payments to the respective financial institutions on the terms originally negotiated with our supplier. The range of payment terms is consistent regardless of a vendor's participation in the program. We monitor our days payable outstanding relative to our peers and industry trends in order to assess our conclusion that these programs continue to be trade payable programs and not indicative of borrowing arrangements. The liabilities continue to be presented as trade payables in our consolidated balance sheets until they are paid, and they are reflected as cash flows from operating activities when settled.
As of December 31, 2020, our accounts payable balance included $149 million related to invoices from suppliers participating in the programs. As of December 31, 2019, our accounts payable balance included $157 million related to invoices from suppliers participating in the programs. The cumulative amounts settled through the supply chain financing programs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $423 million. These programs did not significantly improve our cash provided by operating activities or free cash flow for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Debt Ratings
Our cost of capital and ability to obtain external financing may be affected by our debt ratings, which the credit rating agencies review periodically. Below is a table that details our credit ratings by the various types of debt by rating agency.
These credit ratings are considered to be below investment grade (with the exception of the Baa3 and BBB- Senior Secured Credit Facility Rating from Moody’s Investor Services and Standard & Poor’s, respectively, which are classified as investment grade). If our credit ratings are downgraded, there could be a negative impact on our ability to access capital markets and borrowing costs could increase. A credit rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating organization. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
Outstanding Indebtedness
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our total debt outstanding consisted of the amounts set forth in the following table.
(1) Amounts are net of unamortized discounts and debt issuance costs of $20 million and $25 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
See Note 14, “Debt and Credit Facilities,” for further details.
Analysis of Historical Cash Flow
The following table shows the changes in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
In addition to net cash provided by operating activities, we use free cash flow as a useful measure of performance and as an indication of the strength and ability of our operations to generate cash. We define free cash flow as cash provided by operating activities less capital expenditures (which is classified as an investing activity). Free cash flow is not defined under U.S. GAAP. Therefore, free cash flow should not be considered a substitute for net income or cash flow data prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Free cash flow does not represent residual cash available for discretionary expenditures, including certain debt servicing requirements or non-discretionary expenditures that are not deducted from this measure. We historically have generated the majority of our annual free cash flow in the second half of the year. Below are the details of free cash flow for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
(1) Free cash flow was $311 million in 2018 excluding the payment of charges related to the sale of Diversey of $52 million.
Operating Activities
2020 vs. 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities improved by $226 million in the current year. This was primarily the result of stronger net earnings including non-cash add backs in 2020 compared to 2019.
Net earnings were $503 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $263 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Non-cash add backs to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by operating activities were $307 million in 2020 compared to $221 million in 2019. The increase in non-cash add backs was primarily driven by the change in deferred tax balances generating $137 million, year over year. Depreciation and amortization increased $23 million in 2020 compared to 2019, due to amortization of intangibles for capitalized software and the full year impact of intangible amortization from our acquisition of Automated Packaging Systems. These non-cash add-backs were partially offset by the non-cash gain on sale of businesses which was $19 million in 2020 compared to a loss of $31 million in 2019, representing a change of $50 million. The increase in non-cash add backs in the current year were also partially offset by a gain on an equity investment of $15 million in 2020.
The year over year improvement in cash provided by operating activities was also due to decreased cash payments made for our Reinvent SEE business transformation including restructuring and restructuring associated payments, which were $74 million in 2020 compared to $91 million in 2019. Cash payments related to restructuring and restructuring associated activities are expected to continue to decline in 2021.
Working capital, which represents cash generated by trade receivables, inventories and accounts payable, represented a source of cash of $3 million in 2020 compared to $14 million in 2019. Cash generation from working capital in 2020 declined primarily due to an increase in cash used for inventory, driven by a purposeful build in 2020 for contingency planning against the risk of raw material shortages or supply disruptions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Cash generated from trade receivables benefited from improved days sales outstanding, resulting partially from the increased use of our trade receivable factoring program. The year over year changes in accounts payable were largely due to the timing of payments to suppliers. Cash generated from customer advance payments increased $8 million, as the Company increased automation and equipment sales.
As of December 31, 2020, we had repaid the vast majority of U.S. payroll taxes deferred earlier in 2020 under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), with only $0.3 million yet to be remitted at year-end.
2019 vs. 2018
Net cash provided by operating activities improved by $83 million in 2019 compared to 2018. This was primarily the result of stronger net earnings including non-cash add backs, improved cash provided by working capital, and lower cash tax payments in 2019 compared to 2018.
Net earnings were $263 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $193 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Non-cash add backs to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by operating activities were $221 million in 2019 compared to $182 million in 2018. The increase was primarily driven by $20 million of higher depreciation and amortization, due to amortization of intangibles acquired from Automated Packaging Systems, as well as a non-cash loss recorded from the sale of discontinued operations of $31 million.
Working capital represented a source of cash of $14 million in 2019 compared to a use of cash of $20 million in 2018. Cash generation from working capital in 2019 was driven by improvements in accounts receivables, primarily on strengthened collections, and cash generated from organic inventory reduction, which excludes the change in balance resulting from the opening balance sheet acquired in acquisitions made this year. These improvements were slightly offset by a use of cash in accounts payable in 2019 of $37 million which compares to a source of cash of $43 million in 2018. The change in cash provided by/used in accounts payable primarily represents timing of payments as well as the benefits received in prior years of improvements to working capital.
Cash tax payments in 2019 were $95 million compared to $155 million in 2018. The improvement was partially the result of one-time items benefiting cash taxes paid in the year including the Novipax settlement and benefits from the purchase of Automated Packaging Systems.
The year over year improvements were partially offset by cash payments made for our Reinvent SEE business transformation including restructuring and restructuring associated payments of $91 million in 2019 compared to $12 million in 2018. The one-time cash outflow in 2019 related to the Novipax settlement payment was largely offset by a one-time payment in lieu of certain future royalty payments for patents made in 2018.
Investing Activities
2020 vs. 2019
Net cash used in investing activities was $160 million in 2020, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $666 million in 2019. The change in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to prior year business acquisitions activity of $454 million, predominately related to the Automated Packaging Systems acquisition. A favorable purchase price adjustment of $4 million was received during the first quarter 2020 related to the Automated Packaging Systems acquisition.
In 2019, the Company invested in cash deposits with maturities greater than 90 days (marketable securities) which matured in 2020 and then converted back into a cash equivalent, generating a net favorable impact to investing activities of $26 million in 2020 compared to 2019.
Proceeds related to the sale of businesses and property increased $15 million compared to 2019, resulting from the sale of two discrete properties in EMEA generating $6 million cash inflow during 2020 as well as the impact of recoveries of tax refund amounts related to Diversey entities which were owed to us.
During 2020, we made a total investment of $8 million in an equity holding. This is classified as an investing cash flow activity based on our strategic investment thesis of anticipated partnership in increasing plastic circularity. See Note 16 “Fair Value Measurements, Equity Investments and Other Financial Instruments,” for more information on our equity investments.
2019 vs. 2018
Net cash used in investing activities was $666 million in 2019, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $267 million in 2018. The change in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to an increase in business acquisitions activity of $384 million, primarily due to the acquisition of Automated Packaging Systems, offset by the cash outflow for the purchase of AFP in 2018; and an increase in capital expenditures of $21 million, driven by increased investment to drive growth and improve cost productivity.
Financing Activities
2020 vs. 2019
Net cash used in financing activities was $262 million in 2020, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $140 million in 2019. The change in net cash (used in) provided by financing activities was primarily due to borrowing activity in 2019. Specifically, in 2019 we received the proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt of $895 million, including the $475 million on the Term Loan A due 2022 and the issuance of $425 million of 4.00% of senior notes, which were partially offset by the $425 million repurchase of the 6.50% senior notes. Lower repayments of short-term borrowings of $29 million were primarily due to higher payments on our revolving credit facility in 2019 compared to 2020. At December 31, 2020, we had no amounts outstanding on our revolving credit facility.
Cash outlay for share repurchases were $33 million in 2020 compared to $67 million in 2019.
We continue to evaluate our capital allocation strategy to determine the best use of cash, including decisions regarding share repurchases, investments in growth and operational efficiency, acquisitions and maintaining our debt-leverage ratio.
2019 vs. 2018
Net cash provided by financing activities was $140 million in 2019, compared to net cash used in financing activities of $478 million in 2018. The change in net cash provided by (used in) in financing activities was primarily due to borrowing activity in 2019. Specifically, we received the proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt of $895 million, including the Term Loan A due 2022 of $475 million to fund the purchase of Automated Packaging Systems and the issuance of $425 million of 4.00% of senior notes due 2027, which was partially offset by the $425 million repurchase of the 6.50% senior notes due 2020. Short-term borrowings was a use of cash in 2019 compared to a source of cash in 2018 representing a net change $352 million year over year. This was driven by decrease in borrowings under the European Accounts Receivable Securitization program and our revolving credit facility in 2019 compared to an increase of facility use in 2018. Additionally, share repurchases were $515 million lower in 2019 compared to 2018.
Changes in Working Capital
The $386 million, or 302%, increase in working capital was primarily due to an increase in cash and cash equivalents of $286 million and repayment of short-term borrowings, primarily the revolving credit facility, of $92 million.
Net working capital balances of trade receivables plus inventory less accounts payable were relatively consistent with the prior year. The increase in inventory of $26 million was primarily due to a purposeful inventory build in the second quarter 2020 for contingency planning against the risk of raw material shortages or supply disruptions. This build was partially offset
by a higher accounts payable balance at year-end. Overall, given the consistency of the working capital balances of trade receivables, inventory and accounts payable, coupled with the increase in sales and cost of goods sold compared to 2019, our cash conversion cycle (days inventory outstanding plus days sales outstanding less days payable outstanding) improved in 2020 relative to 2019.
Changes in Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
The $369 million increase in stockholders’ equity in 2020 compared with 2019 was due to:
•net earnings of $503 million;
•the effect of share-based incentive compensation of $31 million, which includes the impact of our share-based compensation expense as well as the impact of shares netting to cover the employee tax withholding amounts;
•stock issued for profit sharing contribution paid in stock of $24 million; and
•cumulative translation adjustment of $7 million.
These increases were partially offset by:
•dividends paid on our common stock and dividend equivalent accruals related to unvested equity awards of $101 million;
•a net increase in shares held in treasury of $35 million due to the repurchases of common stock;
•unrealized losses on derivative instruments of $35 million; and
•a net increase in accumulated other comprehensive loss of $26 million on unrecognized pension items due primarily to market conditions impacting actuarial assumptions as of our annual pension valuation.
We repurchased approximately 0.9 million shares of our common stock during the year ended December 31, 2020 for $35 million. See Note 21, “Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit),” for further details.
Derivative Financial Instruments
Interest Rate Swaps
The information set forth in Note 15, “Derivatives and Hedging Activities,” under the caption “Interest Rate Swaps” is incorporated herein by reference.
Net Investment Hedge
The information set forth in Note 15, “Derivatives and Hedging Activities,” under the caption “Net Investment Hedge” is incorporated herein by reference.
Other Derivative Instruments
The information set forth in Note 15, “Derivatives and Hedging Activities,” under the caption “Other Derivative Instruments” is incorporated herein by reference.
Foreign Currency Forward Contracts
At December 31, 2020, we were party to foreign currency forward contracts, which did not have a significant impact on our liquidity.
The information set forth in Note 15, “Derivatives and Hedging Activities,” under the caption “Foreign Currency Forward Contracts Designated as Cash Flow Hedges” and “Foreign Currency Forward Contracts Not Designated as Hedges” is incorporated herein by reference.
For further discussion about these contracts and other financial instruments, see Item 7A, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.”
Recently Issued Statements of Financial Accounting Standards, Accounting Guidance and Disclosure Requirements
We are subject to numerous recently issued statements of financial accounting standards, accounting guidance and disclosure requirements. Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Standards,” which is contained in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, describes these new accounting standards and is incorporated herein by reference.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations are based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.
Our estimates and assumptions are evaluated on an ongoing basis and are based on all available evidence, including historical experience and other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. To derive these estimates and assumptions, management draws from those available sources that can best contribute to its efforts. These sources include our officers and other employees, outside consultants and legal counsel, third-party experts and actuaries. In addition, we use internally generated reports and statistics, such as aging of trade receivables, as well as outside sources such as government statistics, industry reports and third-party research studies. The results of these estimates and assumptions may form the basis of the carrying value of assets and liabilities and may not be readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from estimates under conditions and circumstances different from those assumed, and any such differences may be material to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
We believe the following accounting policies are critical to understanding our consolidated results of operations and affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements. The critical accounting policies discussed below should be read together with our significant accounting policies set forth in Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Standards”.
Commitments and Contingencies - Litigation
On an ongoing basis, we assess the potential liabilities and costs related to any lawsuits or claims brought against us. We accrue a liability when we believe a loss is probable and when the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. Litigation proceedings are evaluated on a case-by-case basis considering the available information, including that received from internal and outside legal counsel, to assess potential outcomes. While it is typically very difficult to determine the timing and ultimate outcome of these actions, we use our best judgment to determine if it is probable that we will incur an expense related to the settlement or final adjudication of these matters and whether a reasonable estimation of the probable loss, if any, can be made. In assessing probable losses, we consider insurance recoveries, if any. We expense legal costs, including those legal costs expected to be incurred in connection with a loss contingency, as incurred. We have historically adjusted existing accruals as proceedings have continued, been settled or for which additional information has been provided on which to review the probability and measurability of outcomes, and will continue to do so in future periods. Due to the inherent uncertainties related to the eventual outcome of litigation and potential insurance recovery, it is possible that disputed matters may be resolved for amounts materially different from any provisions or disclosures that we have previously made.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
For finite-lived intangible assets, such as customer relationships, contracts, and intellectual property, and for other long-lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment, whenever impairment indicators are present, we perform a review for impairment. The impairment model is a two step test under which we first calculate the recoverability of the carrying value by comparing the undiscounted value of the projected cash flows associated with the asset or asset group, including its estimated residual value, to the carrying amount. If the cash flows associated with the asset or asset group are less than the carrying value, we would perform a fair value assessment of the asset, or asset group. If the carrying amount is found to be greater than the fair value, we record an impairment loss for the excess of book value over the fair value. In addition, in all cases of an impairment review, we re-evaluate the remaining useful lives of the assets and modify them, as appropriate.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we identified a triggering event related to our foam fabrication producing asset group within our Protective segment. This asset group generates cash flows which were identified for the purpose of the impairment test at the lowest level based on the interdependency of revenue and shared cost structure, in accordance with ASC 360. The
asset group's primary asset was determined to be the intangible asset of Customer Relationships, which has a remaining useful life of approximately 12 years. The triggering event was related to the finalization of the upcoming year's financial projections and budget which indicated short-term deterioration in the profitability of the specific asset group's North American operations. The short-term deterioration is driven in part by a decrease in expected sales of a particular customer within the region. The decline in expected performance identified as a triggering event is not expected to be material to the overall segment or total Company. We performed a quantitative analysis of the recoverability of the net asset group and determined that the assets were not impaired. The estimated future cash flows, including the residual value of the asset group, were 29% greater than the carrying value of net assets. The asset group tested for impairment had a net carrying value of $120 million as of the date of testing, of which $48 million was attributable to intangible assets. Key assumptions used to estimate the recoverable amount of the asset group were expected future sales performance and efficiency and cost improvements resulting in cash flow growth over the remaining useful life of the primary asset. We believe the assumptions utilized in the projections are appropriate and in-line with industry and GDP growth estimates. As part of our analysis, we performed a sensitivity analysis on the sales and future cash flow assumptions. The sensitivities led us to the same conclusion that the carrying value of the asset group was recoverable.
For indefinite-lived intangible assets, such as trademarks and trade names, each year and whenever impairment indicators are present, we determine the fair value of the asset and record an impairment loss for the excess of book value over fair value, if any. In addition, in all cases of an impairment review we re-evaluate whether continuing to characterize the asset as indefinite-lived is appropriate. We recorded no impairment to indefinite lived assets in the current year.
Goodwill
Goodwill is reviewed for possible impairment at least annually on a reporting unit level during the fourth quarter of each year. A review of goodwill may be initiated before or after conducting the annual analysis if events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may no longer be recoverable.
A reporting unit is the operating segment unless, at businesses one level below that operating segment - the “component” level - discrete financial information is prepared and regularly reviewed by management, and the component has economic characteristics that are different from the economic characteristics of the other components of the operating segment, in which case the component is the reporting unit.
In our annual impairment review, we may elect to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. In a qualitative assessment, we would consider the macroeconomic conditions, including any deterioration of general economic conditions, industry and market conditions, including any deterioration in the environment where the reporting unit operates, increased competition, changes in the products/services and regulatory and political developments; cost of doing business; overall financial performance, including any declining cash flows and performance in relation to planned revenues and earnings in past periods; other relevant reporting unit specific facts, such as changes in management or key personnel or pending litigation; and events affecting the reporting unit, including changes in the carrying value of net assets.
If the results of our qualitative assessment indicate it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we are required to perform a quantitative assessment to determine the fair value of the reporting unit.
Alternatively, if an optional qualitative goodwill impairment assessment is not performed, we may perform a quantitative assessment. Under the quantitative assessment, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value, including the goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeded its carrying value, there would be no indication of impairment. If the fair value of the reporting unit were less than the carrying value, an impairment charge would be recognized for the difference.
Under the quantitative assessment, we derive an estimate of fair values for each of our reporting units using a combination of an income approach and appropriate market approaches. Absent an indication of fair value from a potential buyer or similar specific transactions, we believe that the use of these methods provides a reasonable estimate of a reporting unit’s fair value. Fair value computed by these models is arrived at using a number of factors and inputs. There are inherent uncertainties, however, related to fair value models, the inputs and our judgment in applying them to this analysis. Nonetheless, we believe that the combination of these methods provides a reasonable approach to estimate the fair value of our reporting units.
We believe the most significant inputs in our quantitative assessment include:
•Forecasted future operating results: On an annual basis, the Company prepares annual and medium-term financial projections. These projections are based on input from the Company's leadership, strategy, commercial leadership and finance teams and presented to our Board of Directors annually. Influences on this year's forecasted financial information and the fair value model include: the impact of planned strategic initiatives, the continued integration of recent acquisitions, including Automated Packaging Systems,
continuous improvement derived from Reinvent SEE business transformation initiatives and overall market conditions.
•Discount rate: Our third-party valuation specialists provide inputs into management's determination of the discount rate. The rate is dependent on a number of underlying assumptions, the most impactful of which are the risk-free rate, tax rate, equity risk premium, debt to equity ratio and pre-tax cost of debt.
•Long-term growth rate: Long-term growth rates are applied to the terminal year of our cash flow valuation approach. The long-term growth rates are tied to growth rates we expect to achieve beyond the years for which we have forecasted operating results. We also consider external benchmarks, including forecasted long-term GDP growth and other data points which we believe are applicable to our industry and the composition of our global operations.
The Company performed a quantitative assessment of the goodwill by reporting unit as of October 1, 2020. We believe it is appropriate to periodically perform the quantitative assessment for our annual impairment test, even if qualitative considerations do not indicate the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. The periodic and timely calculation of the quantitative assessment provides better support for our qualitative assessments. Other factors that contributed to our decision to perform a quantitative test included the market volatility resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, the indicators of impairment identified with respect to a specific subset of our other long-lived assets, as described above, and our continued integration of recent acquisitions, including Automated Packaging Systems, which is contained within our Protective reporting unit.
Based on our quantitative assessment, we believe the fair value of each of our reporting units sufficiently exceed the carrying values. As part of our analysis, we performed a sensitivity analysis on the discount rate and long-term growth rate assumptions. The sensitivities led us to the same conclusion that no impairment exists.
The Company also assesses its goodwill for impairment from time to time when warranted by the facts and circumstances surrounding individual reporting units. Subsequent to our annual reporting period, we continued to assess whether there were changes in facts or circumstances that would lead us to believe goodwill may be impaired. No indication of goodwill impairment has been identified subsequent to our annual testing date.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, we also performed a quantitative assessment for our annual impairment test. In the fourth quarter of 2018, we performed a qualitative assessment. No indication of goodwill impairment was identified in either 2019 or 2018.
See Note 9, “Goodwill and Identifiable Intangible Assets, net,” for details of our goodwill balances as of 2020, 2019 and 2018 and additional information related to the quantitative assessment performed in 2020.
Pensions
For a number of our current and former U.S. and international employees, we maintain defined benefit pension plans. Under current accounting standards, we are required to make assumptions regarding the valuation of projected benefit obligations and the performance of plan assets for our defined benefit pension plans.
The projected benefit obligation and the net periodic benefit cost are based on third-party actuarial assumptions and estimates that are reviewed and approved by management on a plan-by-plan basis each fiscal year. We believe the most significant assumptions are the discount rate used to measure the projected benefit obligation and the expected future rate of return on plan assets. We revise these assumptions based on an annual evaluation of long-term trends and market conditions that may have an impact on the cost of providing retirement benefits.
In determining the discount rate, we utilize market conditions and other data sources management considers reasonable based upon the profile of the remaining service life or expected life of eligible employees. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is determined by taking into consideration the weighted-average expected return on our asset allocation, asset return data, historical return data, and the economic environment. We believe these considerations provide the basis for reasonable assumptions of the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. The measurement date used to determine the benefit obligation and plan assets is December 31.
At December 31, 2020, the total projected benefit obligation for our U.S. pension plan was $202 million, and the total benefit income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2 million. At December 31, 2020, the total projected benefit obligation for our international pension plans was $783 million, and the total benefit cost for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3 million. The employer service cost of our pension plans is charged to Cost of sales and Selling, general and administrative expenses. All other components of benefits expense are recorded to other income (expense), net.
Material changes to the principal assumptions could have a material impact on the costs and liabilities recognized on our Consolidated Financial Statements. A 25 basis point change in the assumed discount rate and a 100 basis point change in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would have resulted in the following increases (decreases) in the projected benefit obligation at December 31, 2020 and the expected net periodic benefit cost for the year ending December 31, 2021:
Income Taxes
Estimates and judgments are required in the calculation of tax liabilities and in the determination of the recoverability of our deferred tax assets. Our deferred tax assets arise from net deductible temporary differences, tax benefit carryforwards and tax credits. We evaluate whether our taxable earnings, during the periods when the temporary differences giving rise to deferred tax assets become deductible or when tax benefit carryforwards may be utilized, should be sufficient to realize the related future income tax benefits. For those jurisdictions where the expiration dates of tax benefit carryforwards or the projected taxable earnings indicate that realization is not likely, we provide a valuation allowance.
In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we estimate future taxable earnings, with consideration for the feasibility of ongoing planning strategies and the realizability of tax benefit carryforwards and past operating results, to determine which deferred tax assets are more likely than not to be realized in the future. Changes to tax laws, statutory tax rates and future taxable earnings can have an impact on valuation allowances related to deferred tax assets. In the event that actual results differ from these estimates in future periods, we may need to adjust the valuation allowance, which could have a material impact on our consolidated financial position and results of operations.
In calculating our worldwide provision for income taxes, we also evaluate our tax positions for years where the statutes of limitations have not expired. Based on this review, we may establish reserves for additional taxes and interest that could be assessed upon examination by relevant tax authorities. We adjust these reserves to take into account changing facts and circumstances, including the results of tax audits and changes in tax law. If the payment of additional taxes and interest ultimately proves unnecessary or less than the amount of the reserve, the reversal of the reserves would result in tax benefits being recognized in the period when we determine the reserves are no longer necessary. If an estimate of tax reserves proves to be less than the ultimate assessment, a further charge to income tax provision would result. These adjustments to reserves and related expenses could materially affect our consolidated financial position and results of operations.
We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized on the Consolidated Financial Statements from such positions are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon settlement with tax authorities. See Note 19, “Income Taxes,” for further discussion.