Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the section titled “Selected Financial Data” and our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, including those described in the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements.” Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those set forth under the section titled “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We aim to enable exceptional scientific outcomes by commercializing transformative products for researchers to unlock deep, unbiased biological information. Our initial product, the Proteograph Product Suite (Proteograph), will leverage our proprietary engineered nanoparticle (NP) technology to provide unbiased, deep, rapid and large-scale access across the proteome. Our Proteograph Product Suite is an integrated solution that is comprised of consumables, an automation instrument and software. Our Proteograph solution provides an easy-to-use workflow, which has the potential to make proteomic profiling, and the analysis of the thousands of samples needed to characterize the complex, dynamic nature of the proteome, accessible for nearly any laboratory. We believe that characterizing and understanding the full complexity of the proteome is foundational for accelerating biological insights and will lead to broad potential end-markets for proteomics, encompassing basic research and discovery, translational research, diagnostics and applied applications. This full understanding of the complexity of the proteome requires large-scale, unbiased and deep interrogation of thousands of samples across time, which we believe is unavailable with the proteomic approaches available today. We believe that our Proteograph Product Suite has the potential to enable researchers to perform proteomics studies at scale, similar to the manner in which next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have transformed genomics.
Since we were incorporated in 2017, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to research and development activities, including with respect to our Proteograph Product Suite, establishing and maintaining our intellectual property portfolio, hiring personnel, raising capital, building our commercial infrastructure and providing general and administrative support for these activities.
Our revenue to date has been nominal and generated from research collaborations and grant-funded activities. Our initial product, the Proteograph Product Suite, has not yet been broadly commercialized, and we have not generated any revenue from product sales to date. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability, if ever, will depend on the successful commercialization of our Proteograph Product Suite. We plan to commercialize our Proteograph utilizing a three phase plan that has been shown to be effective and optimal for introducing disruptive products in numerous life sciences technology markets, including NGS. We are currently in the first phase, during which we will collaborate with a small number of key opinion leaders in proteomics, whose assessment and validation of products can significantly influence other researchers in their respective markets. During the second phase, early access limited release, of which we are in the early stages of commencing, we plan to sell our Proteograph Product Suite to select sites performing large-scale proteomics or genomics research. We will work closely with these sites, which we expect will serve as models for the rest of the market, to exemplify applications that demonstrate the unique value proposition of our Proteograph. We expect this phase to continue through 2021 and lead into the third phase of commercialization, broad commercial availability, in early 2022.
We intend to commercialize our Proteograph Product Suite as an integrated solution comprising consumables, an automation instrument and software. Our commercial strategy will focus on growing adoption by the research community of our Proteograph, expanding the installed base and increasing utilization to generate revenue from the purchase of our Proteograph consumables. We expect a highly efficient sales model since our Proteograph solution does not have a large capital expenditure component and our SP100 automation instrument integrates with most existing proteomics laboratories’ workflows and also complements large-scale genomics research.
We intend to commercialize our Proteograph Product Suite through a direct sales channel in the United States, and through both direct and distributor sales channels in regions outside the United States. Given our stage of
development, we currently have limited sales and marketing and no commercial product distribution or service and support capabilities. We intend to build the necessary infrastructure for these activities in the United States, European Union, the United Kingdom, and potentially other countries and regions, including Asia-Pacific, as we execute on our three phase commercial launch strategy for our Proteograph.
We leverage well-established unit operations to formulate and manufacture our NPs at our facilities in Redwood City, California. We procure some of our consumables, including components of our NPs, from third-party manufacturers, which includes the commonly-available raw materials needed for manufacturing our proprietary engineered NPs. We are currently manufacturing using our pilot line and building out our manufacturing capabilities as we ramp towards broad commercial availability. We obtain some of the reagents and components used in our Proteograph workflow from third-party suppliers. While some of these reagents and components are sourced from a single supplier, these products are readily available from numerous suppliers. While we currently plan to handle filling and packaging of our Proteograph assay and the related consumables, in the future, we may have our filling and packaging outsourced to a third-party. We conduct vendor and component qualification for components provided by third-party suppliers and quality control tests on all of our NPs. We will need to substantially expand our NP manufacturing capabilities to enable the successful commercialization of our Proteograph Product Suite.
We have designed our SP100 automation instrument and have outsourced the manufacturing of our Proteograph automation instrument to Hamilton Company, a leading manufacturer of automated liquid handling workstations. We have entered into a non-exclusive agreement with Hamilton that covers the manufacturing of our SP100 automation instrument and its continued supply on a purchase order basis. The agreement has an initial term that runs three years following our commercial launch. Pricing for the supply of our SP100 automation instrument is on a fixed schedule during the initial term of the agreement, with tiered pricing dependent upon the number of units purchased in a twelve-month period.
On December 8, 2020, we completed our IPO, in which we sold 10,592,106 shares of Class A common stock, including 1,381,579 shares of Class A common stock that were offered and sold pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a price to the public of $19.00 per share. Including the option exercise, we received net proceeds of $183.9 million after deducting offering costs, underwriting discounts and commissions of $17.4 million. Concurrent with the IPO, we issued 7,105,262 shares of our common stock in a private placement for net proceeds of $130.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $4.7 million. On February 1, 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 1,650,000 shares of our Class A common stock at a public offering price of $67.00 per share. We received net proceeds of $103.1 million after deducting offering costs, underwriting discounts and commissions of $7.5 million.
Since our incorporation, we have incurred significant losses and negative cash flows from operations. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred a net loss of $32.8 million and $16.0 million and used $20.8 million and $13.1 million of cash in operations, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $55.4 million and cash, cash equivalents, and investments of $431.9 million, which do not include net proceeds from our public offering completed on February 1, 2021. We expect to continue to incur significant and increasing losses and do not expect positive cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future, and our net losses may fluctuate significantly from period to period, depending on the timing of and expenditures on our planned commercialization and research and development activities.
We expect our expenses to increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•continue to develop and commercialize our Proteograph Product Suite;
•attract, hire and retain qualified personnel;
•establish a sales, marketing, service, support and distribution infrastructure in advance of commercialization;
•build-out and expand our in-house NP manufacturing capabilities;
•continue to engage in research and development of other products and enhancements to our Proteograph;
•implement operational, financial and management information systems;
•obtain, maintain, expand, and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
•build the infrastructure to operate as a public company.
PrognomIQ
In August 2020, we transferred certain assets related to disease testing to PrognomIQ, Inc. (PrognomIQ), a new wholly-owned subsidiary, in exchange for all of its outstanding equity interests. Following the transfer, we completed a pro-rata distribution to our stockholders of most of the shares of capital stock of PrognomIQ. Following the distribution and a subsequent $55.0 million equity financing of PrognomIQ, we hold approximately 19% of the outstanding capital stock in PrognomIQ.
The rationale for this transaction was to enable the growth of ecosystems around new applications that leverage unbiased, deep and large-scale proteomic information. The transaction allows us to remain focused on our core strategy, which is to be a provider, rather than a consumer, of proteomics solutions to all customers across these ecosystems. By focusing on our role as a provider of proteomics solutions, we are no longer potentially competing with, or creating the perception that we are competing with, our customers. Our relationship with PrognomIQ does not preclude us from selling our Proteograph Product Suite to any customer in any geography, nor does it preclude our customers from using our Proteograph in any way. PrognomIQ has indicated that it plans to combine the protein data from our Proteograph solution with genomics and other -omics data, to create a multi-omics approach to health and disease testing. We believe PrognomIQ’s use of proteomics and the potential for other similar companies which use proteomics in their research and products will help us drive the adoption of our Proteograph Product Suite in these applications.
Omid Farokhzad, Chief Executive Officer and Chair of our board of directors, serves as the Chair of PrognomIQ’s board of directors. Philip Ma, Ph.D. our former Chief Business Officer serves as the Chief Executive Officer of PrognomIQ. While Dr. Ma has fully transitioned to PrognomIQ, he will remain our consultant until April 2021. In addition, three of our other employees have also transitioned to PrognomIQ. We will be providing general transition services and support, including laboratory and office space to PrognomIQ during the transition period. We anticipate these services to continue through the first half of 2021.
We granted PrognomIQ a non-exclusive license to certain patents and patent applications that we own and a non-exclusive sublicense to certain patent applications we exclusively licensed from BWH, in each case relating to our core technology, to develop, manufacture and commercialize licensed products for the field of human diagnostics on a worldwide basis. In consideration of the non-exclusive sublicense to certain patent applications licensed from BWH, PrognomIQ paid us a low-five digit figure, and would pay a low single digit royalty, in an amount equivalent to what we would have to pay under our license with BWH, on net sales of sublicensed products beginning with the first commercial sale of a sublicensed product during the term of the agreement. For further discussion of our license and sublicense arrangement with PrognomIQ, see the section titled “Business - Collaboration and License Agreements - PrognomIQ.” We do not view these amounts to be material to our financial condition and results of operations nor do we expect these amounts to ever be material to us in the future.
COVID-19 Pandemic
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we could experience disruptions that could severely impact our business. For example, we have experienced longer lead times from Hamilton for orders of our SP100 automation instruments and may experience delays and longer lead times from our other suppliers of critical hardware, instrumentation and consumables used for product development and manufacturing operations. Pandemic precautions and preventative measures may also impact our commercialization plans due to restrictions on our customers’ ability to access laboratories, causing delays in the delivery and installation of our Proteograph products, training such customers on our products, and their ability to conduct research. The ongoing build-out of our expansion facilities may also be delayed by COVID-related restrictions. Furthermore, COVID-19 has adversely affected the broader economy and financial markets, resulting in an economic downturn that could curtail the research and development budgets of our customers, our ability to hire additional personnel and our financing
prospects. Any of the foregoing could harm our operations and we cannot anticipate all the ways in which it could be adversely impacted by health epidemics such as COVID-19.
For additional details, see the section titled “Risk Factors.”
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue from product sales and we may not be able to generate meaningful revenues in the near future. Our revenue to date has been generated from research collaborations and grant-funded activities.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses include cost associated with performing services under research and development service contracts and research and development of our technology and product candidates. R&D expenses consist primarily of employee compensation, including stock-based compensation, and related benefits, laboratory supplies used for in-house research, consulting costs, costs related to clinical studies for the collection of biological samples for research use, which relate to the assets transferred to PrognomIQ, and allocated overhead, including rent, depreciation, information technology and utilities.
We plan to increase our investment in our R&D efforts related to our Proteograph Product Suite, our product development pipeline and our proprietary engineered NP technology. Therefore, we expect R&D expenses will increase in absolute dollars in future periods as we incur expenses associated with hiring additional personnel, purchasing supplies and materials, and the allocation of facility expense associated with the ongoing build-out of our expansion facilities to support our R&D efforts.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee compensation, including stock-based compensation, and related benefits for executive management, finance, administration and human resources, legal, allocated overhead, professional service fees and other general overhead costs to support our operations.
We expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses as we continue to invest in our personnel as we grow and with the additional costs incurred as a result of operating as a public company, including accounting, human resources, legal, insurance and investor relations costs. As a result, we expect general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars in future periods.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on cash, cash equivalents and investments.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest related to certain convertible promissory notes that were issued in May 2019. These notes were converted to convertible preferred stock in November 2019.
Other Expense
Other expense consists of our share of losses from our equity method investment made in August 2020, the carrying amount of which was reduced to zero during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Results of Operations
Comparisons of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods presented:
* Not meaningful
Revenue
Revenue increased by $0.5 million, or 466%, from $0.1 million in 2019 to $0.7 million in 2020, due to a Small Business Innovation Research grant awarded by the National Institutes of Health in the third quarter of 2019 and continued through 2020 and completion of a research collaboration study.
Research and Development
R&D expenses increased by $6.5 million, or 53%, from $12.4 million in 2019 to $18.9 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in product development efforts related to our Proteograph Product Suite including $3.4 million in employee compensation costs, stock-based compensation and other related costs due to growth in research and development personnel, $1.2 million related to the expansion of facilities and maintenance
and depreciation of laboratory equipment, $1.5 million in laboratory materials and prototypes, supplies and reagents used for in-house research and $1.3 million in professional and consulting fees. This was offset by a decrease in clinical study fees of $0.9 million related to the costs associated with the ramp down of site enrollment for clinical studies related to the collection of biological samples for research use. These clinical studies are related to the assets transferred to PrognomIQ.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $10.8 million, or 234% , from $4.6 million in 2019 to $15.4 million in 2020, primarily due to a $2.0 million increase in employee compensation and other related expenses, and a $5.3 million stock-based compensation increase, as a result of both converting consultants to full-time employees and an increase in personnel, including the addition of key members of executive management. Other increases include $0.7 million in professional and consulting fees related to non-capitalizable accounting and audit services in connection with our initial public offering, $1.0 million in corporate legal matters primarily related to the PrognomIQ transaction and patent activities, $0.4 million in public relation costs, $0.3 million in insurance premiums as related to becoming a publicly traded company, and $0.6 million in general business expenses such as information technology services and support and business licenses, fees and taxes.
Total Other Income
Total other income stayed relatively consistent year over year, from $0.8 million in 2019 to $0.9 million in 2020. Interest rate yields decreased during the fiscal year 2020, which were largely offset quantitatively by higher amounts of cash invested in money market funds and U.S. Treasury securities during the fiscal year 2020 as a result of multiple financing events, including $55.0 million raised in convertible preferred stock financings in the fourth quarter of 2019, $55.0 million raised in convertible preferred stock financings in the second quarter of 2020 and $314.3 million raised in an initial public offering and private placement in December 2020, compared to $17.1 million raised in convertible preferred stock financings during the first nine months of 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since the date of our incorporation, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations. Our operations have been funded primarily through the sale and issuance of equity securities since inception. We anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses and do not expect positive cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future. However, based on our cash on hand, we believe we will have adequate liquidity over the next twelve months following the date of this Annual Report to operate our business and to meet our cash requirements.
On December 8, 2020, we completed our IPO, in which we sold 10,592,106 shares of Class A common stock and received net proceeds of $183.9 million after deducting offering costs, underwriting discounts and commissions. Concurrent with the IPO, we issued 7,105,262 shares of our common stock in a private placement for net proceeds of $130.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions. On February 1, 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 1,650,000 shares of our Class A common stock and received net proceeds of $103.1 million after deducting offering costs, underwriting discounts and commissions.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
In 2020, cash used in operating activities was $20.8 million, attributable to a net loss of $32.8 million, partially offset by a net change in our net operating assets and liabilities of $2.7 million and non-cash charges of $9.2 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $7.3 million in stock-based compensation, $1.6 million of depreciation and amortization and $0.3 million of net amortization of premiums on available-for-sales securities. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to increased accrued liabilities related to employee-related compensation of $1.3 million, and professional, consulting and legal fees related to our initial public offering of $1.1 million.
In 2019, cash used in operating activities was $13.1 million, attributable to a net loss of $16.0 million, partially offset by a net change in our net operating assets and liabilities of $1.0 million, and by non-cash charges of $2.0 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $1.6 million in stock-based compensation and $0.7 million of depreciation and amortization, offset by $0.3 million of net accretion of discounts on available-for-sales securities. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to increased accrued liabilities related to clinical study fees of $0.4 million, tenant improvements of $0.3 million, professional services and consulting costs of $0.4 million, and $0.2 million in other general business expenses, offset by deposits related to a lease agreement of $0.3 million.
Investing Activities
In 2020, cash used in investing activities was $34.6 million, which related to purchases of available-for-sale securities, net of proceeds from maturities of $30.0 million, in addition to $4.5 million in payments primarily for laboratory equipment.
In 2019, cash used in investing activities was $72.4 million, which related to purchases of available-for-sale securities, net of proceeds from maturities of $68.3 million, in addition to $4.1 in payments primarily for laboratory equipment.
Financing Activities
In 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $371.5 million. This was attributable to net proceeds of $183.9 million from issuance of common stock upon initial public offering, net of issuance costs, net proceeds of $130.3 million from the concurrent private placement, net of issuance costs, and net proceeds of $54.9 million from the issuance of Series D-1 convertible preferred stock, net of issuance costs.
In 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $72.3 million. This was attributable to the net proceeds of $17.3 million from the issuance of Series C convertible preferred stock, net of issuance costs and $54.6 million from the issuance of Series D convertible preferred stock, net of issuance costs.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
In addition, we enter into agreements as a part of normal course of business with various vendors, which are generally cancellable without material penalty upon written notice. Payments associated with these agreements are not included in this table of contractual obligations.
Our operating lease obligations reflect our lease obligations for our headquarters facility in Redwood City, California. In June 2020, we amended the lease agreement for this facility to expand the office and laboratory space covered by the lease, extend the lease through February 2032, and increase the annual base rent for the expanded premises. Upon occupancy of the expansion facility that is anticipated to occur in the second half of 2021, the annual base rent will be $0.9 million in the first 12 months of the lease term (subject to an abatement period of nine months), and increases on an annual basis to $1.2 million in the final 12 months of the lease term. The amendment also provides for tenant incentives in the amount of $2.4 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since the date of our incorporation, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, as such term is defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as revenue and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation by measuring and recognizing compensation expense for all share-based awards made to employees and non-employees based on estimated grant-date fair values. We use the straight-line method to allocate compensation cost to reporting periods over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. We recognize actual forfeitures by reducing the stock-based compensation in the same period as the forfeitures occur. We estimate the fair value of share-based awards to employees and non-employees using the Black-Scholes option-pricing valuation model. The Black-Scholes model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including fair value of common stock, expected term, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, and expected dividend yield, which are described in greater detail below.
Estimating the fair value of equity-settled awards as of the grant date using the Black-Scholes option pricing model is affected by assumptions regarding a number of complex variables. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation is recognized. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop. These inputs are as follows:
•Fair value of common stock-Prior to our IPO, there was no public market for our common stock. As such, the estimated fair value of our common stock and underlying stock options has been determined at each grant date by our board of directors, with input from management, based on the information known to us on the grant date and upon a review of any recent events and their potential impact on the estimated per share fair value of our common stock. As part of these fair value determinations, our board of directors obtained and considered valuation reports prepared by a third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Technical Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. For valuations after the completion of our initial public offering, the fair value of each share of underlying common stock is based on the closing price of our Class A common stock as reported on the date of grant.
•Expected term-The expected term for options granted to employees and directors represents the average period that our options granted are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method (based on the mid-point between the weighted-average vesting date and the end of the contractual term). We have very limited historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior for our stock option grants. The expected term for options granted to non-employees is the contractual term.
•Expected volatility-As we had no publicly available stock price information prior to our IPO and limited publicly available stock price information subsequent to our IPO, the expected volatility was estimated based on the historical average volatility for comparable publicly traded life sciences technology companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, life cycle stage, or area of specialty. We will continue to apply this process until enough historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available.
•Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of the options.
•Expected dividend yield-We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected volatility, expected terms, and interest rates utilized for our stock-based compensation calculations on a prospective basis. Assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options granted involve inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our equity-based compensation could be materially different.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. Other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements under the JOBS Act for emerging growth companies include presentation of only two years audited financial statements in a registration statement for an initial public offering, an exemption from the requirement to provide an auditor’s report on internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, an exemption from any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation, and less extensive disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements. We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that (i) we are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) we affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended
transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act until the earliest of (i) the last day of our first fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of $1.07 billion or more, (ii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion of non-convertible debt instruments during the previous three fiscal years or (iii) the date on which we are deemed a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC with at least $700.0 million of outstanding equity securities held by non-affiliates, or (iv) the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of completion of our initial public offering.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one yet, of their potential impact on our financial condition of results of operations.
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
This Annual Report does not include a report of management’s assessment regarding internal control over financial reporting or an attestation report of our independent registered public accounting firm due to a transition period established by the rules of the SEC for newly public companies.
In connection with the audits of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus, we and our independent registered public accounting firm identified material weaknesses related to:
•there being insufficient accounting personnel to enable segregation of duties relating to the general ledger, disbursement, and certain accounting functions.
•there not being formalized processes or controls for account reconciliations, including independent review of such reconciliations, or related financial statement analysis prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP; and
•there not being a sufficient complement of accounting personnel with the necessary U.S. GAAP technical expertise to timely identify and account for complex or non-routine transactions or to formalize accounting policies, memoranda, or controls for such transactions.
Under standards established by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, a material weakness is a deficiency, or combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of our annual or interim consolidated financial statements will not be prevented or detected and corrected on a timely basis.
We continue to work on remediating the material weaknesses and have taken steps to strengthen our internal control over financial reporting, including hiring three finance department employees with appropriate expertise, including our Chief Financial Officer and our Controller, and retaining an accounting consulting firm to provide additional depth and breadth to our technical accounting and financial reporting capabilities. We have also begun to review and document our accounting and financial processes and internal controls, build out our financial management and reporting systems infrastructure, and further develop and formalize our accounting policies and financial reporting procedures, which includes ongoing senior management review and establishing our audit committee oversight. In addition, our current plan includes engaging a consulting firm to assist in the design effectiveness and testing of our internal controls and the hiring of an additional four finance and accounting personnel during 2021 to assist in executing on these specific functions, of which we have hired two personnel as of January 31, 2021. With the additional personnel, we intend to take appropriate and reasonable steps to remediate these material weaknesses through the implementation of appropriate segregation of duties, formalization of accounting policies and controls and retention of appropriate expertise for complex accounting transactions. However, we cannot assure you that these measures will significantly improve or remediate the material weaknesses described above. As of December 31, 2020, the material weaknesses have not been remediated.
The actions that we are taking are subject to ongoing executive management review, and will also be subject to audit committee oversight. If we are unable to successfully remediate the material weakness, or if in the future, we identify further material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting, we may not detect errors on a timely basis and our consolidated financial statements may be materially misstated.
This annual report does not include a report of management’s assessment regarding internal control over financial reporting or an attestation report of the company’s registered public accounting firm due to a transition period established by rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission for newly public companies.