Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, some of the information contained in the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. You should review "Item 1A. Risk Factors" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a late-stage clinical company advancing targeted fusion protein therapeutics ("TFPTs") for the treatment of patients with cancer. We genetically fuse the targeting antibody fragment and the cytotoxic protein payload into a single molecule which is produced through our proprietary one-step, microbial manufacturing process. We target tumor cell surface antigens with limited expression on normal cells. Binding of the target antigen by the TFPT allows for rapid internalization into the targeted cancer cell. We have designed our targeted proteins to overcome the fundamental efficacy and safety challenges inherent in existing antibody-drug conjugates ("ADCs") where a payload is chemically attached to a targeting antibody.
Our most advanced product candidate, Vicineum, also known as VB4-845, is a locally-administered targeted fusion protein composed of an anti-epithelial cell adhesion molecule ("EpCAM") antibody fragment tethered to a truncated form of Pseudomonas exotoxin A for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC. On December 18, 2020, we submitted our completed BLA for Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC to the FDA. On February 12, 2021, the FDA notified us that it has accepted for filing our BLA. The FDA also granted Priority Review for the BLA and the anticipated target PDUFA date for a decision on the BLA is August 18, 2021. In addition to the file acceptance and granting of Priority Review, the FDA also indicated that it is not currently planning to hold an advisory committee meeting to discuss the BLA for Vicineum.
In August 2019, we reported updated preliminary efficacy data from our ongoing single-arm, multi-center, open-label Phase 3 clinical trial of Vicineum as a monotherapy in patients with BCG-unresponsive NMIBC (the "VISTA Trial"). As of the May 29, 2019 data cutoff date, the data reported the preliminary complete response rates ("CRRs") in evaluable carcinoma in situ ("CIS") patients following three, six, nine and 12 months of treatment in the clinical trial. The results were consistent with the results observed in the previously completed Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical trials of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC. The VISTA Trial completed enrollment in April 2018 with a total of 133 patients across three cohorts based on histology and time to disease recurrence after adequate BCG treatment (under 2018 FDA guidance on treatment of NMIBC, adequate BCG is defined as at least two courses of BCG with at least five doses in an initial induction course of treatment, plus at least two doses in a second course of treatment):
•Cohort 1 (n=86): Patients with CIS with or without papillary disease that was determined to be refractory or recurred within six months of their last course of adequate BCG;
•Cohort 2 (n=7): Patients with CIS with or without papillary disease that recurred after six months, but less than 11 months, after their last course of adequate BCG; and
•Cohort 3 (n=40): Patients with high-risk (Ta or T1) papillary disease without CIS that recurred within six months of their last course of adequate BCG.
The primary endpoints of the VISTA Trial were CRR at 3 months in patients with CIS (with or without papillary disease) whose disease is BCG-unresponsive and duration of response ("DoR") for BCG-unresponsive CIS patients who experience a complete response ("CR").
As of the May 29, 2019 data cutoff date, preliminary primary and secondary endpoint data for each of the trial cohorts were as follows:
Cohort 1 (n=86) Evaluable Population (n=82) Complete Response Rate, for CIS:
Time Point Evaluable Patients* Complete Response Rate
(95% Confidence Interval)
3-months n=82 39% (28%-50%)
6-months n=82 26% (17%-36%)
9-months n=82 20% (12%-30%)
12-months n=82 17% (10%-27%)
*Response-evaluable population includes any modified intention-to-treat ("mITT") patient who completed the induction phase.
Cohort 2 (n=7) Evaluable Population (n=7) Complete Response Rate, for CIS:
Time Point Evaluable Patients* Complete Response Rate
(95% Confidence Interval)
3-months n=7 57% (18%-90%)
6-months n=7 57% (18%-90%)
9-months n=7 43% (10%-82%)
12-months n=7 14% (0%-58%)
*Response-evaluable population includes any mITT patient who completed the induction phase.
Pooled Cohorts 1 and 2 (n=93) Evaluable Population (n=89) Complete Response Rate, for CIS:
Time Point Evaluable Patients* Complete Response Rate
(95% Confidence Interval)
3-months n=89 40% (30%-51%)
6-months n=89 28% (19%-39%)
9-months n=89 21% (13%-31%)
12-months n=89 17% (10%-26%)
*Response-evaluable population includes any mITT patient who completed the induction phase.
Phase 3 Pooled Complete Response Rate vs. Phase 2 Pooled Complete Response Rate:
Time Point Preliminary Phase 3 Pooled CRR
(95% Confidence Interval)
Phase 2 Pooled CRR
(95% Confidence Interval)
3-months 40% (30%-51%) 40% (26%-56%)
6-months 28% (19%-39%) 27% (15%-42%)
9-months 21% (13%-31%) 18% (8%-32%)
12-months 17% (10%-26%) 16% (7%-30%)
Cohort 3 (n=40) Evaluable Population (n=38) Recurrence-Free Rate†:
Time Point Evaluable Patients* Recurrence-Free Rate
(95% Confidence Interval)
3-months n=38 71% (54%-85%)
6-months n=38 58% (41%-74%)
9-months n=38 45% (29%-62%)
12-months n=38 42% (26%-59%)
†Recurrence-free rate is defined as the percentage of patients that are recurrence-free at the given assessment time point.
*Response-evaluable population includes any mITT patient who completed the induction phase.
Duration of Response: The median DoR for patients in Cohort 1 and Cohort 2 combined (n=93) is 287 days (lower 95% confidence interval ("CI") = 154 days, upper 95% confidence interval is not estimable ("NE") due to the limited number of events occurring beyond the median), using the Kaplan-Meier method. The Kaplan-Meier method is a non-parametric statistical analysis used to estimate survival times and times to event when incomplete observations in data exist. Additional ad hoc analysis of pooled data for all patients with CIS (Cohorts 1 and 2, n=93) shows that among patients who achieved a complete response at 3 months, 52% remained disease-free for a total of 12 months or longer after starting treatment, using the Kaplan-Meier method. DoR is defined as the time from first occurrence of complete response to documentation of treatment failure or death.
We have conducted additional analyses for secondary endpoints based on the May 29, 2019 data cutoff date. These additional preliminary data include the following:
•Time to Cystectomy: Across all 133 patients treated with Vicineum in the VISTA Trial, greater than 75% of all patients are estimated to remain cystectomy-free at 3 years, using the Kaplan-Meier method. Additional ad hoc analysis shows that approximately 88% of responders are estimated to remain cystectomy-free at 3 years. Time to cystectomy is defined as the time from the date of first dose of study treatment to surgical bladder removal. The first 2018 FDA guidance on treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC patients states that the goal of therapy in such patients is to avoid cystectomy. Therefore, time to cystectomy is a key secondary endpoint in the VISTA Trial.
•Time to Disease Recurrence: High-grade papillary (Ta or T1) NMIBC is associated with high rates of progression and recurrence. The median time to disease recurrence for patients in Cohort 3 (n=40) is 402 days (95% CI, 170-NE), using the Kaplan-Meier method. Time to disease recurrence is defined as the time from the date of the first dose of study treatment to the first occurrence of treatment failure or death on or prior to treatment discontinuation.
•Progression-Free Survival ("PFS"): 90% of all 133 patients treated with Vicineum in the VISTA Trial are estimated to remain progression-free for 2 years or greater, using the Kaplan-Meier method. PFS is defined as the time from the date of first dose of study treatment to the first occurrence of disease progression (e.g., T2 or more advanced disease) or death on or prior to treatment discontinuation.
•Event-Free Survival: 29% of all 133 patients treated with Vicineum in the VISTA Trial are estimated to remain event-free at 12 months, using the Kaplan-Meier method. Event-free survival is defined as the time from the date of first dose of study treatment to the first occurrence of disease recurrence, progression or death on or prior to treatment discontinuation.
•Overall Survival ("OS"): 96% of all 133 patients treated with Vicineum in the VISTA Trial are estimated to have an overall survival of 2 years or greater, using the Kaplan-Meier method. OS is defined as the time from the date of first dose of study treatment to death from any cause.
Preliminary Safety Results
As of the May 29, 2019 data cutoff date, in patients across all cohorts (n=133) of our Phase 3 VISTA Trial of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, 88% experienced at least one adverse event, with 95% of adverse events being Grade 1 or 2. The most commonly reported treatment-related adverse events were dysuria (14%), hematuria (13%) and urinary tract infection (12%) - all of which are consistent with the profile of bladder cancer patients and the use of catheterization for treatment delivery. These adverse events were determined by the clinical investigators to be manageable and reversible, and only four patients (3%) discontinued treatment due to an adverse event. Serious adverse events, regardless of treatment attribution, were reported in 14% of patients. There were four treatment-related serious adverse events reported in three patients including acute kidney injury (Grade 3), pyrexia (Grade 2), cholestatic hepatitis (Grade 4) and renal failure (Grade 5). There were no age-related increases in adverse events observed in the VISTA Trial.
Other Vicineum Activity
In August 2018, we received Fast Track designation from the FDA for Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC.
In May 2019, we met with the FDA for a Type C meeting regarding chemistry, manufacturing and controls (“CMC”) for Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC and reached agreement with the FDA on the analytical comparability plan to be used to assess comparability between the drug supply used in clinical trials and the potential commercial drug supply to be produced by Fujifilm. We also confirmed with the FDA that, subject to final comparability data to be provided in the BLA submission, no additional clinical trials were deemed necessary to establish comparability.
In June 2019, we met with the FDA for a Type B Pre-BLA meeting regarding the approval pathway for Vicineum for the treatment of patients with BCG-unresponsive NMIBC. At the meeting, we reached alignment with the FDA on an accelerated approval pathway for Vicineum along with Rolling Review. “Rolling Review” of the BLA enables individual modules to be submitted and reviewed on an ongoing basis, rather than waiting for all sections to be completed before submission. The FDA also indicated that the clinical data, nonclinical data, clinical pharmacology data, and the safety database were sufficient to support a BLA submission, and that no additional clinical trials were necessary for a BLA submission. Per the official FDA minutes received post-meeting, the FDA stated that the pre-licensing inspection may be completed at the time of process performance qualification manufacturing, which we believe will benefit the overall review timeline for the BLA. In addition, the FDA communicated that they expected that a meeting with the FDA’s Oncologic Drugs Advisory Committee ("ODAC")
will be required as part of the accelerated approval pathway. If Vicineum receives marketing approval for treatment of NMIBC, a post-marketing confirmatory trial will also be required.
In November 2019, we met with the FDA for a Type C meeting to discuss the details of a post-marketing confirmatory trial for Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC. At that meeting, we reached agreement with the FDA that the post-marketing confirmatory trial for Vicineum will enroll BCG-refractory patients who have received less-than-adequate BCG, which is especially important in light of the ongoing BCG shortage. This represents a broader patient population than the BCG-intolerant population originally proposed. We anticipate that, if Vicineum is approved by the FDA, the initial indication will be for BCG-unresponsive patients who have received adequate BCG. If the post-marketing confirmatory trial is successful, it could result in an expanded label to include this additional population of patients who have received less-than-adequate BCG.
On December 4, 2019, we met with the FDA for a Type B pre-BLA meeting for CMC. At that meeting, we reached agreement with the FDA on the final content for Module 3 (CMC) of the BLA.
On December 6, 2019, we initiated our BLA submission for Vicineum to the FDA under Rolling Review. This submission consisted of Modules 1, 2, 4 and 5 only.
On May 7, 2020, we received clinical Scientific Advice from the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use ("CHMP") of the European Medicines Agency ("EMA") stating that the Committee agreed that our nonclinical, clinical pharmacology and safety database are all sufficient to support a marketing authorization application ("MAA"). Furthermore, additional clinical trials were not requested by the CHMP in support of the MAA submission for Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC.
On May 29, 2020, we received CMC Scientific Advice from the CHMP of the EMA, stating that the committee agreed that our comparability plan provides a strong analytical package, and no additional clinical trials to establish comparability are deemed necessary at this time. Furthermore, the CHMP agreed to accept the current Good Manufacturing Practice ("cGMP") inspections conducted by the FDA and will therefore not conduct an independent inspection of the manufacturing facilities.
On June 17, 2020, we were informed that the FDA has conditionally accepted the proprietary brand name VICINEUM™ for our product candidate, oportuzumab monatox. The name VICINEUM was developed in compliance with the FDA’s final Guidance for Industry, Contents of a Complete Submission for the Evaluation of Proprietary Names and the FDA’s draft Guidance for Industry, Best Practices in Developing Proprietary Name for Drugs. We believe VICINEUM is a proprietary name with strong marketing potential that is also consistent with FDA’s goal of preventing medication errors and potential harm to the public by ensuring that only appropriate proprietary names are approved for use. Final approval of the VICINEUM brand name is conditional on FDA approval of our product candidate, oportuzumab monatox. Based upon FDA feedback, we withdrew our previously submitted proposed brand name, VICINIUM®, from consideration due to potential for confusion with ammonium derivative products with the “-ium” suffix as established by the United States Adopted Names Council.
On July 28, 2020, we received notice from the EMA that it has approved our request to review Vicineum under the EMA’s centralized authorization procedure drug review process and on September 29, 2020, we received notice from the EMA that it has appointed the Rapporteur and Co-Rapporteur for our MAA. The Rapporteur and Co-Rapporteur are members of EMA’s CHMP and will jointly coordinate CHMP’s evaluation of our MAA for Vicineum.
On October 23, 2020, we completed a successful pre-submission meeting with the EMA which addressed product specific, legal, regulatory and scientific topics related to Vicineum. The information and insights gained from the meeting will help to facilitate the validation of the MAA and support a smooth evaluation. The agency also provided guidance on various administrative topics which helps to clarify the regulatory path forward.
We held two successful meetings with the assigned Rapporteurs on November 2, 2020 and December 14, 2020 in which we received guidance on the contents of the MAA. The success of these meetings, in addition to the receipt of centralized procedure eligibility confirmation from the EMA, are significant milestones toward our regulatory path forward in Europe and supported our submission of the MAA on March 5, 2021, with potential approval anticipated in early 2022
On December 18, 2020, we submitted the completed BLA, including Module 3 (CMC), to the FDA. After we submitted the BLA to the FDA, we were invited to participate in an Application Orientation Meeting, which is available in certain Center for Drug Evaluation and Research ("CDER") review divisions, at the review team’s discretion, for priority applications where early action is expected and/or desired. The objectives of an Application Orientation Meeting include familiarizing the FDA with application datasets, discussing scientific aspects including clinical risk-benefit, and establishing early communication between applicants and the FDA.
On February 12, 2021, the FDA notified us that it has accepted for filing our BLA. The FDA also granted Priority Review for the BLA and the anticipated target PDUFA date for a decision on the BLA is August 18, 2021. In addition to the file acceptance and granting of Priority Review, the FDA also indicated that it is not currently planning to hold an advisory committee meeting to discuss the BLA for Vicineum.
Manufacturing
In October 2018, we entered into a Master Bioprocessing Services Agreement with Fujifilm (the "Fujifilm MSA") for the manufacturing process and technology transfer of Vicineum drug substance production.
In November 2019, we entered into a Commercial Manufacturing and Supply Agreement with Baxter (the "Baxter CSA") for the manufacturing process and technology transfer of Vicineum drug product production.
In April 2019, the first full, commercial-scale cGMP run was completed at Fujifilm. Full quality release testing was completed and all Phase 3 release specifications were met, supporting Fujifilm’s ability to produce the bulk drug substance form of Vicineum for commercial purposes if we receive regulatory approval to market Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC.
In February 2020, manufacturing of the pre-process performance qualification ("pre-PPQ") cGMP batch was completed at Fujifilm. Full quality release testing of the drug substance was completed and all quality acceptance criteria were met.
On August 4, 2020, we completed manufacturing of the drug substance PPQ batches at Fujifilm and in September 2020, we successfully completed the final of three drug product PPQ batches at Baxter. All of the completed drug substance PPQ batches and drug product PPQ batches met all quality acceptance criteria.
In December 2020, we received and analyzed all of the analytical comparability test results from the drug substance and drug product PPQ batches. For analytical comparability, we conducted testing across four categories: release testing, biophysical characterization, forced degradation studies, and stability studies. This approach is in alignment with requirements of the FDA, the EMA and the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use. The test results for product intended for commercial use were found to be highly comparable to the the Company's clinical supply of Vicineum. Based on these results, we are optimistic that the FDA will determine that the commercial supply of Vicineum is comparable to the clinical supply of Vicineum, and that no additional clinical trials are warranted. The comparability data from the PPQ campaigns for both drug substance and drug product were the final material components of our completed BLA, which was submitted to the FDA on December 18, 2020.
In December 2020, we entered into a commercial manufacturing and supply framework agreement with Qilu (the “Qilu CMO Framework Agreement”)for Qilu to be a contract manufacturer for the global commercial supply of Vicineum. We believe that the technology transfer to Qilu for the manufacturing of Vicineum is on track to be completed in mid-2021.
Partnering
Greater China
On July 30, 2020, we and our wholly-owned subsidiary, Viventia Bio, Inc. entered into an exclusive license agreement with Qilu (the “Qilu License Agreement”) pursuant to which we granted Qilu an exclusive, sublicensable, royalty-bearing license, under certain intellectual property owned or exclusively licensed by us, to develop, manufacture and commercialize Vicineum for the treatment of NMIBC and other types of cancer in China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan ("Greater China"). We also granted Qilu a non-exclusive, sublicensable, royalty-bearing sublicense, under certain other intellectual property licensed by us to develop, manufacture and commercialize Vicineum in Greater China. We retain (i) development and commercialization rights in the rest of the world excluding Greater China and MENA and (ii) manufacturing rights with respect to Vicineum in the rest of the world excluding Greater China.
We have received a total of $10 million in net proceeds associated with the $12 million upfront payment due pursuant to the Qilu License Agreement . We are also entitled to receive up to an additional $23 million upon the achievement of certain technology transfer, development and regulatory milestones, as well as a 12% royalty based upon annual net sales of Vicineum in Greater China. The royalties are payable upon the first commercial sale of Vicineum in a region and continuing until the latest of (i) twelve years after the first commercial sale of Vicineum in such region, (ii) the expiration of the last valid patent claim covering or claiming the composition of matter, method of treatment, or method of manufacture of such Vicineum in such region, and (iii) the expiration of regulatory or data exclusivity for such Vicineum in such region. The royalty rate is subject to reduction under certain circumstances, including when there is no valid claim of a licensed patent that covers Vicineum in a particular region or no data or regulatory exclusivity of Vicineum in a particular region.
The Investigational New Drug application for Vicineum submitted by Qilu, our partner in Greater China, to the Center for Drug Evaluation of the China National Medical Products Administration was accepted for review in January 2021.
MENA
On November 30, 2020, we entered into an exclusive license agreement with Hikma Pharmaceuticals LLC ("Hikma") (the “Hikma License Agreement”) pursuant to which we granted Hikma an exclusive, sublicensable, royalty-bearing license, under certain intellectual property owned or exclusively licensed by us, to commercialize Vicineum in the Middle East and North Africa region ("MENA") region. We retain development and commercialization rights in the rest of the world excluding Greater China and MENA. In consideration for the rights granted by us, Hikma agreed to pay to us an upfront payment, sales related milestones payments, and royalties and on net sales in the MENA region for the term of the Hikma License Agreement.
We maintain global development, marketing and commercialization rights for all of our TFPT-based product candidates. We intend to explore various commercialization strategies to market our approved products. If we obtain regulatory approval for Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, we intend to build a North American specialty urology sales force to market the product in the United States. Outside the United States, we will continue to seek additional commercialization partners with urology expertise. We also own or exclusively license worldwide intellectual property rights for all of our TFPT-based product candidates, covering our key patents with protection into 2036.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $52.4 million, net working capital (current assets less current liabilities) of $44.8 million and an accumulated deficit of $315.9 million. We incurred negative cash flows from operating activities of $30.8 million, $37.5 million and $22.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Since our inception, we have received no revenue from sales of our products, and we anticipate that operating losses will continue for the foreseeable future as we continue into the follow-up stage of our Phase 3 VISTA Trial of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, seek marketing approval from the FDA and, if approved, commercialize Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC. We have financed our operations to date primarily through private placements of our common stock, preferred stock, common stock warrants and convertible bridge notes, venture debt borrowings, our initial public offering ("IPO"), follow-on public offerings, sales effected in "at-the-market" ("ATM") offerings, out-license and commercialization partnership agreements and, to a lesser extent, from a collaboration.
Under Accounting Standards Codification Topic 205-40, Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern, we are required at each reporting period to evaluate whether there are conditions and events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. This evaluation initially does not take into consideration the potential mitigating effect of our plans that have not been fully implemented as of the date the financial statements are issued. When substantial doubt exists, we evaluate whether the mitigating effect of our plans sufficiently alleviates the substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The mitigating effect of our plans, however, is only considered if both (i) it is probable that our plans will be effectively implemented within one year after the date that our financial statements are issued and (ii) it is probable that our plans, when implemented, will mitigate the relevant conditions or events that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that our financial statements are issued. Generally, to be considered probable of being effectively implemented, our plans must have been approved by our board of directors before the date that our financial statements are issued.
Our future success is dependent on our ability to develop and, if approved, commercialize our product candidates, including Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, and ultimately upon our ability to attain profitable operations. In order to commercialize our product candidates, including Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, we need to complete clinical development and comply with comprehensive regulatory requirements. We are subject to a number of risks similar to other late-stage clinical companies, including, but not limited to, successful discovery and development of our product candidates, raising additional capital, development and commercialization by our competitors of new technological innovations, protection of proprietary technology and market acceptance of our products. The successful discovery and development of product candidates, including Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, requires substantial working capital, and we expect to seek additional funds through equity or debt financings or through additional commercialization partnerships, licensing transactions or other sources. We may be unable to obtain equity or debt financings or enter into additional commercialization partnerships or licensing transactions at favorable terms, or at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of existing stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include liens or other restrictive covenants limiting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through government or other third-party funding, strategic commercialization
partnerships and alliances or licensing arrangements, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to implement cost reduction strategies and delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market products or product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market.
We continue to monitor the effect of the outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus ("COVID-19"). This virus continues to spread globally, has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and has spread to over 200 countries and territories, including the United States disproportionately. The impact of this pandemic has been and will likely continue to be extensive in many aspects of society, which has resulted in and will likely continue to result in significant disruptions to businesses and capital markets around the world. We are proactively executing risk mitigation strategies to attenuate the impact of COVID-19 on us, and at this time, we have not yet experienced any business disruptions as a result of the pandemic. We are continually assessing the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations and we are monitoring the spread of COVID-19 and the actions implemented to combat the virus throughout the world.
We do not believe that our cash and cash equivalents of $52.4 million as of December 31, 2020 is sufficient to fund our current operating plan for at least twelve months after the issuance of our consolidated financial statements. Based on our current operating plan, we anticipate having sufficient cash to fund our operations into the fourth quarter of 2021; however, we have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and our capital resources may be utilized faster than we currently expect. Given our history of significant losses, negative cash flows from operations, limited cash resources currently on hand and dependence on our ability - about which there can be no certainty - to obtain additional financing to fund our operations after the current cash resources are exhausted, substantial doubt exists about our ability to continue as a going concern. The consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K were prepared under the assumption that we will continue as a going concern and do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Components of Our Results of Operations
License Revenue
License revenue consists of revenue recognized pursuant to our commercialization partnership agreements, including the Qilu License Agreement, which is assessed under ASC Topic 606, Revenue ("ASC 606"). In the future, we may generate revenue from a combination of up-front payments, milestone payments and royalties in connection with our commercialization partnership agreements, including the Qilu License Agreement.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, which include:
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and share-based compensation expense;
•expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations ("CROs") and investigative sites that conduct our clinical trials;
•expenses associated with developing manufacturing capabilities;
•expenses associated with transferring manufacturing capabilities to contract manufacturing organizations ("CMOs") for commercial-scale production;
•facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other supplies;
•expenses associated with regulatory activities; and
•expenses associated with license milestone fees.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We recognize external development costs based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors and our clinical sites.
The successful development and commercialization of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC is highly uncertain. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development and commercialization, including the uncertainty of:
•the scope, progress, outcome and costs of our clinical trials and other research and development activities;
•the efficacy and potential advantages of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC compared to alternative treatments, including any standard of care;
•the market acceptance of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC;
•the cost and timing of the implementation of commercial-scale manufacturing of Vicineum;
•obtaining, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•significant and changing government regulation;
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic; and
•the timing, receipt and terms of any marketing approvals.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials or other testing beyond those that we currently contemplate will be required for the completion of clinical development of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC.
We allocate direct research and development expenses, consisting principally of external costs, such as fees paid to investigators, consultants, central laboratories and CROs in connection with our clinical trials, costs related to manufacturing or purchasing clinical trial materials and technology transfer and license milestone fees, to specific product programs. We do not allocate employee and contractor-related costs, costs associated with our platform and facility expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product programs because these costs may be deployed across multiple product programs under research and development and, as such, are separately classified. The table below provides research and development expenses incurred for Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC and other expenses by category. We have deferred further development of Vicineum for the treatment of SCCHN and VB6-845d in order to focus our efforts and our resources on our ongoing development and, if approved, commercialization of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC.
We did not allocate research and development expenses to any other specific product program during the periods presented (in thousands):
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for personnel, including share-based compensation, in executive, operational, finance, business development and human resource functions. Other general and administrative expenses include facility-related costs, professional fees for legal, patent, consulting and accounting services, insurance, investment banking fees, commercial market research, and United States pre-launch market readiness. Future reporting periods may include selling costs pursuant to our commercialization strategy.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
In connection with the Viventia Acquisition in September 2016, we recorded contingent consideration pertaining to the amounts potentially payable to Viventia's shareholders pursuant to the terms of the Share Purchase Agreement among us, Viventia and the other signatories thereto and are based on regulatory approval in certain markets and future revenue levels. The fair value of contingent consideration is assessed at each balance sheet date and changes, if any, to the fair value are recognized in earnings (or loss) for the period.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists primarily of interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents and, to a lesser extent, any gains or losses on foreign exchange.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists of income taxes paid to foreign jurisdictions pursuant to our commercialization partnership agreements, including the Qilu License Agreement.
Our Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
License Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $11.2 million, which was due to the recognition of revenue pursuant to our commercialization partnership agreements, specifically the Qilu License Agreement. The Company did not record any revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses were $29.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $24.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $4.5 million was due primarily to increased costs associated with technology transfer and manufacturing scale-up for commercial supply ($6.0 million), license milestone fees ($1.2 million), and professional fees in support of regulatory activities ($0.4 million), partially offset by lower employee-related compensation ($1.1 million), lower clinical trial expenses ($1.6 million) as a result of the Company’s Phase 3 VISTA Trial winding down, and other decreases ($0.4 million).
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses were $14.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $2.1 million was due primarily to increases in employee-related compensation ($1.3 million), insurance ($0.5 million), legal fees ($0.6 million), and other increases ($0.2 million), partially offset by lower market research ($0.5 million).
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
The decrease in fair value of contingent consideration was $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the increase of $71.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. In 2020, discount rates fluctuated significantly as a result of the extreme volatility of financial markets as global economies shut down in order to contain the spread of COVID-19. The discount rate applied to the 2% earnout on all potential commercial net sales of Vicineum through December 2033, upon which a significant portion of the fair value is derived, fluctuated from 5.6% as of December 31, 2019 to 8.8% as of December 31, 2020. As such, changes to discount rates, as well as the refinement of launch timelines in certain markets outside the United States, partially offset by improvements to the competitive landscape, resulted in a decrease in fair value of contingent consideration of $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The increase in fair value of contingent consideration of $71.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by second and fourth quarter of 2019 events. During the second quarter of 2019, we reassessed the total addressable global market for NMIBC and determined that both the global market size and estimated potential Vicineum commercial net sales within the global NMIBC market were likely higher than our previous estimates. Specific drivers of the increased revenue estimates include our expectations that Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC could achieve peak market penetration earlier than previously estimated and that Vicineum sales outside the United States could be two to three times our expected sales volumes in the United States, resulting in a $44.0 million increase in the estimated fair value of contingent consideration. The $25.0 million increase in the estimated fair value of contingent consideration during the fourth quarter of 2019 was attributable primarily to increases in our assumptions for both the estimated United States market share for Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, if approved, and the probability of success for achieving marketing approval by the FDA, based on expert commentary from a December 2019 public hearing of the FDA's Oncologic Drugs Advisory Committee during a review of a competitor's product. As contingent consideration incorporates an earnout rate of 2% on all commercial net sales reported through December 2033, any increase in expected future net sales correlates to an increase in the estimated fair value of our contingent consideration liability. Changes in forecast assumptions, including the probability of regulatory approvals and Vicineum pricing and sales volumes, as well as changes in the discount rate utilized based on prevailing market conditions, could result in materially different fair value estimates.
Other income, net
Other income, net was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change of $0.9 million was due to the decrease in interest income on cash balances.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes was $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to no provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $1.4 million was due to income taxes paid to foreign jurisdictions pursuant to our commercialization partnership agreements.
Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For a comparison of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, see "Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") on March 16, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $52.4 million, net working capital of $44.8 million and an accumulated deficit of $315.9 million. We incurred negative cash flows from operating activities of $30.8 million, $37.5 million and $22.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Since our inception, we have received no revenue from sales of our products, and we anticipate that operating losses will continue for the foreseeable future as we continue into our follow-up stage of our Phase 3 VISTA Trial of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, seek marketing approval from the FDA and EMA for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, and if approved, commercialize Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC. We have financed our operations to date primarily through private placements of our common stock, preferred stock, common stock warrants and convertible bridge notes, venture debt borrowings, our IPO, follow-on public offerings, sales effected in ATM offerings, out-license and commercialization partnership agreements and, to a lesser extent, from a collaboration.
In November 2019, we entered into an Open Market Sale AgreementSM (the "Sales Agreement") with Jefferies LLC ("Jefferies"), as amended by Amendment No. 1 to Open Market Sale AgreementSM, dated October 30, 2020 and Amendment No. 2 to Open Market Sale AgreementSM, dated February 17, 2021, under which we may issue and sell shares of our common stock from time to time for an aggregate sales price of up to $119.5 million through Jefferies (the "ATM Offering"). Sales of common stock under the Sales Agreement are made by any method that is deemed to be an ATM offering as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, including but not limited to sales made directly on or through the Nasdaq Global Market or any other existing trading market for our common stock. We have no obligation to sell any of our common stock and may at any time suspend offers under the Sales Agreement or terminate the Sales Agreement. Subject to the terms and conditions of the Sales Agreement, Jefferies will use its commercially reasonable efforts to sell common stock from time to time, as the sales agent, based upon our instructions, which include a prohibition on sales below a floor price. We have provided Jefferies with customary indemnification rights, and Jefferies is entitled to a commission at a fixed rate equal to 3.0% of the gross proceeds for each sale of common stock.
Through December 31, 2020, we raised $39.9 million of net proceeds from the sale of 35.4 million shares of common stock under the ATM Offering, including $38.0 million in net proceeds from the sale of 33.4 million shares of common stock during the period January 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020. In 2020, we incurred $0.2 million in legal, accounting and printing costs in connection with the ATM Offering. We raised $60.3 million of net proceeds from the sale of 26.3 million shares of
common stock under the ATM Offering from January 1, 2021 through March 8, 2021.
We do not believe that our cash and cash equivalents of $52.4 million as of December 31, 2020 is sufficient to fund our current operating plan for at least twelve months after the issuance of our consolidated financial statements. Based on our current operating plan, we anticipate having sufficient cash to fund our operations into the fourth quarter of 2021; however, we have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and our capital resources may be utilized faster than we currently expect. Given our history of significant losses, negative cash flows from operations, limited cash resources currently on hand and dependence on our ability - about which there can be no certainty - to obtain additional financing to fund our operations after the current cash resources are exhausted, substantial doubt exists about our ability to continue as a going concern. The consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K were prepared under the assumption that we will continue as a going concern and do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
We continue to monitor the effect of the outbreak of COVID-19. The impact of this pandemic has been and will likely continue to be extensive in many aspects of society, which has resulted in and will likely continue to result in significant disruptions to businesses and capital markets around the world. We are proactively executing risk mitigation strategies to attenuate the impact of COVID-19 on us, and at this time, we have not yet experienced any business disruptions as a result of the pandemic. We are continually assessing the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations and we are monitoring the spread of COVID-19 and the actions implemented to combat the virus throughout the world.
Funding Requirements
Our future success is dependent on our ability to develop and, if approved, commercialize our product candidates, including Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, and ultimately upon our ability to attain profitable operations. In order to commercialize our product candidates, including Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, we need to complete clinical development and comply with comprehensive regulatory requirements. We are subject to a number of risks similar to other late-stage clinical companies, including, but not limited to, successful discovery and development of our product candidates, raising additional capital, development and commercialization by our competitors of new technological innovations, protection of proprietary technology and market acceptance of our products. The successful discovery, development and, if approved, commercialization of product candidates, including Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, requires substantial working capital, and we expect to seek additional funds through equity or debt financings or through additional commercialization partnerships, licensing transactions or other sources. We may be unable to obtain equity or debt financings or enter into additional commercialization partnerships or licensing transactions at favorable terms, or at all, and, if necessary, we may be required to implement cost reduction strategies.
We will incur substantial expenses if and as we:
•continue into our follow-up stage of our Phase 3 VISTA Trial for Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC;
•seek marketing approvals for Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC;
•establish and implement sales, marketing and distribution capabilities and scale up and validate external manufacturing capabilities (including completing the manufacturing process and technology transfer to any third-party manufacturers) to commercialize Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, if approved;
•maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•add equipment and physical infrastructure to support our research and development;
•hire additional clinical, regulatory, quality control, scientific and management personnel;
•expand our operational, financial and management systems and personnel;
•conduct research and pre-clinical and clinical development of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC and our other product candidates;
•seek to discover and develop additional product candidates; and
•in-license or acquire the rights to other products, product candidates or technologies.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the scope, initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of pre-clinical development and laboratory testing and clinical trials for Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC and our other product candidates;
•the cost and timing of any new clinical trials or studies of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC;
•the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our business
•our ability to establish additional commercialization partnerships or licensing arrangements on favorable terms, if at all, particularly manufacturing, marketing and distribution arrangements for our product candidates;
•the costs and timing of the implementation of commercial-scale manufacturing activities, including those associated with the manufacturing process and technology transfer to third-party manufacturers to facilitate such commercial-scale manufacturing of Vicineum;
•the costs and timing of establishing and implementing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities for Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, if approved;
•the costs and timing of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending any intellectual property-related claims;
•our obligation to make milestone, royalty and other payments to third-party licensors under our licensing agreements;
•the extent to which we in-license or acquire rights to other products, product candidates or technologies;
•the outcome, timing and cost of regulatory review by the FDA and comparable foreign regulatory authorities for Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, including the potential for the FDA or comparable foreign regulatory authorities to require that we perform more studies than those that we currently expect to perform;
•our ability to achieve certain future regulatory, development and commercialization milestones under our out-license and commercialization partnership agreements;
•the effect of competing technological and market developments; and
•the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC, if approved.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues from commercial sales, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, government or other third-party funding, strategic commercialization partnerships and alliances, and licensing arrangements. We do not have any committed external source of funds other than the amounts payable under our out-license and commercialization partnership agreements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of existing stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include liens or other restrictive covenants limiting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through government or other third-party funding, strategic commercialization partnerships and alliances or licensing arrangements, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market products or product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted business operations and created significant volatility and disruption to financial markets. Significant uncertainty remains as to the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, and on the global economy as a whole. The extent and duration of the pandemic could continue to disrupt global markets and may affect our ability to raise additional capital in the future.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $30.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $22.4 million, adjusted for non-cash items, including depreciation of $0.1 million, share-based compensation of $1.8 million, a change in the fair value of the contingent consideration of $11.2 million and a net increase in operating assets and liabilities of $0.9 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $37.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $107.5 million, adjusted for non-cash items, including depreciation of $0.2 million, share-based compensation of $1.2
million, a change in the fair value of the contingent consideration of $71.6 million and a net decrease in operating assets and liabilities of $3.1 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $22.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $33.7 million, adjusted for non-cash items, including depreciation of $0.2 million, share-based compensation of $1.3 million, a change in the fair value of contingent consideration of $8.8 million and a net increase in operating assets and liabilities of $0.6 million.
Net Cash Used in Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities consisted of de minimis purchases and sales or property and equipment during each of the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2018 and $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Cash Provided by Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $38.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of $38.0 million in net proceeds from our ATM Offering and $0.1 million from the exercise of outstanding warrants and options to purchase our common stock.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $35.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted primarily of $27.8 million in net proceeds from our June 2019 Financing, $5.5 million from the exercise of outstanding warrants to purchase our common stock and $1.9 million in net proceeds from our ATM Offering.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $58.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 and consisted primarily of $51.0 million in net proceeds from our March 2018 and June 2018 financings and $7.3 million from the exercise of outstanding warrants to purchase our common stock.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP and the rules and regulations of the SEC require the use of estimates and assumptions, based on complex judgments considered reasonable, and affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Our critical accounting policies are those policies which require the most significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Management has determined that our most critical accounting policies are those relating to the fair value of intangible assets, goodwill and contingent consideration; income taxes (including the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets); research and development costs; revenue recognition and going concern considerations.
Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Our intangible assets consist of indefinite-lived, acquired in-process research and development ("IPR&D") worldwide product rights to Vicineum as a result of the Viventia Acquisition in 2016. IPR&D assets acquired in a business combination are considered indefinite-lived until the completion or abandonment of the associated research and development efforts. Amortization over the estimated useful life will commence at the time of the launch of Vicineum in the respective markets, if approved. If regulatory approval to market Vicineum for the treatment of BCG-unresponsive NMIBC is not obtained, we will immediately expense the related capitalized cost.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are quantitatively tested for impairment at least annually during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year, or more often if indicators of impairment are present. Impairment testing of indefinite-lived intangible assets requires management to estimate the future discounted cash flows of an asset using assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual future cash flows may differ from the estimates used in impairment testing. We recognize an impairment loss when and to the extent that the estimated fair value of an intangible asset is less than its carrying value. In addition, on a quarterly basis, we perform a qualitative review of our business operations to determine whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred which could indicate that the carrying value of our intangible assets was not recoverable. Based on the annual testing and quarterly reviews performed, we concluded that the carrying value of our intangible assets was not impaired as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Goodwill
Goodwill on our consolidated balance sheet is the result of the Viventia Acquisition in September 2016 and represents the difference between the purchase price and the fair value of the identifiable tangible and intangible net assets acquired under the acquisition method of accounting. Goodwill is not amortized; rather than recording periodic amortization, goodwill is quantitatively tested for impairment at least annually during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year, or more often if indicators of impairment are present. Impairment testing of goodwill requires management to estimate the future discounted cash flows of a reporting unit using assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual future cash flows may differ from the estimates used in impairment testing. If the fair value of the equity of a reporting unit exceeds
the reporting unit’s carrying value, including goodwill, then goodwill is considered not to be impaired. We recognize a goodwill impairment when and to the extent that the fair value of the equity of a reporting unit is less than the reporting unit's carrying value, including goodwill. We have only one reporting unit. In addition, on a quarterly basis, we perform a qualitative review of our business operations to determine whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred which could have a material adverse effect on the estimated fair value of each reporting unit and thus indicate a potential impairment of the goodwill carrying value. Based on the annual testing and quarterly reviews performed, we concluded that there was no goodwill impairment during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Contingent Consideration
Contingent consideration on our consolidated balance sheet is the result of the Viventia Acquisition in September 2016 and represents the discounted present value of future launch milestones and net sales royalties due to the Selling Shareholders pursuant to the Share Purchase Agreement. For additional information, see "Note 1. Description of Business" in our consolidated financial statements, which begin on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Contingent consideration is measured at its estimated fair value at each reporting period, with fluctuations in value resulting in a non-cash charge to earnings (or loss) during the period. The estimated fair value measurement is based on significant unobservable inputs (Level 3 within the fair value hierarchy), including internally developed financial forecasts, probabilities of success and timing of certain milestone events and achievements, which are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual future cash flows may differ from the assumptions used to estimate the fair value of contingent consideration. The valuation of contingent consideration requires the use of significant assumptions and judgments, which management believes are consistent with those that would be made by a market participant. Management reviews its assumptions and judgments on an ongoing basis as additional market and other data is obtained, and any future changes in the assumptions and judgments utilized by management may cause the estimated fair value of contingent consideration to fluctuate materially, resulting in earnings volatility.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and net operating loss ("NOL") and research and development credit ("R&D credit") carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in operations in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is recorded to the extent it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Unrecognized income tax benefits represent income tax positions taken on income tax returns that have not been recognized in the financial statements. We recognize the benefit of an income tax position only if it is more likely than not (greater than 50%) that the tax position will be sustained upon tax examination, based solely on the technical merits of the tax position. Otherwise, no benefit is recognized. The tax benefits recognized are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We recognize accrued interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions as income tax expense in our consolidated statements of operations. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any uncertain tax positions.
Revenue
We record revenue from our out-license agreements and commercialization partnership agreements, including the Roche License Agreement and the Qilu License Agreement. Under each of these agreements, we granted the counterparty an exclusive license to develop and commercialize the underlying licensed product. These agreements contain up-front license fees, development and regulatory milestone payments, sales-based milestone payments, and sales-based royalty payments.
We determine whether our out-license agreements and commercialization partnership agreements are in scope of ASC 606, which we adopted as of January 1, 2018. Under ASC 606, in determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under these out-license agreements and commercialization partnership agreements, we perform the following steps:
1) Identification of the contract;
2) Determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in
the context of the contract;
3) Measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration;
4) Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations;
5) Recognition of revenue when or as the Company satisfies each performance obligation.
Development, Regulatory and Sales-Based Milestones and Other Payments
At the inception of an arrangement that includes development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the development milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated development milestone value is included in the transaction price. Development milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee's control, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. For payments pursuant to sales milestones and royalty payments, we will not recognize revenue until the subsequent sale of a licensed product occurs. For arrangements with more than one performance obligation, milestones are generally allocated entirely to the license performance obligation, as (1) the terms of milestone and royalty payments relate specifically to the license and (2) allocating milestones and royalties to the license performance obligation is consistent with the overall allocation objective, because management’s estimate of milestones and royalties approximates the standalone selling price of the license.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development activities are expensed in the period incurred. Research and development expenses consist of both internal and external costs associated with all basic research activities, clinical development activities and technical efforts required to develop a product candidate. Internal research and development consist primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, benefits and share-based compensation, facilities leases, research-related overhead, pre-approval regulatory and clinical trial costs, manufacturing and other contracted services, license fees and other external costs.
In certain circumstances, we are required to make advance payments to vendors for goods or services that will be received in the future for use in research and development activities. In such circumstances, the advance payments are recorded as prepaid assets and expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Recently issued accounting standards are discussed in "Part IV - Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statements - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 4. Recent Accounting Pronouncements" in our consolidated financial statements, which begin on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
The information generally required by this item regarding our commitments and contractual obligations is not required to be provided by smaller reporting companies.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.