Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Please also see the section entitled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Business Overview
Sprouts Farmers Market offers a unique grocery experience featuring an open layout with fresh produce at the heart of the store. Sprouts inspires wellness naturally with a carefully curated assortment of better-for-you products paired with purpose-driven people. We continue to bring the latest in wholesome, innovative products made with lifestyle-friendly ingredients such as organic, plant-based and gluten-free. Since our founding in 2002, we have grown rapidly, significantly increasing our sales, store count and profitability. Headquartered in Phoenix with 362 stores in 23 states as of January 3, 2021, we are one of the largest specialty retailers of fresh, natural and organic food, and fastest growing retailers in the United States.
Our Heritage
In 2002, we opened the first Sprouts Farmers Market store in Chandler, Arizona. From our founding in 2002 through January 3, 2021, we have grown rapidly, significantly increasing our sales, store count and profitability, including successfully rebranding 43 Henry’s Farmers Market and 39 Sunflower Farmers Market stores added in 2011 and 2012, respectively, through acquisitions to the Sprouts banner. These three businesses all trace their lineage back to Henry’s Farmers Market and were built with similar store formats and operations including a strong emphasis on value, produce and service in smaller, convenient locations. The consistency of these formats and operations was an important factor that allowed us to rapidly and successfully rebrand and integrate each of these businesses under the Sprouts banner and on a common platform.
Outlook
In 2020, we announced the initial steps of our new long-term growth strategy that we believe will transform our company and drive profitable growth. This strategy focuses on the following areas:
•
Win with Target Customers. We plan to refocus attention on our target customers, where there is ample opportunity to gain share within these customer segments. Our business can grow by leveraging existing strengths in a unique assortment of better-for-you, quality products and by expanding ecommerce capabilities to allow customers easy access to differentiated products through delivery or pickup.
•
Update Format and Expand in Select Markets. We plan to deliver unique smaller stores with expectations of stronger returns, while maintaining the approachable, fresh-focused farmer’s market heritage Sprouts is known for. Our geographic store expansion and new store placement will intersect where our target customers live, in markets with growth potential and supply chain support, providing a long runway of at least 10% annual unit growth beginning in 2022.
•
Create an Advantaged Fresh Supply Chain. We believe our network of fresh distribution centers can drive efficiencies across the chain and support growth plans. To further deliver on our fresh commitment and reputation, as well as to improve financial results, we will aspire to ultimately position fresh distribution centers within a 250-mile radius of stores.
•
Refine Brand and Marketing Approach. We believe we can elevate our national brand recognition and positioning by telling our unique product innovation and differentiation story. Increased customer engagement through digital and social connections will drive additional sales growth and loyalty.
•
Deliver on Financial Targets and Box Economics. We will measure and report on the success of this strategy against a number of long-term financial and operational targets.
Components of Operating Results
We report our results of operations on a 52- or 53-week fiscal year ending on the Sunday closest to December 31, with each fiscal quarter generally divided into three periods consisting of two four-week periods and one five-week period. Fiscal 2020 was a 53-week year ending on January 3, 2021. Fiscal 2019 was a 52-week year ending on December 29, 2019, and fiscal 2018 was a 52-week year ending on December 30, 2018.
Net Sales
We recognize sales revenue at the point of sale, with discounts provided to customers reflected as a reduction in sales revenue. Proceeds from sales of gift cards are recorded as a liability at the time of sale and recognized as sales when they are redeemed by the customer. See Note 3, “Significant Accounting Policies” for additional information on revenue recognition related to gift cards. We do not include sales taxes in net sales.
We monitor our comparable store sales growth to evaluate and identify trends in our sales performance. Our practice is to include sales from a store in comparable store sales beginning on the first day of the 61st week following the store’s opening and to exclude sales from a closed store from comparable store sales on the day of closure. This practice may differ from the methods that other retailers use to calculate similar measures.
Our net sales have increased as a result of new store openings and comparable store sales growth. Factors that influence comparable store sales growth and other sales trends include:
•
general economic conditions and trends, including levels of disposable income and consumer confidence;
•
product price inflation or deflation;
•
our competition, including competitive store openings in the vicinity of our stores and competitor pricing and merchandising strategies;
•
consumer preferences and buying trends;
•
our ability to identify market trends, and to source and provide product offerings that promote customer traffic and growth in average ticket;
•
the number of customer transactions and average ticket;
•
the prices of our products, including the effects of factors beyond our control, such as inflation, deflation and tariffs;
•
opening new stores in the vicinity of our existing stores; and
•
advertising, in-store merchandising and other marketing activities.
Cost of sales and gross profit
Cost of sales includes the cost of inventory sold during the period, including direct costs of purchased merchandise (net of discounts and allowances), distribution and supply chain costs and supplies. Cost of sales also includes depreciation and amortization expense for distribution centers and supply chain-related assets. Merchandise incentives received from vendors, which are reflected in the carrying value of inventory when earned or as progress is made toward earning the rebate or allowance, and are reflected as a component of cost of sales as the inventory is sold. Inflation and deflation in the prices of food and other products we sell may periodically affect our gross profit and gross margin. The short-term impact of inflation and deflation is largely dependent on whether or not we pass the effects through to our customers, which will depend upon competitive market conditions.
Our cost of sales and gross profit are correlated to sales volumes. As sales increase, gross margin is affected by the relative mix of products sold, pricing and promotional strategies, inventory shrinkage and leverage of fixed costs of sales.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily consist of salaries, wages and benefits costs, share-based compensation, store occupancy costs (including rent, property taxes, utilities, common area maintenance and insurance), advertising costs, buying cost, pre-opening and other administrative costs.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization (exclusive of depreciation included in cost of sales) primarily consists of depreciation and amortization for buildings, store leasehold improvements, and equipment.
Store closure and other costs, net
Store closure and other costs, net primarily reflects costs incurred related to store closures, including impairment charges of long-lived assets, severance and any exit costs associated with closing a store. One-time disaster recovery and executive severance costs are also included here.
Factors Affecting Comparability of Results of Operations
COVID-19 Pandemic
Our results of operations for the year ended January 3, 2021 were impacted by increased demand from our customers initially stockpiling groceries and wellness products at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and continuing to consume more food at home throughout the year as restaurants have not fully reopened to pre-pandemic levels, and we in turn have made significant investments in compensation, benefits and personal protective equipment for our front-line store team members, as well as enhanced store sanitation procedures. We have also incurred increased ecommerce fees as consumers have increasingly used online shopping alternatives to purchase our products during the pandemic.
Additional Week in 2020
Fiscal 2020 consisted of 53 weeks. The 53rd week resulted in additional sales and expenses as further discussed in “-Comparison of Fiscal 2020 to Fiscal 2019” below.
March 2018 Refinancing
In March 2018, we completed a transaction in which we refinanced our debt (referred to as the “March 2018 Refinancing”), as further discussed in “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” below. The March 2018 Refinancing resulted in an increase in borrowing capacity, a reduction in interest rate and the recording of a loss on early extinguishment of debt (see Note 13, “Long-Term Debt and Finance Lease Liabilities”).
Results of Operations for Fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018
The following tables set forth our results of operations and other operating data for the periods presented. The period-to-period comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of financial results to be achieved in future periods. Fiscal 2020 consisted of 53 weeks, while each of Fiscal 2019 and Fiscal 2018 consisted of 52 weeks.
Comparison of Fiscal 2020 to Fiscal 2019
Net sales
Net sales during 2020 totaled $6.5 billion, increasing 15% over the prior fiscal year. Sales growth was primarily driven by strong performance in new stores opened in the last twelve months and a 6.9% increase in comparable store sales, each of which was largely driven by increased demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the 53rd week in 2020. Comparable stores contributed approximately 92% of total sales for 2020 and approximately 91% for the prior fiscal year.
Cost of sales and gross profit
Gross profit increased during 2020 compared to 2019 by $484.5 million to $2.4 billion, primarily driven by increased sales volume. Gross margin increased by 3.2% to 36.8%, compared to 33.6%, due to strategic changes in promotional activities in addition to shrink favorability and positive leverage from the increase in sales driven by the COVID-19 pandemic. The impact of the 53rd week on gross margin was insignificant.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased $314.2 million or 20% as compared to 2019. As a percentage of net sales, selling, general and administrative expenses increased slightly by 1.3% due to higher bonus expense, ecommerce fees, and store operational expenses associated with COVID-19. The impact of the 53rd week on selling, general and administrative expenses was insignificant.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses (exclusive of depreciation included in cost of sales) increased $3.6 million primarily related to new store growth as well as remodel initiatives in older stores. The impact of the 53rd week on depreciation and amortization was insignificant.
Store closure and other costs, net
Store closure and other costs, net in 2020 primarily represented a recognized gain on the assignment of the lease for one of our closed locations in the first quarter of 2020, partially offset by ongoing activity associated with our closed store locations. In 2019, store closure and other costs, net of $7.3 million includes $4.1 million of impairment losses related to the write-down of leasehold improvements as well as one-time severance expense of $1.2 million associated with the transition of our former President and Chief Operating Officer to Senior Advisor.
Interest expense, net
The decrease in interest expense, net was primarily due to the decrease in the average balance outstanding under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement. This was partially offset by the interest expense paid as a result of an unfavorable interest rate swap. See Note 13, “Long-Term Debt and Finance Lease Liabilities” and Note 20, “Capital Stock.”
Income tax provision
Income tax provision increased by $42.9 million to $89.4 million for 2020 from $46.5 million for 2019, primarily related to an increase in income before income taxes. The effective income tax rate was 23.7% in 2020 and 2019. The effective tax rate in 2020 was primarily affected by a decrease in federal tax credits and prior year release of uncertain tax positions, partially offset by the increase in charitable contribution deductions and the benefit recognized from amended returns.
Net income
Net income increased $137.8 million primarily due to increased net sales and favorable margin impact related to COVID-19 and more balanced promotions, partially offset by higher selling, general and administrative expenses. Net income growth also included the benefit of the 53rd week in 2020.
Diluted earnings per share
The increase in diluted earnings per share of $1.18 was driven by higher net income.
Comparison of Fiscal 2019 to Fiscal 2018
Net sales
Net sales during 2019 totaled $5.6 billion, increasing 8% over the prior fiscal year. Sales growth was primarily driven by strong performance in new stores opened in the last twelve months. Comparable stores contributed approximately 91% of total sales for 2019 and approximately 89% for the prior fiscal year.
Cost of sales and gross profit
Gross profit increased during 2019 compared to 2018 by $147.3 million, to $1.9 billion, primarily driven by increased sales volume.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased $145.3 million or 10% as compared to 2018. This increase is primarily related to the 28 new stores that opened in 2019, as well as costs associated with a full year of operations for 2018 store openings. As a percentage of net sales, selling, general and administrative expenses increased slightly primarily due to higher occupancy costs related to the adoption of the new lease accounting standard that went into effect at the beginning of fiscal 2019 as well as higher costs associated with the expansion of our home delivery program, healthcare costs and credit card fees.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses (exclusive of depreciation included in cost of sales) increased $12.4 million primarily related to new store growth as well as remodel initiatives in older stores.
Store closure and other costs, net
Store closure and other costs, net in 2019 of $7.3 million includes $4.1 million of impairment losses related to the write-down of leasehold improvements as well as one-time severance expense of $1.2 million associated with the transition of our former President and Chief Operating Officer to Senior Advisor. In 2018, store closure and other costs, net included $8.0 million primarily related to lease termination obligations and asset disposals associated with the closure of two underperforming stores during the fourth quarter of 2018, as well as one-time severance expense of $3.6 million associated with the resignation of our former Chief Executive Officer.
Interest expense, net
The decrease in interest expense, net is due to the reclassification of previously reported financing leases to operating leases in connection with the adoption of the new lease accounting standard that went into effect at the beginning of 2019, partially offset by the higher average balance outstanding under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement to fund our share repurchase program. See Note 13, “Long-Term Debt and Finance Lease Liabilities” and Note 20, “Capital Stock.”
Income tax provision
The effective tax rate increased to 23.7% in 2019 primarily due to the prior year excess tax benefits for the exercise of expiring pre-IPO options in the first half of fiscal year 2018.
Net income
Net income decreased $8.9 million primarily due to higher occupancy costs related to the adoption of the new lease standard that went into effect at the beginning of 2019, as well as cycling a lower effective tax rate in 2018.
Diluted earnings per share
Earnings per share included a benefit of $0.06 per share for 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to the share repurchase program.
Return on Invested Capital
In addition to reporting financial results in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, we provide information regarding Return on Invested Capital (“ROIC”) as additional information about our operating results. ROIC is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be reviewed in isolation or considered as a substitute for our financial results as reported in accordance with GAAP. ROIC is an important measure used by management to evaluate our investment returns on capital and provides a meaningful measure of the effectiveness of our capital allocation over time.
We define ROIC as net operating profit after-tax (“NOPAT”), including the effect of capitalized operating leases, divided by average invested capital. Operating lease interest represents the add-back to operating income driven by the hypothetical interest expense we would incur if the property under our operating leases were owned or accounted for as a finance lease (capital lease prior to adoption of ASC 842). The assumed ownership and associated interest expense are calculated using the discount rate for each lease as recorded as a component of rent expense within selling, general and administrative expenses. Invested capital reflects a trailing twelve-month average.
As numerous methods exist for calculating ROIC, our method may differ from methods used by other companies to calculate their ROIC. It is important to understand the methods and the differences in those methods used by other companies to calculate their ROIC before comparing our ROIC to that of other companies.
Our calculation of ROIC for the fiscal years indicated was as follows:
(1)
Fiscal 2020 includes 53 weeks.
(2)
$2.6 million income tax benefit related to a tax calculation method change recognized in the third quarter of 2018; see Note 17, “Income Taxes.”
(3)
2020 special items include professional fees related to our ongoing strategic initiatives. 2019 special items include the direct costs associated with store closure. 2018 special items include the direct costs associated with store closure and executive severance costs.
(4)
Net of tax amounts are calculated using the normalized effective tax rate for the periods presented.
(5)
2020 and 2019 estimated interest on operating leases is calculated by multiplying operating leases by the 7.2% and 7.5% discount rate, respectively, for each lease recorded as rent expense within direct store expense.
(6)
2018 estimated interest on capitalized operating leases is calculated as the trailing four quarters’ rent expense multiplied by eight and by a 7.0% interest rate factor.
(7)
2020 average operating leases represents the average net present value of outstanding lease obligations over the trailing four quarters. 2019 average operating leases represents the net present value of outstanding operating lease obligations. 2018 average operating leases is calculated as the trailing four quarters’ rent expense multiplied by eight.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table sets forth the major sources and uses of cash for each of the periods set forth below, as well as our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at the end of each period (in thousands):
We have generally financed our operations principally through cash generated from operations and borrowings under our credit facilities. Our primary uses of cash are for purchases of inventory, operating expenses, capital expenditures primarily for opening new stores, remodels and maintenance, repurchases of our common stock and debt service. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash, and cash anticipated to be generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including new store openings, remodel and maintenance capital expenditures at existing stores, store initiatives and other corporate capital expenditures and activities. Our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash position benefits from the fact that we generally collect cash from sales to customers the same day or, in the case of credit or debit card transactions, within days from the related sale.
Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities increased $138.8 million to $494.0 million in 2020 compared to $355.2 million in 2019. The increase in cash flows from operating activities is primarily a result of cash generated from net income of $287.5 million in 2020 compared to net income of $149.6 million in 2019. Net income growth in 2020 is primarily due to increased net sales and favorable margin impact related to COVID-19, as well as the benefit of the 53rd week.
Cash flows from operating activities increased $60.8 million to $355.2 million in 2019 compared to $294.4 million in 2018. The increase in cash flows from operating activities is primarily a result of changes in working capital.
Cash flows from/ (used in) operating activities from changes in working capital were $83.4 million in 2020, compared to $72.7 million in 2019 and ($38.0) million in 2018. The increase in cash flows from operating activities for changes in working capital in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by elevated accounts payable and accrual balances in the current period.
Investing Activities
Cash flows used in investing activities consist primarily of capital expenditures in new stores, including leasehold improvements and store equipment, capital expenditures to maintain the appearance of our stores, sales enhancing initiatives and other corporate investments. Cash flows used in investing activities were $122.0 million, $183.2 million, and $177.1 million for 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The decrease in cash flows used in investing activities is primarily due to fewer stores under construction in 2020 as compared to 2019.
We expect capital expenditures to be in the range of $140 - $160 million in 2021, including expenditures incurred to date, net of estimated landlord tenant improvement allowances, primarily to fund investments in new stores, remodels, maintenance capital expenditures and corporate capital expenditures. We expect to fund our capital expenditures with cash on hand and cash generated from operating activities.
Financing Activities
Cash flows used in financing activities were $287.4 million for 2020 compared to $87.4 million for 2019. During 2020, cash flows used in financing activities primarily consisted of $288.0 million of payments on the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement.
During 2019, cash flows used in financing activities were $87.4 million for 2019 compared to $134.5 million for 2018. During 2019, cash flows used in financing activities primarily consisted of $176.3 million for stock repurchases, partially offset by $85.0 million of net borrowings on the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement and $4.9 million from the exercise of stock options.
During 2018, cash flows used in financing activities consisted of $258.3 million for stock repurchases, $4.5 million cash paid for capital and financing lease obligations, partially offset by $105 million of net borrowings on the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, $21.8 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and $3.6 million from cash received from landlords related to finance lease obligations.
Long-term Debt and Credit Facilities
Long-term debt decreased $288.0 million to $250.0 million as of January 3, 2021 compared to December 29, 2019 due to payments on the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement.
Long-term debt increased $85.0 million to $538.0 million as of December 29, 2019 compared to December 30, 2018 due to net borrowings under our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement used to fund our share repurchase programs.
See Note 13, “Long-Term Debt and Finance Lease Liabilities” for a description of our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement and our Former Credit Facility (as defined therein).
Share Repurchase Program
On February 20, 2018, the Company’s board of directors authorized a new $350 million common stock share repurchase program, replacing the previous share repurchase program which was completed in the second quarter of 2018. Upon this authorization’s December 31, 2019 expiration, $42.0 million remained unused. Our board of directors has not authorized additional share repurchases subsequent to the expiration of the prior authorization on December 31, 2019, and there was no share repurchase authorization available as of January 3, 2021.
The shares under the Company’s repurchase programs may be purchased on a discretionary basis from time to time prior to the applicable expiration date, subject to general business and market conditions and other investment opportunities, through open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, or other means, including through Rule 10b5-1 trading plans. The board’s authorization of the share repurchase programs does not obligate our company to acquire any particular amount of common stock, and the repurchase programs may be commenced, suspended, or discontinued at any time. We have used borrowings under our Former Credit Facility and Amended and Restated Credit Agreement to assist with the repurchase programs. See Note 13, “Long-Term Debt and Finance Lease Liabilities” of our audited consolidated financial statements, contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for more details.
Share repurchase activity under our repurchase programs for the periods indicated was as follows (total cost in thousands):
Shares purchased under our repurchase programs were subsequently retired.
Factors Affecting Liquidity
We can currently borrow under our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, up to an initial aggregate commitment of $700.0 million, which may be increased from time to time pursuant to an expansion feature set forth in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement. We have previously utilized borrowings under our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement to fund our share repurchase program as described above. The interest rate we pay on our borrowings increases as our leverage ratio increases.
The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement contains financial, affirmative and negative covenants. The negative covenants include, among other things, limitations on our ability to:
•
incur additional indebtedness;
•
grant additional liens;
•
enter into sale-leaseback transactions;
•
make loans or investments;
•
merge, consolidate or enter into acquisitions;
•
pay dividends or distributions;
•
enter into transactions with affiliates;
•
enter into new lines of business;
•
modify the terms of debt or other material agreements; and
•
change our fiscal year.
Each of these covenants is subject to customary and other agreed-upon exceptions.
In addition, the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement requires that we and our subsidiaries maintain a maximum total net leverage ratio not to exceed 3.25 to 1.00 and minimum interest coverage ratio not to be less than 1.75 to 1.00. Each of these covenants is tested on the last day of each fiscal quarter, starting with the fiscal quarter ended April 1, 2018.
We were in compliance with all applicable covenants under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement as of January 3, 2021.
Our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement is defined and more fully described in Note 13, “Long-Term Debt and Finance Lease Liabilities” of our audited consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of January 3, 2021, and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods:
(1)
The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement is scheduled to mature and the commitments thereunder will terminate on March 27, 2023, subject to extensions as set forth therein. These borrowings are reflected in the “1-3 Years” column. See Note 13, “Long-Term Debt and Finance Lease Liabilities” to our unaudited consolidated financial statements located elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2)
Operating lease payments include $184.8 million related to options to extend lease terms that are reasonably certain of being exercised. We have subtenant agreements under which we will receive $1.6 million for the period of less than one year, $2.6 million for years one to three, $1.7 million for years four to five, and $1.6 million for the period beyond five years.
(3)
Represents estimated interest payments through the March 27, 2023 maturity date of our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement based on the outstanding amounts as of January 3, 2021 and based on LIBOR rates in effect at the time of this report, net of interest rate swaps.
(4)
Real estate obligations include legally binding minimum lease payments for leases executed but not yet commenced.
(5)
Consists primarily of purchase commitments under noncancelable service and supply contracts.
(6)
As of January 3, 2021, we had recorded $48.5 million of liabilities related to our self-insurance programs. Self-insurance liabilities are not included in the table above because the payments are not contractual in nature and the timing of the payments is uncertain.
The contractual commitment amounts in the table above are associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding. Obligations under contracts that we can cancel without a significant penalty are not included in the table above.
We periodically make other commitments and become subject to other contractual obligations that we believe to be routine in nature and incidental to the operation of the business. Management believes that such routine commitments and contractual obligations do not have a material impact on our business, financial condition or results of operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not engage in any off-balance sheet financing activities, nor do we have any interest in entities referred to as variable interest entities.
Impact of Deflation and Inflation
Deflation and inflation in the prices of food and other products we sell may periodically affect our sales, gross profit and gross margin. Food deflation across multiple categories, particularly in produce and proteins, could reduce sales growth and earnings if our competitors react by lowering their retail pricing and expanding their promotional activities, which can lead to retail deflation higher than cost deflation that could reduce our sales, gross profit margins and comparable store sales. Food inflation, when combined with reduced consumer spending, could also reduce sales, gross profit margins and comparable store sales. The short-term impact of deflation and inflation is largely dependent on whether or not the effects are passed through to our customers, which is subject to competitive market conditions.
Food deflation and inflation is affected by a variety of factors and our determination of whether to pass on the effects of deflation or inflation to our customers is made in conjunction with our overall pricing and marketing strategies, as well as our competitors’ responses. Although we may experience periodic effects on sales, gross profit, gross margins and cash flows as a result of changing prices, we do not expect the effect of deflation or inflation to have a material impact on our ability to execute our long-term business strategy.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. These principles require us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, sales and expenses, cash flow and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and our actual results, our future financial statements will be affected.
We believe that of our significant accounting policies, which are described in Note 3, “Significant Accounting Policies” to the audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the following accounting policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity: inventory, lease assumptions, self-insurance reserves, goodwill and intangible assets, impairment of long-lived assets, fair values of share-based awards, and income taxes. Accordingly, we believe these are the most critical to fully understand and evaluate our financial condition and results of operations.
Inventories
Inventories consist of merchandise purchased for resale, which are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. The cost method is used for distribution center perishable and store perishable department inventories by assigning costs to each of these items based on a first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) basis (net of vendor discounts).
Our non-perishable inventory is valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value using weighted averaging, the use of which approximates the FIFO method.
We believe that all inventories are saleable and no allowances or reserves for obsolescence were recorded as of January 3, 2021 and December 29, 2019.
Lease Assumptions
The most significant estimates used by management in accounting for leases and the impact of those estimates are as follows:
Expected lease term-Our expected lease term includes both contractual lease periods and option periods that are determined to be reasonably certain. The expected lease term is used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. An increase in the expected lease term will increase the probability that a lease will be considered a finance lease and will generally result in higher interest and depreciation expense for a leased property recorded on our balance sheets.
Incremental borrowing rate-The incremental borrowing rate is primarily used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. An increase in the incremental borrowing rate decreases the net present value of the minimum lease payments and reduces the probability that a lease will be considered a finance lease. For finance leases, the incremental borrowing rate is also used in allocating our rental payments between interest expense and a reduction of the outstanding obligation.
Fair market value of the leased asset-The fair market value of leased retail property is generally estimated based on comparable market data provided by third-party sources and evaluated using the experience of our development staff. Fair market value is used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease.
Self-Insurance Reserves
The Company is self-insured for costs related to workers’ compensation, general liability and employee health benefits up to certain stop-loss limits. As of January 3, 2021, the consolidated self-insurance reserve balance was $48.5 million, of which a majority of the balance related to workers' compensation and general liability reserves. Liabilities for self-insurance reserves are estimated based on independent actuarial estimates, which are based on historical information and assumptions about future events. We utilize various techniques, including analysis of historical trends and actuarial valuation methods, to estimate the cost to settle reported claims and claims incurred but not yet reported as of the balance sheet date. The actuarial valuation methods consider loss development factors, which include the development time frame and expected claim reporting and settlement patterns, and expected loss costs, which include the expected frequency and severity of claim activity. We believe our assumptions are reasonable, but the estimated reserves for these liabilities could be affected materially by future events or claims experiences that differ from historical trends and assumptions.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the cost of acquired businesses in excess of the fair value of assets and liabilities acquired. Our indefinite-lived intangible assets consist of trade names related to “Sprouts Farmers Market” and liquor licenses. We also hold intangible assets with finite useful lives consisting of the “Sunflower Farmers Market” trade name.
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are evaluated for impairment on an annual basis during the fourth fiscal quarter, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. Our impairment evaluation of goodwill consists of a qualitative assessment to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If this qualitative assessment indicates it is more likely than not the estimated fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, no further analysis is required and goodwill is not impaired. Our qualitative assessment considered factors including changes in the competitive market, budget-to-actual performance, trends in market capitalization for us and our peers, turnover in key management personnel and overall changes in macroeconomic environment.
Our impairment evaluation for our indefinite-lived intangible assets consists of a qualitative assessment similar to that for goodwill. If our qualitative assessment indicates it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its carrying value, no further analysis is required and the asset is not impaired. Otherwise, we compare the estimated fair value of the asset to its carrying amount with an impairment loss recognized for the amount, if any, by which carrying value exceeds estimated fair value.
No impairment of goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets was recorded during fiscal 2020, 2019 or 2018 because the fair value of those assets was substantially above carrying value.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts may not be recoverable. This evaluation is performed at the lowest level of identifiable cash flows independent of other assets. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated undiscounted future cash flows from the operation and/or disposition of the assets are less than their carrying amount. Measurement of an impairment loss would be based on the excess of the carrying amount of the asset group over its fair value. Fair value is measured using discounted cash flows or independent opinions of value, as appropriate. No impairment was recorded during fiscal 2020. We recorded an impairment loss in 2019 during the normal course of business. We recorded an impairment loss during 2018, primarily related to asset write-offs in connection with the closure of two underperforming stores in the fourth quarter of 2018. See Note 3, “Significant Accounting Policies” and Note 6, “Property and Equipment”.
Share-Based Compensation
Under the provisions of ASC 718, share-based compensation expense is measured at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award. Changes in these inputs and assumptions can materially affect the measurement of the estimated fair value of our share-based compensation expense.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our share-based compensation on a prospective basis. If any of the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes model for options valuation change significantly, share-based compensation for future awards may differ materially compared with the awards granted previously. Refer to Note 26, “Share-Based Compensation” to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of these assumptions.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. We recognize the effect of income tax positions only if those positions are more likely than not of being sustained. Recognized income tax positions are measured at the largest amount that is greater than 50% likely of being realized. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs. We record interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as part of income tax expense.
During the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax settlement is uncertain. Under applicable accounting guidance, we are required to evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets. The realization of our deferred tax assets is dependent on future earnings. Applicable accounting guidance requires that a valuation allowance be recognized when, based on available evidence, it is more likely than not that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized due to the inability to generate sufficient taxable income in future periods. In circumstances where there is significant negative evidence, establishment of a valuation allowance must be considered. A pattern of sustained profitability is considered significant positive evidence when evaluating a decision to reverse a valuation allowance. Further, in those cases where a pattern of sustained profitability exists, projected future taxable income may also represent positive evidence, to the extent that such projections are determined to be reliable given the current economic environment. Accordingly, our assessment of our valuation allowances requires considerable judgment and could have a significant negative or positive impact on our current and future earnings.