Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
The following discussion contains certain forward-looking statements that are subject to business and economic risks and uncertainties, and which speak only as of the date of this annual report. No one should place strong or undue reliance on any forward-looking statements. The use in this Form 10-K of such words as “believes”, “plans”, “anticipates”, “expects”, “intends”, and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements, but are not the exclusive means of identifying such statements. The Company’s actual results or actions may differ materially from these forward-looking statements due to many factors and the success of the Company is dependent on our efforts and many other factors including, primarily, our ability to raise additional capital. Such factors include, among others, the following: our ability to continue as a going concern, general economic and business conditions; competition; success of operating initiatives; our ability to raise capital and the terms thereof; changes in business strategy or development plans; future revenues; the continuity, experience and quality of our management; changes in or failure to comply with government regulations or the lack of government authorization to continue our projects; and other factors referenced in the Form 10-K. This Item should be read in conjunction with the financial statements, the related notes and with the understanding that the Company’s actual future results may be materially different from what is currently expected or projected by the Company.
We caution readers not to place undue reliance on any such forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date made. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs and estimates of our management, as well as on assumptions made by and information currently available to us at the time such statements were made. Forward looking statements are subject to a variety of risks and uncertainties, which could cause actual events or results to differ from those reflected in the forward looking statements, including, without limitation, the failure to successfully locate cargo and artifacts from the Juno Beach shipwreck site and a number of other risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements, either as a result of the matters set forth or incorporated in this Report or due to certain economic and business factors, some of which may be beyond our control.
We disclaim any obligation subsequently to revise any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statements or to reflect the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events.
Overview
General
The Company’s principal business plan is to develop the infrastructure and technology to engage in the archaeologically-sensitive exploration, recovery and conservation of historic shipwrecks. Once artifacts have been properly conserved, they may be made available for scientific research and allowed to be displayed for the public. The Company’s secondary business is to attempt to develop revenue streams to support its historic shipwreck exploration and recovery operations.
The Company has investigated various technologies and non-scientific equipment to help better explore or document our shipwreck sites. To the present date, none of these technologies have been proven to work with the exception of the SeaSearcher, which has been developed to scan historic shipwreck sites for both ferrous and nonferrous artifacts. The Company will continue to experiment with unproven technologies and will actively work with third parties, consultants and scientists to develop its own proprietary technology which has and will result in considerable expenses.
The Company continues to review revenue producing opportunities including joint ventures and partnerships with other companies and potentially governmental agencies. Blockchain , has a strategic partnership to provide referrals to a blockchain software services provider and receive referral fees when the referrals lead to closed business for the blockchain software services company. COVID-19, pricing issues, long sales cycles, and various other reasons have considerably slowed Blockchain’s progress.
There is a possibility that the Company will be forced to cease its operations if it is not successful in eventually locating and recovering valuable artifacts and treasure or can’t build a revenue stream in to offset its expenses. If the Company were to cease its operations, and not find or engage another business entity, then it is likely that there would be complete loss of all capital invested in or borrowed by the Company. As such, an investment in Seafarer is highly speculative and very risky.
This type of business venture is highly speculative in nature and carries an excessive amount of risk. An investment in the Company’s securities is very risky and should only be considered by those investors or lenders who do not require liquidity and who can afford to suffer a complete and total loss of their investment.
There is currently a limited trading market for the Company’s securities. It is impossible for the Company to assure that when and if an active-trading market in its shares will be established, or whether any such market will be sustained or sufficiently liquid to enable holders of shares of the Company’s common stock to liquidate their investment in our company.
The sale of restricted securities by current shareholders, including shares issued to consultants, independent contractors, Board of Directors members and shares issued to settle convertible promissory notes or to settle other loans and debt, are highly dilutive and may cause a significant decline in the market price of the Company’s securities. Furthermore, in recent years regulatory agencies have made it very difficult for broker dealers to accept stock certificates from issuers of low priced stocks and the Company believes that it may become even more challenging to deposit stock certificates and this trend may continue for the foreseeable future.
Moreover, in the past few years several major brokerage firms have indicated that they will not allow their clients to deposit stock certificates of low priced stocks. Some securities clearing firms who used to clear low priced securities for multiple brokerage firms have shut down or been acquired, resulting in fewer brokerage firms that are willing or able to accept lower priced securities for deposit. Unless an investor has a large and well-established relationship with a brokerage firm, it may be extremely difficult and potentially expensive to deposit lower priced securities. An investor should consider consulting with professional financial advisers before making an investment in our securities.
Plan of Operation
The Company has taken the following steps to implement its business plan:
● To date, the Company has devoted its time towards establishing its business to develop the infrastructure capable of researching, exploring, recovering and conserving historic shipwrecks. The Company has performed some research, exploration and recovery activities.
● Spent considerable time and capital researching potential shipwrecks, including obtaining information from foreign archives.
● The Company has generated limited revenues to date, including some nominal revenue from dividends and other business.
● The Company continues to review revenue producing opportunities including joint ventures with other companies and potentially governmental agencies. The Company is actively looking to work with revenue producing companies. These opportunities have been slow to develop, but the Company will continue to pursue those endeavors that it believes have the potential to increase the value of the Company’s shares.
● The Company has investigated various types of equipment and technology to expedite the process of finding artifacts other than iron or ferrous metals. Most have been of no help, but the Company continues to explore new technology. The Company has developed its own proprietary technology, the SeaSearcher, and will attempt to continue to develop additional proprietary technologies or work with third parties to develop technologies to aid in its exploration and recovery operations. Development of technologies will require additional time and financing. The cost of developing the new technology has, to date, been very expensive.
● The Company has investigated media opportunities do develop content centered on its specific historic shipwreck exploration and recovery activities as well as the historic shipwreck and related historical period genre in general and will continue to evaluate various media strategies.
Other Information
There are very strict international, federal and state laws that govern the exploration and recovery of historic shipwrecks. While the Company has been able to obtain some permits, there is no guarantee that the Company will be able to secure future permits or enter into agreements with government agencies in order to explore and salvage historic shipwrecks. There is a risk that government entities may enact legislation that is so strict that any recovery of artifacts and cargo from historic shipwrecks will be nearly impossible. Additionally, permits and agreements with governmental agencies to conduct historic shipwreck exploration and recovery operations are expensive to obtain and maintain, in terms of both direct costs and ongoing compliance costs. It is also entirely possible that the Company will not be successful in obtaining title or permission to excavate certain wrecks.
It is possible that permits that are sought for potential future international projects may never be issued, and if issued, may not be legal or honored by the entities that issued them. Governmental agencies may require various types of permits to explore shipwreck sites, and the permitting process is often lengthy and complex. Obtaining permits and entering into agreements with governmental and quasi-governmental agencies to conduct historic shipwreck exploration and recovery operations is generally a very complex, time consuming, and expensive process. Furthermore, the process of entering into agreements and/or obtaining permits may be subject to lengthy delays, possibly in excess of a year. Some governmental agencies may refuse to issue permits to the Company for recovery of artifacts or intentionally delay the permitting process, or go beyond their authority and request halting of ground disturbance.
The reasons for a lengthy permitting process may be due to a number of potential factors including but not limited to requests by permitting agencies for additional information, submitted applications that need to be revised or updated, newly discovered information that needs to be added to an application or agreement, changes to either the agreement or permit terms or revisions to other information contained in the permit, excessive administrative time lags at permitting agencies, work halts based on biased predispositions with no authority given by rule 1A-31, etc. Existing permits and agreements may be put on hold or suspended without notice for lengthy periods of time due to administrative issues and disagreements over the terms and conditions. The length of time it takes to obtain permits, enter into agreements, or rectify any conditions that are causing a permit to be suspended or on hold may cause the Company to expend significant resources while gearing up to do work with little or no visibility as to timing.
The Company regularly reviews opportunities to perform exploration and recovery operations at purported historic shipwreck sites. The Company currently does have some specific plans to perform exploration and recovery operations at other shipwreck sites in the future, however these plans are subject to change based on a number of factors. The Company is actively reviewing other potential historic shipwreck sites, including sites located internationally, for possible exploration and recovery. Should the Company decide that it will pursue exploration and recovery activities at other potential shipwreck sites, it may be necessary to obtain various permits as well as environmental permits.
The Company continually monitors media rights for potential revenue opportunities. The Company has had discussions with media entities to further understand the potential advantages offered. Management believes various forms of media can represent a potential future revenue opportunity for the Company, if the right circumstances arise.
This type of business venture is extremely speculative in nature and carries a tremendous amount of risk. An investment in the Company’s securities is highly speculative and very risky and should only be considered by those investors or lenders who do not require near-term liquidity and who can afford to suffer a complete and total loss of their investment.
Results of Operations
We have generated only minimal revenue from operations and do not expect to report any significant revenue from operations for the foreseeable future. We have incurred recurring losses to date. Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern and, accordingly, do not include adjustments relating to the recoverability and realization of assets and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue in operation.
The Company expects to continue to incur significant operating losses and to generate negative cash flow from operating activities, while building out its infrastructure in order to explore and salvage historic shipwreck sites and establishing itself in the marketplace. Based on our historical rate of expenditures, the Company expects to expend its available cash in less than one month from April 12, 2021.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had working capital deficits of $1,158,747 and $492,223 respectively. The working capital deficit increased 135% from 2019 to 2020. The year-over-year increase in the Company’s working capital deficit may indicate that there is substantial risk to the continued viability of the Company and a high degree of risk that the Company could become insolvent due to this significant working capital deficit and the lack of meaningful cash flow from its operations. The Company is in immediate need of further working capital and is seeking options, with respect to financing, in the form of debt, equity or a combination thereof.
Since inception, the Company has funded its operations through common stock issuances and loans in order to meet its strategic objectives; however, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to obtain further funds to continue with its efforts to establish a new business. There is a very significant risk that the Company will be unable to obtain financing to fund its operation and as such the Company may be forced to cease operations at any time which would likely result in a complete loss of all capital that has been invested in and/or borrowed by the Company to date.
The Company’s ability to eliminate operating losses and to generate positive cash flow from operations in the future will depend upon a variety of factors, many of which it is unable to control. If the Company is unable to implement its business plan successfully, it may not be able to eliminate operating losses, generate positive cash flow or achieve or sustain profitability, which may have a material adverse effect on the Company’s business, operations, and financial results, as well as its ability to make payments on its debt obligations, and the Company may be forced to cease operations.
If we are unable to secure additional financing, our business may fail and our stock price will likely be materially adversely affected. The Company’s lack of operating cash flow and reliance on the sale of its commons stock and loans to fund operations is extremely risky. If the Company is unable to continue to raise capital or obtain loans or other financing on terms that are acceptable to the Company, or at all, then it is highly likely that the Company will be forced to cease operations. If the Company ceases its operations, then it is very highly likely that all capital invested in and/or borrowed by the Company will be lost.
Summary of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Results of Operations Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
The Company’s core business involving the exploration and recovery of historic shipwrecks has not generated any revenues to date and is not expected to generate any significant revenues for the foreseeable future. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company generated $10,622 and $14,000 in revenue respectively, which is shown as service income on the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Net Losses
The Company’s net loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $2,660,813, and $2,309,165, respectfully, a year-over-year increase of approximately 15%.
Operating Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2020, consulting and contractor expenses were $1,542,145 compared to $1,095,266 during the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately 41%. Consulting and contractor expenses increased due to the Company hiring additional dive operations personnel in anticipation of increased exploration and recovery activities. Vessel maintenance expenses were $193,844 during 2020 versus $154,741 during the same period in 2019, an increase of approximately 25%. The increase in vessel maintenance expenses in 2020 was primarily due to the Company extensively utilizing multiple vessels during its exploration activities. Maintenance and repairs have increased for the Company’s vessels due to heavy use in the Company’s exploration activities. Research and development expenses were $463,468 in 2020 versus research and development expenses of $444,002 in 2019, an increase of approximately 4.4%. The increase in research and development expenses is attributable to further development of the Company’s SeaSearcher autonomous underwater device. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred professional fee related expenses of $136,786 versus $108,055 during the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately 26.6%. Professional fees increased primarily due to an increase in legal fees related to assistance with permitting. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $244,328 compared to $154,985 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately 57.7%. Depreciation expense was $20,379 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $1,003 in 2019. 2020 was the first full year of depreciation expense for the Company’s vessel, the Discovery, that the Company purchased in late 2019. Rent expense was $41,986 in 2020 versus $40,929 in 2019, a 2.6% year-over-year increase. Travel and entertainment expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $66,892 versus $65,890 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately 1.5%.
Other Income (Expenses)
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $286,720 versus $214,612 for the same period in 2019, an increase of approximately 33.6%. The increase in interest expense was due to an increase in amortization of interest relating to the beneficial conversion features of several convertible notes. Loss on extinguishment of debt was $34,375 during the year ended December 31, 2020 versus $49,682 during the same period in 2019. Net loss on settlement of accounts payable was $4,512 during the year ended December 31, 2020 versus $0 for the same period in 2019. Gain on sale of asset was $5,500 during the year ended December 31, 2020 versus $0 in the same period in 2019. Gain on disposal of investment was $354,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 versus $0 in the same period in 2019, see Note 5 - Investment in Probability and Statistics, Inc. The Company received dividend income of $4,500 and $6,000 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020 net cash flows used in operating activities was $1,885,788. The increase in net cash flow used in operating activities is primarily attributable to the increased net loss due to operations of the Company’s shipwreck exploration and recovery business.
For the year ended December 31, 2019 net cash flows used in operating activities was $1,654,988.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020 net cash flows used in investing activities was $6,500. The increase in net cash flow used in investing activities is attributable to the purchase of a vehicle for the Company’s operations.
For the year ended December 31, 2019 net cash flows used in investing activities was $0.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020 net cash provided by financing activities was $1,460,624.
For the year ended December 31, 2019 net cash provided by financing activities was $2,273,525.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, the Company had $186,873 cash in the bank. During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 the Company incurred net losses of $2,660,813 and $2,309,165, respectively. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $310,662 in current assets and $1,469,409 in current liabilities, leaving the Company a working capital deficit of $1,158,747.
Lack of Liquidity
A major financial challenge and significant risk facing the Company is a lack of positive cash flow and liquidity. The Company continued to operate with significant debt and a working capital deficit during the year ended December 31, 2020. This working capital deficit indicates that the Company is unable to meet its short-term liabilities with its current assets. This working capital deficit is extremely risky for the Company as it may be forced to cease its operations due to its inability to meet its current obligations. If the Company is forced to cease its operations, then it is highly likely that all capital invested in and/or borrowed by the Company will be lost.
The expenses associated with being a small publicly traded company attempting to develop the infrastructure to explore and salvage historic shipwrecks recovery are extremely prohibitive, especially given that the Company does not currently generate any significant revenues and does not expect to generate any significant revenues in the near future. There are ongoing expenses associated with operations that are incurred whether the Company is conducting shipwreck recovery operations or not. Vessel maintenance, particularly for an older vessel such as the Company’s main salvage vessel, upkeep expenses and docking fees are continuous and unavoidable regardless of the Company’s operational status. Management anticipates the Company may need to put the vessel in dry dock in order for additional repairs to be made. These repairs and maintenance are expensive and have a negative impact on the Company’s cash position.
In addition to the operation expenses, a publicly traded company also incurs the significant recurring corporate expenses related to maintaining publicly traded status, which include, but are not limited to accounting, legal, audit, executive, administrative, corporate communications, rent, telephones, etc. The recurring expenses associated with being a publicly traded company are very burdensome for smaller public companies such as Seafarer. This lack of liquidity creates a very risky situation for the Company in terms of its ability to continue operating, which in turn makes owning shares of the Company’s common stock extremely risky and highly speculative. The Company’s lack of liquidity may cause the Company to be forced to cease operations at any time which would likely result in a complete loss of all capital invested in or borrowed by the Company to date.
Due to the fact that the Company does not generate any revenues and does not expect to generate revenues for the foreseeable future it must rely on outside equity and debt funding. The combination of the ongoing operating expenses that must be met even during times when there is little or no exploration or recovery activities taking place, and corporate expenses, creates a very risky situation for the Company and its shareholders in terms of the need to access external financing to fund operations. This working capital shortfall and lack of access to cash to fund corporate activities is extremely risky and may force the Company to cease its operations which would more than likely result in a complete loss of all capital invested in or loaned to the Company to date.
Lack of Revenues and Cash Flow/Significant Losses from Operations
The exploration and recovery of historic shipwrecks requires a multi-year, multi-stage process and it may be many years before any significant revenue is generated from exploration and recovery activities, if ever. The Company does not believe that it will generate any significant revenues in the near future. The Company believes that it may be several years before it is able to generate any cash flow from its operations, if any are ever generated at all. Without revenues and cash flow the Company does not have reliable cash flow to pay its expenses. The Company relies on outside financing in the form of equity and debt and it is possible that the Company may not be able to obtain outside financing in the future. If the Company is not able to obtain financing it would more than likely be forced to cease operations and all of the capital that has been invested in or borrowed by the Company would be lost.
If the Company is unable to secure additional financing, our business may fail or our operating results and our stock price may be materially adversely affected. The raising of additional financing would in all likelihood result in dilution or reduction in the value of the Company’s securities.
The Company may not be able to continue as a going concern. If the Company is not able to continue as a going concern, it is highly likely that all capital invested in the Company or borrowed by the Company will be lost. The report of our independent auditors for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 raises substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we have experienced operating losses in every year since our inception resulting in an accumulated deficit. Our independent auditors believe, based on our financial results as of December 31, 2020, that such results raised substantial doubts about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. If the Company is not able to continue as a going concern, it is highly likely that all capital invested in the Company or borrowed by the Company will be lost.
The Company has experienced a net loss in every fiscal year since inception. The Company’s losses from operations were $2,699,206 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $2,050,871 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company believes that it will continue to generate losses from its operations for the foreseeable future and the Company may not be able to generate a profit in the long-term, or ever.
Convertible Notes Payable and Notes Payable, in Default
The Company does not have additional sources of debt financing to refinance its convertible notes payable and notes payable that are currently in default. If the Company is unable to obtain additional capital, such lenders may file suit, including suit to foreclose on the assets held as collateral for the obligations arising under the secured notes. If any of the lenders file suit to foreclose on the assets held as collateral, then the Company may be forced to significantly scale back or cease its operations which would more than likely result in a complete loss of all capital that has been invested in or borrowed by the Company. The fact that the Company is in default regarding several loans held by various lenders makes investing in the Company or providing any loans to the Company extremely risky with a very high potential for a complete loss of capital.
The convertible notes that have been issued by the Company are convertible at the lender’s option. These convertible notes represent significant potential dilution to the Company’s current shareholders as the convertible price of these notes is generally lower than the current market price of the Company’s shares. As such when these notes are converted into equity there is typically a highly dilutive effect on current shareholders and very high probability that such dilution may significantly negatively affect the trading price of the Company’s common stock. Furthermore, management intends to have discussions or has already had discussions with several of the promissory note holders who do not currently have convertible notes regarding converting their notes into equity. Any such amended agreements to convert promissory notes into equity would more than likely have a highly dilutive effect on current shareholders and there is a very high probability that such dilution may significantly negatively affect the trading price of the Company’s common stock. Some of these note holders have already amended their notes and converted the notes into equity. Based on conversations with other note holders, the Company believes that additional note holders will amend their notes to contain a convertibility clause and eventually convert the notes into equity.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments which affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities (see Note 3, Significant Accounting Policies, contained in the notes to the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 contained in this filing). On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions which we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities which are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates based upon different assumptions or conditions; however, we believe that our estimates are reasonable.
Management is aware that certain changes in accounting estimates employed in generating financial statements can have the effect of making the Company look more or less profitable than it actually is. Management does not believe that the Company has made any such changes in accounting estimates.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
None.