ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Introduction and Certain Cautionary Statements
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of our operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and schedules included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, intensified competition and operating problems in our operating business projects and their impact on revenues and profit margins or additional factors, and those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report. In addition, certain information presented below is based on unaudited financial information.
Background
Using our proprietary technology and design and engineering expertise, we modify code-engineered cargo shipping containers and purpose-built modules for use for safe and sustainable commercial, industrial and residential building construction. Rather than consuming new steel and lumber, our proprietary technology and design and engineering expertise allows for the redesign, repurpose and conversion of heavy-gauge steel cargo shipping containers into SGBlocks™, which are safe green building blocks for commercial, industrial, and residential building construction.
Prior to October 2019, our business model was solely a project-based construction model pursuant to which we were responsible for the design and construction of finished products that incorporated our technology primarily to customers in the multi-family housing, restaurant, military and education industries throughout the United States. In October 2019, we changed our business model for our residential building construction to a royalty fee model when we entered into a five year exclusive license with CPF pursuant to which CPF licensed on an exclusive basis our proprietary technology, intellectual property, any improvements thereto, and any related permits, with the right to develop and commercialize products in the United States and its territories within the field of design and project management platforms for residential use, including, without limitation, single-family residences and multi-family residences, but specifically excluding military housing. The Ridge Avenue Project, a residential housing project in Atlanta has also been excluded from the CPF license. Now, in the United States with respect to residential construction (other than the excluded residential structures) we are not permitted to and are no longer responsible for constructing the Modules that are based on our technology or the related costs and instead that service (including with respect to agreement that were in existence as of the effective date of the license with CPF) is performed by CPF and its subcontractors and any revenue for such residential construction will no longer generated from sales of products directly to the end customer but instead will be generated from royalties received from CPF based on the gross revenue that CPF receives from sales of products that are based upon our technology. Depending upon the success of this new business model, we may expand the licensing business model to commercial and industrial construction. We also are continuing to seek opportunities and potential projects in other target markets, which may develop into licensing opportunities in the future.
On October 3, 2019, we entered into a Loan Agreement and Promissory Note (the “Loan Agreement”) with CPF GP, pursuant to which we agreed to loan CPF GP a principal amount of $750,000 at an annual interest rate of five percent (5%), with a maturity date of July 31, 2023. Under the Loan Agreement, as amended agreed to advance to CPF GP the first installment of the principal amount, equal to $500,000, no later than January 31, 2020 and the second installment of the principal amount, equal to $250,000, no later than April 15, 2020. As security for this loan, we will receive a security interest in all of CPF GP’s membership interests in the Licensee. If we fail to fund either principal installment, such failure will constitute a default under the Loan Agreement and a cross default under the License Agreement. On January 21, 2020, pursuant to the Loan Agreement, CPF GP issued to us a promissory note in the principal amount of $400,000 (the “Company Note”) and issued to Paul Galvin, our Chairman and CEO, a promissory note in the principal amount of $100,000 (the “Galvin Note”). The transaction closed on January 22, 2020, on which date we loaned CPF GP $400,000 and Mr. Galvin personally loaned CPF GP $100,000 on behalf of us. The Company Note and Galvin Note bear interest at five percent (5%) per annum, payable, together with the unpaid principal amount of the promissory notes, on the earlier of the July 31, 2023 maturity date or upon the liquidation, redemption sale or issuance of a dividend upon the LLC interests in CPF MF 2019-1 LLC, a Texas limited liability company of which CPF GP is the general partner; provided, that the terms of the Galvin Note provide that all interest payments due to Mr. Galvin under the Galvin Note shall be paid directly to, and for the benefit of, the Company.
On February 4, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with an accredited investor, pursuant to which we issued to the investor a secured note in the aggregate principal amount of $200,000 (the “Note”). The Note is one of a series of up to $400,000 of notes that may be issued by us, bears interest at a rate of nine percent (9%) per annum, is due on July 31, 2023, and is secured under a Pledge Agreement, dated February 4, 2020, entered into with the investor (the “Pledge Agreement”) by a security interest in the royalty payable to us under that certain Exclusive License Agreement, dated October 3, 2019, with CPF GP 2019-1 LLC. We have the right to prepay the Note, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time, without premium or penalty.
In March 2020, we began increasing our focus on providing our Modules as health care facilities for deployable medical response solutions. In May, we entered into a partnership with Grimshaw and Osang for deployment of our D-Tec suite of prefabricated health facilities for on-site immediate COVID-19 testing. In September we entered the U.S. test lab market by forming a joint venture with Clarity Labs, a manufacturer and market leader of rapid diagnostic tests, to launch CLIA-certified laboratories. Our joint venture with Clarity has allowed us to not only supply our D-Tec suite of prefabricated health facilities but also allows us to provide testing services at such facilities. We have supplied our building modular coronavirus testing centers and provide testing services for Los Angeles International Airport (LAX), Memorial in Wayne County, Michigan and have been selected as a Trusted Testing Partner (TTP) for Hawaii’s COVID-19 travel testing program.
In September 2020, we acquired substantially all the assets of Echo, except for Echo’s real estate holdings for which we obtained a right of first refusal. Echo is a container/modular manufacturer based in Durant, Oklahoma specializing in the design and construction of permanent modular and temporary modular buildings and was one of our key supply chain partners. This acquisition has allowed us to expand our reach for our Modules and offers us an opportunity to vertically integrate a large portion of our cost of goods sold, as well as increase margins, productivity and efficiency in the areas of design, estimating, manufacturing and delivery.
In November 2020, Clarity Mobile Venture, our joint venture partnership, entered into a contract with the City of Los Angeles for the operations of a COVID-19 PCR test laboratory at Los Angeles International Airport ("LAWA") to provide a full-service modular laboratory and testing facility onsite at the airport. The facility is located across from LAWA Terminal 6 and opened in December 2020. The facility administers PCR tests with results available within three hours for passengers and airline crew, and no later than 24 hours for LAWA airport employees. Additionally, other rapid coronavirus tests including antigen tests have been provided. Clarity Mobile Venture will be the primary operator of the facility.
In November 2020, we and Memorial Hospital, of Michigan (“Memorial”), entered into a Professional Services and Capital Support Contract (“PSCSC”) with Wayne County, Michigan which engages the Company as a sub-contractor to render services and support to support Memorial, as the primary contractor, in connection with the fulfillment of statements of work submitted from Wayne County to Memorial to construct portable on-site laboratory facilities for COVID-19 testing. The program deploys the D-Tec Product Series designed by Grimshaw Architects and developed by SG Blocks. The D-Tec 1 Units are expected to be deployed throughout Wayne County and will provide sample extraction. Clarity Mobile Venture will be the primary operator of the facility.
Results of Operations
Our operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 may not be indicative of our future operations.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenue
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we derived revenue from the following three categories of sources: construction services, engineering services and medical revenue. The medical revenue segment is a new segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 that commenced when we began sales of COVID tests and includes revenue from our sales of COVID tests, revenue related to COVID-19 samples collected from our Clarity Mobile joint venture and other laboratory testing equipment sold. Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $8,755,623 compared to $2,984,835 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase of $5,770,788 or 193% was primarily due to our growth in medical related projects of approximately $5,020,000 which included an increase in medical revenue of $4,241,500 from the collection of COVID-19 tests samples, the sale of COVID-19 test kits, and an increase in construction sales of $778,500 from sales of construction of laboratory and collection units. Revenue from construction services increased by a total $1,295,936 which included the increase of $778,500 discussed in the previous sentence for medical related projects and revenue increases in government projects of approximately of $750,000, special use projects of approximately $1,410,000, hospitality project of approximately $485,000, and another project of approximately $300,000. We had a decrease of approximately ($2,260,000) related to our retail and office customer types.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Profit
Cost of revenue was $6,535,444 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2,307,488 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $4,227,956 or 183%, is primarily related to higher procurement of COVID-19 testing supplies and medical equipment surrounding our medical customer and higher procurement and manufacturing costs of modifying containers and wood modular units. Due to capabilities of Echo, we have now increased our sales of wood modular units.
Gross profit was $2,220,179 and $677,347 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Gross profit percentage increased to 25% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 23% for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to higher margins on revenue derived from our lab testing and other medical related construction contracts. We also had a single contract in the amount of $300,000 with no estimated costs in 2020.
Payroll and Related Expenses
Payroll and related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $2,992,207 compared to $2,392,587 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily caused by an increase of approximately $488,000 in stock-based compensation expense and increase in non-chargeable production salaries of approximately of $102,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. We recognized $1,204,095 in stock-based compensation expense related to payroll and related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $715,904 for December 31, 2019.
Other Operating Expenses (General and administrative expenses, Marketing and business development expense, Pre-project expenses and Goodwill impairment)
Other operating expenses (general and administrative expenses, marketing and business development expenses, pre-project expenses and goodwill impairment) for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $3,810,804 compared to $4,988,722 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to no impairment loss recognized in 2020 compared to an impairment loss of approximately $2,938,000 in 2019, a decrease in marketing and business development costs of approximately $10,000, offset by an increase in pre-project expenses of approximately $109,000, and an increase in general and administrative expenses of $1,661,573 that included an increase in rent expenses of approximately $140,000, an increase of approximately $41,000 in depreciation expense, an increase of approximately $504,000 in legal fees, an increase of approximately $78,000 in insurance fees, an increase of approximately $96,000 in building and shop supplies, an increase in information technology expenses of approximately $52,000 and an increase of approximately $519,000 in consulting and advisory services. We recognized $57,120 in stock-based compensation expense related to legal expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020. We recognized $13,500 in stock-based compensation expense related to marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9,275 mainly related to a 9% secured note in the principal amount of $200,000 issued on February 4, 2020 to an accredited investor. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized $178,995 in interest expense related to the RedDiamond Partners LLC Securities Purchase Agreement that was executed in November 2019 and repaid in full in December 2019. Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $61,675 mainly derived from bank interest and interest associated with an outstanding note receivable and there was no interest income for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $23,282 in other income compared to $14,506 during the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, there was a loss on asset disposal of $1,012 compared to $52,039 for a loss from equity affiliates during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income Tax Provision
A 100% valuation allowance was provided against the deferred tax asset consisting of available net operating loss carryforwards and, accordingly, no income tax benefit was provided.
Impact of Inflation
The impact of inflation upon our revenue and income (loss) from continuing operations during each of the past two fiscal years has not been material to its financial position or results of operations for those years because we do not maintain any inventories whose costs are affected by inflation.
Impact of Coronavirus (COVID-19)
With the global spread of the ongoing novel coronavirus ("COVID-19") pandemic during 2020, we have implemented business continuity plans designed to address and mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its employees and business. The worldwide spread of the COVID-19 virus is expected to result in a global slowdown of economic activity which is likely to decrease demand for a broad variety of goods and services, including from our customers, while also resulting in delays in projects due to labor shortages and supplier disruptions for an unknown period of time until the disease is contained. To date, we have experienced some delays in projects due to COVID-19 which we expect to have an impact on our revenue and our results of operations, the size and duration of which we are currently unable to predict. Any quarantines, the timing and length of containment and eradication solutions, travel restrictions, absenteeism by infected workers, labor shortages or other disruptions to the suppliers and contract manufacturers or customers would likely adversely impact our sales, and operating results and result in further project delays. In addition, the pandemic could result in an economic downturn that could affect the ability of our customers and licensees to obtain financing and therefore impact demand for our products. Order lead times could be extended or delayed and increases we have experienced in pricing could continue to increase. Some products or services may become unavailable if the regional or global spread were significant enough to prevent alternative sourcing. Accordingly, we are considering alternative product sourcing in the event that product supply becomes problematic. We expect this global pandemic to have an impact on the Company's revenue and results of operations, the size and duration of which we are currently unable to predict. In addition, to the extent the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic adversely affects our business and results of operations, it may also have the effect of heightening many of the other risks and uncertainties which we face.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had an aggregate of $13,010,356 and $1,625,671, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Historically, our operations have primarily been funded through proceeds from equity and debt financings, as well as revenue from operations.
In June 2017, we completed a public offering, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $6,800,000 after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other expenses. In July 2017, in connection with a public offering, the underwriters exercised their option to purchase 11,250 additional shares of common stock from us in full at a price to the public of $100.00 per share. As a result of the exercise and closing of the option to purchase additional shares, total net proceeds from the public offering were approximately $7,900,000 after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and related expenses. We incurred a total of $1,565,386 in issuance costs in connection with the Public Offering.
In April 2019, we issued 42,388 shares of our common stock at a price of $22.00 per share through a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional investors and accredited investors. Concurrently with the sale of the common stock, pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, we also sold common stock purchase warrants to such investors to purchase up to an aggregate of 42,388 shares of common stock. We incurred $379,816 in issuance costs from the offering and issued 4,239 warrants to the underwriters.
In August 2019, we issued 45,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $17.00 per share pursuant to the terms of an Underwriting Agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) to the public. We incurred $181,695 in issuance costs from the offering and issued warrants to purchase 2,250 shares of common stock to the underwriter.
In December 2019, we completed the Public Offering where we issued 857,500 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $3.00 per share resulting in net proceeds of approximately $2,117,948 after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other expenses. We incurred a total of $454,552 in issuance costs in connection with the Public Offering. In our November 2019 debt financing, we received a cash payment in the aggregate amount of $375,000 pursuant to a Securities Purchase Agreement that we entered into with RedDiamond Partners LLC (the “Lender”), and we issued to the Lender the Debenture in the aggregate principal amount of $480,770 (representing an original issue discount of 22%), which Debenture was secured by a security interest in all of our existing and future assets, subject to existing security interests and exceptions. We received net proceeds of approximately $326,250 after deducting certain fees due to the placement agent and certain transaction expenses. The Debenture was repaid in full out of the proceeds of our December 2019 public offering.
On February 4, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with an accredited investor, pursuant to which we issued to the investor a secured note in the aggregate principal amount of $200,000 (the “Note”). The Note is one of a series of up to $400,000 of notes that may be issued by us, bears interest at a rate of nine percent (9%) per annum, is due on July 31, 2023, and is secured under a Pledge Agreement, dated February 4, 2020, entered into with the investor (the “Pledge Agreement”) by a security interest in the royalty payable to us under that certain Exclusive License Agreement, dated October 3, 2019, with CPF GP 2019-1 LLC. We have the right to prepay the Note, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time, without premium or penalty.
In April 2020, we completed a public offering where we pursuant to which we issued 440,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $4.25 per share which resulted in net proceeds of approximately $1,522,339 after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other expenses related to the offering. We incurred a total of approximately $347,661 in issuance costs in connection with the offering and issued no warrants to purchase shares of common stock to the underwriter.
In May 2020, we sold 6,000,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $2.50 per share and on May 15, 2020, pursuant to the terms of the Underwriting Agreement dated May 6, 2020 by and among us and ThinkEquity, a division of Fordham Financial Management, Inc., as representatives of several underwriters named therein ("ThinkEquity"), ThinkEquity was granted an over-allotment option to purchase up to an additional 900,000 shares of our common stock, in connection with the previously announced public offering. On May 15, 2020, ThinkEquity exercised in full such option with respect to all 900,000 shares of our common stock. After giving effect to the full exercise of the over-allotment option, the total number of shares of common stock sold by us in the public offering was 6,900,000 shares of common stock and total net proceeds to us, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses payable by us, were approximately $15,596,141. We incurred a total of approximately $1,653,859 in issuance costs in connection with the offering and issued warrants to purchase 300,000 shares of common stock to the underwriter.
We anticipate that we will continue to generate losses from operations for the foreseeable future. At December 31, 2020, we had a cash balance and short-term investment of $13,010,356. As of December 31, 2020, our stockholders’ equity was $18,253,256, compared to $4,360,149 as of December 31, 2019. Our net loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $4,508,162 and $6,920,540, respectively. This decrease was primarily due to an increase in revenue and a decrease in operating expenses of $578,348, an increase of other income of $70,451 and a decrease of $169,720 in interest expenses in 2020. Net cash used in operating activities was $2,887,950 and $2,815,621 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase resulted mainly from an increase of approximately $45,000 in working capital, an increase of approximately $531,000 in non-cash stock compensation expense, a decrease of non-cash goodwill impairment loss of approximately $2,938,00 that was recognized in 2019, offset by a decrease in the overall net loss of approximately $2,410,000 in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019.
We may need to generate additional revenues or secure additional financing sources, such as debt or equity capital, to fund future growth, which financing may not be available on favorable terms or at all. We do not have any additional sources secured for future funding, and if we are unable to raise the necessary capital at the times we require such funding, we may need to materially change our business plan, including delaying implementation of aspects of such business plan or curtailing or abandoning such business plan altogether.
We provide services to our construction customers in three separate phases: the design phase, the architectural and engineering phase and the construction phase. Each phase is independent of the other, but builds through a progression of concept through delivery of a completed structure. These phases may be embodied in a single contract or in separate contracts, which is typical of a design build process model. As of December 31, 2020, we had 21 projects totaling $25,117,461 under contract, which, if they all proceed to construction, will result in us constructing approximately 232,812 square feet of modular space. Of these contracts, all twenty one (21) projects combine all three phases or parts thereof and including construction. We expect that all of this revenue will be realized by September 30, 2022.
Backlog may fluctuate significantly due to the timing of orders or awards for large projects and is not necessarily indicative of future backlog levels or the rate at which backlog will be recognized as revenue. The increase in backlog at December 31, 2020 from the prior year is primarily attributable to two contracts during the third quarter of 2020 in the amount of approximately $4 million and approximately $2.95 million and three contracts during the fourth quarter of 2020 in the amount of approximately $2.7 million, $0.80 million and $.70 million offset by work in progress or completed contracts for the year ended 2020 for approximately $6,300,000. We expect that all of this revenue will be realized by September 30, 2022. Backlog does not include COVID tests or testing services provided through our joint venture, Clarity Mobile Venture.
There can be no assurance that our customers will decide to and/or be able to proceed with these construction projects, or that we will ultimately recognize revenue from these projects in a timely manner or at all.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements to which we are a party.
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements with third parties that include indemnification provisions which, in our judgment, are normal and customary for companies in our industry sector. These agreements are typically with consultants and certain vendors. Pursuant to these agreements, we generally agree to indemnify, hold harmless, and reimburse indemnified parties for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified parties with respect to actions taken or omitted by us. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these indemnification provisions is unlimited. We have not incurred material costs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification provisions. As a result, the estimated fair value of liabilities relating to these provisions is minimal. Accordingly, we have no liabilities recorded for these provisions as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and New Accounting Pronouncements
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”). In connection with the preparation of the financial statements, we are required to make assumptions and estimates and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses, and the related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates, and judgments on historical experience, current trends, and other factors that we believe to be relevant at the time the consolidated financial statements are prepared. On a regular basis, we review the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates, and judgments to ensure that our financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in “Note 3-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. We believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Share-based payments. We measure the cost of services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the fair value of the award. For employees and directors, including non-employee directors, the fair value of the award is measured on the grant date. For non-employees, the fair value of the award is generally re-measured on interim financial reporting dates and vesting dates until the service period is complete. The fair value amount is then recognized over the period services are required to be provided in exchange for the award, usually the vesting period. We recognize stock-based compensation expense on a graded-vesting basis over the requisite service period for each separately vesting tranche of each award. Stock-based compensation expense to employees and all directors is reported within payroll and related expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. Stock-based compensation expense to non-employees is reported within marketing and business development expense in the consolidated statements of operations.
Convertible instruments. SGB bifurcates conversion options from their host instruments and accounts for them as free-standing derivative financial instruments according to certain criteria. The criteria include circumstances in which (i) the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative instrument are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract; (ii) the hybrid instrument that embodies both the embedded derivative instrument and the host contract is not re-measured at fair value under otherwise applicable GAAP measures with changes in fair value reported in earnings as they occur; and (iii) a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative instrument would be considered a derivative instrument.
SGB determined that the embedded conversion options that were included in the previously outstanding convertible debentures should be bifurcated from their host and a portion of the proceeds received upon the issuance of the hybrid contract has been allocated to the fair value of the derivative. The derivative was subsequently marked to market at each reporting date based on current fair value, with the changes in fair value reported in results of operations.
Revenue recognition - The Company determines, at contract inception, whether it will transfer control of a promised good or service over time or at a point in time, regardless of the length of contract or other factors. The recognition of revenue aligns with the timing of when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To achieve this core principle, the Company applies the following five steps in accordance with its revenue policy:
(1) Identify the contract with a customer
(2) Identify the performance obligations in the contract
(3) Determine the transaction price
(4) Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract
(5) Recognize revenue as performance obligations are satisfied
On certain contracts, the Company applies recognition of revenue over time, which is similar to the method the Company applied under previous guidance (i.e. percentage of completion). Due to uncertainties inherent in the estimation process, it is possible that estimates of costs to complete a performance obligation will be revised in the near-term. For those performance obligations for which revenue is recognized using a cost-to-cost input method, changes in total estimated costs, and related progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation, are recognized on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period in which the revisions to the estimates are made. When the current estimate of total costs for a performance obligation indicate a loss, a provision for the entire estimated loss on the unsatisfied performance obligation is made in the period in which the loss becomes evident.
For product or equipment sales, the Company applies recognition of revenue when the customer obtains control over such goods, which is at a point in time.
Prior to entering into the ELA, we were subject to an agreement to construct and develop a certain property (“Original Agreement”), which now is subject to the ELA. Because of this, we are no longer obliged to perform under the Original Agreement. Upon entering the ELA, we had an outstanding accounts receivable balance of $306,143 which was forfeited and we recognized this amount as deferred contract costs. This amount was offset by $102,217, which was a reimbursement from the licensee for project costs on this project. We incurred total deferred contract costs of $203,926. We considered this amount an incremental cost of obtaining that ELA, because we expect to recover these costs through future royalty payments. We plan to amortize the asset over sixty months, which is the initial term of the ELA because the asset relates to the services transferred to the customer during the contract term.
On October 9, 2019, we entered into a Right of First Refusal Agreement (the “Agreement”) with CMC Development LLC (“CMC”). See Note 3 for a discussion on the Right of First Refusal Agreement. Under the agreement, we have a right of first refusal with respect to being engaged as a designer and builder of any real estate projects for which CMC has secured the rights to develop and in which CMC has a greater than fifty percent (50%) interest in the owner or developer entity and has the right to select the builder for such real estate project (the “ROFR Rights”). In exchange for such ROFR Rights, we agreed to issue to CMC 2,500 shares of restricted stock of our common stock, of which 1,250 shares will vest and be issued on September 30, 2020 and the remaining 1,250 shares will vest and be issued on September 30, 2021, unless the Agreement is earlier terminated. In the event that the Agreement is earlier terminated, CMC will still be entitled to receive the entire amount of such restricted stock that has vested as of such earlier termination date, but in no event less than 1,250 shares of such restricted stock. The Agreement also provides for customary indemnification and confidentiality obligations between the parties. The 2,500 shares of restricted stock of our common stock has yet to be issued to CMC.
The Agreement also provides that CMC has engaged us to build and design, in the aggregate, approximately 100 residential and commercial units at 1100 Ridge Avenue, Atlanta, Georgia, which is known as the “Ridge Avenue, Atlanta Project.” The total cost of the project is $16,900,000. The project is a residential project but not subject to the ELA.
In May 2020, we and Osang Healthcare Co., Ltd. ("Osang"), a South Korea based global manufacturer and distributor of medical grade diagnostic tests and equipment, announced the signing of a one year, non-exclusive distributorship agreement for the United States, for OHC's "GeneFinder COVID-19 Plus RealAmp Kit." This is a test designed to detect SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. The Distributorship Agreement is Osang's standard form of distributorship agreement and provides the Company with the non-exclusive right to distribute Osang's GeneFinder COVID-19 Plus RealAmp Kit in the United States for a stated term of one (1) year. An import license from the U.S. government has been issued to import and distribute the Osang test kits. There can be no assurance that the Distribution Agreement will continue and, it has not yielded the anticipated benefits or generated significant revenue, if any. The revenue from these product sales is recognized upon the transfer of control, which is at a point in time, and is generally upon shipment, Provisions for any discounts, rebates, sales concessions and returns are provided for in the period the related sale is recorded. During the year ending December 31, 2020, we recognized $250,000 in revenue related to such products, which is included in medical revenue on the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. On April 14, 2021, we filed suit against Osang for breach of contract and fraud seeking damages in the amount of $12 to $15 million in U.S. District Court in the Eastern District of New York (CV 21-1990). See Item 3. Legal Proceedings.
We entered into a joint venture agreement with Clarity Lab Solutions, LLC (“Clarity Labs”) (the “JV”). Revenue from the activities of the JV is related to clinical testing services and is recognized when services have been rendered, which is at a point in time. Included in the consideration we expected to be entitled to receive, we estimate its contractual allowances, payer denials and price concessions. During the year ending December 31, 2020, we recognized $2,150,323 in revenue related to activities through the JV, which is included in medical revenue on the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Goodwill. Goodwill represents the excess of reorganization value over the fair value of identified net assets upon emergence from bankruptcy. In accordance with the accounting guidance on goodwill, SGB performs its impairment test of goodwill at the reporting unit level each fiscal year, or more frequently if events or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of its reporting unit below its carrying value. Our evaluation of goodwill completed during the year ended December 31, 2020, resulted in no impairment loss.
Intangible assets - Intangible assets consist of $2,766,000 of proprietary knowledge and technology, which is being amortized over 20 years. In addition, included in intangible assets is $97,164 of trademarks, and $5,300 of website costs that are being amortized over 5 years. We evaluated intangible assets for impairment during the year ended December 31, 2020, and determined that there are no impairment losses.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for all recently adopted and new accounting pronouncements.
Non-GAAP Financial Information
In addition to our results under GAAP, we also present EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for historical periods. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures and have been presented as supplemental measures of financial performance that are not required by, or presented in accordance with, GAAP. We calculate EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest expense, income tax benefit (expense), depreciation and amortization. We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA before certain non-recurring adjustments such as loss on conversion of convertible debentures, change in fair value of financial instruments and stock compensation expense.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are presented because they are important metrics used by management as one of the means by which it assesses our financial performance. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are also frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry. These measures, when used in conjunction with related GAAP financial measures, provide investors with an additional financial analytical framework that may be useful in assessing us and our results of operations.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have certain limitations. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as alternatives to net income (loss), or any other measures of financial performance derived in accordance with GAAP. These measures also should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items for which these non-GAAP measures make adjustments. Additionally, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not intended to be liquidity measures because of certain limitations, including, but not limited to:
●
They do not reflect our cash outlays for capital expenditures;
●
They do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, working capital; and
●
Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets are being depreciated and amortized and may have to be replaced in the future, and these non-GAAP measures do not reflect cash requirements for such replacements.
Other companies, including other companies in our industry, may not use such measures or may calculate one or more of the measures differently than as presented in this Annual Report, limiting their usefulness as a comparative measure.
In evaluating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, you should be aware that in the future we will incur expenses that are the same or similar to some of the adjustments made in our calculations, and our presentation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed to mean that our future results will be unaffected by such adjustment. Management compensates for these limitations by using EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as supplemental financial metrics and in conjunction with our results prepared in accordance with GAAP. The non-GAAP information should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes.
The following is a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to the nearest GAAP measure, net loss: