Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the audited combined-consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2019 and the audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2018 and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.”
The following discussion contains references to calendar years 2020, 2019 and 2018, all periods of which were prior to the Reorganization Transactions which were effective February 12, 2021. Therefore, the financial results referenced for these periods relate to Cure TopCo and its consolidated subsidiaries for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. Any information related to periods subsequent to the Reorganization refer to Signify Health and its consolidated subsidiaries, including Cure TopCo.
Overview
Signify Health is a leading healthcare platform that leverages advanced analytics, technology, and nationwide healthcare provider networks to create and power value-based payment programs. Our mission is to transform how care is paid for and delivered so that people can enjoy more healthy, happy days at home. Our customers include health plans, governments, employers, health systems and physician groups. We believe that we are a market leader in two fast-growing segments of the value-based healthcare payment industry: payment models based on individual episodes of care and IHEs. Payment models based on individual episodes of care organize or bundle payments for all, or a substantial portion of, services received by a patient in connection with an episode of care, such as a surgical procedure, particular condition or other reason for a hospital stay. IHEs are health evaluations performed by a clinician in the home to support payors’ participation in Medicare Advantage and other government-run managed care plans. Our episode payment platform managed $5.21 billion and $6.14 billion of spend in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our mobile network of providers completed evaluations for over 1.4 million unique individuals participating in Medicare Advantage and other managed care plans in 2020. We believe that these core businesses have enabled us to become integral to how health plans and healthcare providers successfully participate in value-based payment programs, and that our platform lessens the dependence on facility-centric care for acute and post-acute services and shifts more services towards alternate sites and, most importantly, the home.
Our solutions support value-based payment programs by aligning financial incentives around outcomes, providing tools to health plans and healthcare organizations designed to assess and manage risk and identify actionable opportunities for improved patient outcomes, coordination and cost-savings. Through our platform, we coordinate what we believe is a holistic suite of clinical, social, and behavioral services to address an individual’s healthcare needs and prevent adverse events that drive excess cost. Our business model is aligned with our customers as we generate revenue only when we successfully engage members for our health plan customers and generate savings for our provider customers.
Factors affecting our results of operations
As a result of a number of factors, our historical results of operations may not be comparable to our results of operations in future periods, and our results of operations may not be directly comparable from period to period. Set forth below is a discussion of the key factors impacting our results of operations.
Seasonality
Historically, there has been a seasonal pattern to our revenue in our Home & Community Services segment with the revenues in the fourth quarter of each calendar year generally lower than the other quarters. Each year, our IHE customers provide us with a TML, which may be supplemented or amended during the year. Our customers generally limit the number of times we may attempt to contact their members. Throughout the year, as we complete IHEs and attempt to contact members, the number of members who have not received an IHE and whom we are still
able to contact declines, typically resulting in fewer IHEs scheduled during the fourth quarter. In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic led to a large number of in-person IHEs being conducted in the second half of the year, particularly in the fourth quarter, and as a result, for 2020, we did not see the historical seasonality we would normally expect with respect to IHE volume. In 2021, we expect to return to a seasonality trend in our Home & Community Services segment more consistent with historical trends, with fewer IHEs being conducted in the fourth quarter of 2021, compared to the rest of the year. However, any further developments with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic may impact seasonality trends.
Revenue in our Episodes of Care Services segment generally is higher in the second and fourth quarters. We recognize the revenue attributable to episodes reconciled during each 6-month episode performance measurement period over a 13-month performance obligation period that commences in the second or fourth quarter of each year, depending on the relevant contract with our provider partners. The 13-month performance obligation period begins at the start of the relevant episodes of care and extends through the receipt or generation of the semiannual reconciliation for the relevant performance measurement period, as well as the provision and explanation of statements of performance to each of our customers. As a result, during the first and third quarters of each year, we recognize three months of revenue for each of two overlapping performance obligation periods (i.e., three months of revenue from one performance obligation period, and three months of revenue from a second, overlapping performance obligation period). In contrast, during the second and fourth quarters of each year, we recognize revenue relating to three overlapping performance obligation periods-three months of revenue from one performance obligation period, three months of revenue from a second, overlapping performance obligation period, and one month of revenue from a third, overlapping performance obligation period (representing the thirteenth month of the third performance obligation period). We also recognize Episodes revenue based on our estimates of savings realized. The semiannual reconciliations for each performance measurement period under our Episodes programs are received or generated in the second and fourth quarters of each year, and indicate the actual savings realized. See “-Critical Accounting Policies-Revenue recognition.” In addition, due to the semiannual reconciliations for our Episodes programs, and BPCI-A in particular, we typically receive cash during the first and third quarters of each year, which can cause our liquidity to fluctuate from quarter to quarter. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Customer mix
Our customer mix can affect our revenue and profitability in both of our segments. For example, due to the different contractual arrangements we have with different health plans, health plan mix during the period can affect our average per-visit fee, the geographic mix of plan members we are visiting, the mix of members we see that are covered by Medicare versus Medicaid and the selection of IHE, vIHE or IHE+ solutions, each of which has a different price point, and can affect the conversion rate associated with the number of members who agree to receive IHEs, the total number of IHEs completed and the number and type of ancillary services selected. The amounts we receive for our services in our Episodes of Care Services segment are similarly determined by customer mix, as the amount of our administrative fee, our share of episode savings and risk for episode losses and the payors’ and providers’ share of savings, as well as the overall program size and the savings rate generated under each managed episode vary by customer.
Impact of IHE volume and margins
Our revenue and profitability in our Home & Community Services segment are affected by the number of IHEs we complete during a period and how cost effectively we are able to complete them. The number of IHEs we are able to complete during a period can be affected by a variety of factors. For example, decisions by our customers with respect to the TML, including any increase or reduction in the number of members included in the TML (or the member list from which it is derived), may impact our IHE completion rate and, as a result, our revenue. Similarly, our ability to complete IHEs is affected by the level of member engagement. In our experience, members of existing customers are more likely to have had an IHE from Signify Health in the past and are more likely to be responsive to our outreach. In contrast, for new customers, their members are often just getting to know Signify Health and may have never had an IHE before, which can make it harder to successfully contact them and obtain their consent to an IHE. Our ability to complete IHEs is also affected by the capacity of our mobile network of providers, which impacts our ability to efficiently reach all of the members on our TML.
We believe we will benefit from demographic trends in the coming years. As the U.S. population ages, the number of Medicare eligible individuals is increasing. Moreover, Medicare Advantage is growing faster than the Medicare Classic or FFS program according to CMS. We believe we are well positioned to capture the growth in Medicare Advantage enrollment in the coming years and further increase the number of members to whom we provide IHEs.
Our long-term profitability in the Home & Community Services segment is also impacted by how cost-effectively we are able to complete IHEs. For example, it tends to be less costly for us to perform IHEs in densely populated urban areas and more costly for us to perform IHEs in difficult-to-reach jurisdictions. Our ability to cost-effectively perform IHEs is also affected by how efficiently we are able to schedule a provider’s day to maximize the number of IHEs he or she is able to complete in a day. The mix of providers we use may also impact our costs. We use a mix of physicians, nurse practitioners and physicians assistants, with physicians being the most costly to contract with for IHEs. If we increase or decrease our usage of a particular type of provider, it impacts the cost of performing IHEs and our margins.
In 2020, we completed and invoiced to customers over 1.4 million IHEs, including vIHEs, compared to 1.1 million IHEs and 0.9 million IHEs in 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Impact of program size and savings rate
Our revenue and profitability in our Episodes of Care Services segment are affected by the program size of our episodes programs and the savings rates we are able to achieve under these programs. Program size for a particular customer represents the number of episodes we managed for a customer during a period multiplied by the respective baseline price of each episode, which represents the benchmark price set by the relevant program prior to any discounts. Our program size grows by increasing the number of episodes we manage. In connection with our episodes offerings, we receive an administrative fee that is based on the program size we manage for a customer. The BPCI-A program in its current form expires at the end of 2023, and as of the end of 2020, participation in the BPCI-A program was locked in place, meaning that new healthcare providers cannot enter the program, and participating healthcare providers cannot choose to participate in any additional episode types. Accordingly, our ability to grow our revenue under the BPCI-A program going forward will require us to maximize savings rates. See “Changes to the BPCI program” below.
Revenue in our Episodes of Care Services segment is also affected by the savings rate we are able to achieve. Under our contracts with our provider partners in our episodes of care programs, we receive a share of any savings generated by the relevant provider for each episode managed. The savings rate during each period therefore affects our revenue period to period. The savings rate during each period is affected by a variety of factors, including how quickly new customers are able to integrate with our technology and data analytics tools, how long provider partners have been participating in an episode program and their resulting level of familiarity with the program and the degree of implementation of care redesign. The savings rate also varies by the type of solution we offer, and as a result the savings rate will fluctuate depending on the number of episodes we manage under one type of program, such as BPCI-A, versus another program, such as our Commercial Episodes of Care programs.
Our ability to increase program size and savings rate will depend on a number of factors, including the effectiveness of our advanced data analytics capabilities and operating platform, market adoption of our solutions and the adoption of care redesign and bundled payment models overall.
The following table shows our weighted average program size and weighted average savings rates for the periods presented. Weighted average program size and weighted average savings rates did not apply for 2018 as these relate to our Episodes of Care Services segment which was formed following the Remedy Partners Acquisition in 2019.
(1) Weighted Average Program Size represents the weighted average program size for performance obligation periods included in a calendar quarter or calendar year. We manage episodes in six-month blocks, which we refer to as performance measurement periods. In each performance measurement period, we reconcile those episodes of care that concluded during such performance measurement period. We recognize the revenue attributable to episodes reconciled during each six-month performance measurement period over a 13-month performance obligation period, which we refer to as performance obligation periods. Accordingly, our weighted average program size during a given calendar quarter or calendar year reflects the results of multiple overlapping performance obligation periods. We define program size for a performance obligation period as (x) the number of episodes we managed during the relevant performance measurement period multiplied by (y) the baseline price of each episode, which represents the benchmark price set by the relevant program prior to any discounts. We define weighted average program size as the sum of the following for each performance obligation period included in a calendar quarter or calendar year: (x) the program size for the relevant performance obligation period, (y) divided by 13, which represents the approximately 13-month performance obligation period required to complete performance obligations under our episodes programs, and (z) multiplied by the number of months of the relevant performance obligation period included in the calendar quarter or calendar year. For 2019, this does not include amounts related to the BPCI Classic program, as these were not comparable to the current BPCI-A program and therefore are not indicative of future performance. The Remedy Partners Acquisition and the subsequent Remedy Partners Combination occurred in 2019, and as a result, we did not have any episodes of care programs in 2018.
(2) Weighted Average Savings Rate represents the weighted average savings rate generated during performance obligation periods included in a calendar quarter or calendar year. The gross savings for each performance obligation period (i.e., the 13-month period over which we recognize revenue attributable to episodes that concluded during a six-month performance measurement period) is equal to the gross amount of savings generated under the episode programs we manage during the performance measurement period to which such performance obligation period relates. The gross savings for a performance measurement period is defined as (x) the sum of the baseline episode prices of each such episode less (y) the total actual cost of each episode that concluded during such performance measurement period, which baseline prices represent the benchmark price set by the relevant program prior to any discounts. The weighted average savings rate is (i) the sum, for each performance obligation period included in a calendar quarter or calendar year, of (A) the gross savings for each such performance obligation period, divided by (B) 13, and multiplied by (C) the number of months of such performance obligation period included in such calendar quarter or calendar year, divided by (ii) the weighted average program size for such calendar quarter or calendar year. For the above purposes, the gross amount of savings is calculated prior to the deduction of our administrative fees and amounts shared with health plans and provider partners. For example, for BPCI-A, CMS receives a 3% discount, which is included in the gross amount of savings calculated for each performance measurement period. For 2019, the weighted average savings rate does not include amounts related to the predecessor BPCI Classic program, as these are not comparable to the current BPCI-A program and are not indicative of future performance. The Remedy Partners Acquisition and the subsequent Remedy Partners Combination occurred in 2019, and as a result, we did not have any episodes of care programs in 2018.
Investment in growth and technology
We continue to invest in sustaining significant growth, expanding our suite of solutions and being able to support a larger customer base over time. Achievement of our growth strategy will require additional investments and results in higher expenses incurred, particularly in developing new solutions, as well as in technology and human resources, as we aim to achieve this growth without diluting or decreasing the level and quality of services we provide. Developing new solutions can be time- and resource-intensive, and even once we launch a new solution, it can take a significant amount of time to contract with customers, provide them with our suite of technology and
data analytics tools and have them actually begin generating revenue. This may increase our costs for one or more periods before we begin generating revenue from new solutions. In addition to developing new solutions, we are making significant investments in developing our existing solutions and increasing capacity. We will continue to invest in our technology platform and human resources to empower our providers and our customers to further improve results and optimize efficiencies. However, our investments may be more expensive or take longer to develop than we expect and may not result in operational efficiencies.
Changes to the BPCI program
Revenue generated by our BPCI solutions represented approximately 25% of our total revenue and over 90% of our Episodes of Care Services segment revenue in 2020, and approximately 20% of our total revenue and 85% of our Episodes of Care Services segment revenue in 2019. Our revenue and profitability are affected by changes to the BPCI program. Under our BPCI-A contracts, we earn an administrative fee, which is based on the size of the relevant provider’s program, and also share in the savings or losses generated in conjunction with our provider partners as compared to BPCI-A’s benchmark episode price for a particular episode. Significant changes to the BPCI-A program can lead to a decline in the program size and/or savings rates we are able to achieve in conjunction with our provider partners under the program. For example, the predecessor BPCI Classic program expired at the end of the third quarter of 2018 and CMS launched the BPCI-A program in the fourth quarter of 2018, which replaced BPCI Classic. CMS made significant changes to BPCI-A as compared to BPCI Classic, including reducing the number of episode types that can be managed, modifying the definitions for many of the episodes, as well as opening the program up to new healthcare providers (most of whom did not have prior experience participating in episodes of care programs). CMS also increased the discount used to generate the benchmark episode price from 2% to 3%. This had the effect of increasing the savings threshold that must be achieved before we are able to earn our administrative fee, or any incremental savings that are shared with our provider partners. As a result of these changes, we saw a significant drop in the savings rate under BPCI-A during 2019 as compared to the savings rate under the BPCI Classic program in 2018. This was partially offset in 2019 by an increase in program size under BPCI-A. Historically, savings rates increased under the BPCI Classic program over time as healthcare providers integrated with our technology, implemented care redesign, developed a post-acute strategy, and adapted to the program. However, there can be no assurance that the same trend will continue under the BPCI-A program.
In September 2020, CMS announced changes to BPCI-A for 2021. These changes included an adjustment to the baseline period on which clinical episode prices are calculated, such that prices for 2021 will be calculated on the basis of historical experience that includes the first year of the BPCI-A program. As a result, benchmark episode prices could be lower than in prior years because BPCI-A care redesign and savings measures will be reflected in a portion of the benchmark period. In addition, CMS announced changes to the pricing methodology by which benchmark episode prices will be calculated, which will impact savings rate opportunities and we also believe may have impacted healthcare provider demand to take on certain episodes (and therefore affected program size). Further, when healthcare providers selected episodes for 2021 at the end of 2020, CMS required such selections to be made in groups of similar episodes, rather than individually. For example, a provider partner that previously only participated in hip replacement episodes is now also required to participate in knee and shoulder replacement episodes as well. This impacted certain provider partner demand for various episodes and correspondingly affected program size. We are unable to estimate the exact impact to 2021 program size, although we would expect the 2020 bundle selections to ultimately result in a program size in-line with that of the 2019 program size. Moreover, the clinical episodes selected by provider partners for 2021 will also apply to 2022 and 2023, meaning the selections made are binding through 2023. Lastly, in 2021, CMS will exclude from the BPCI-A program all episodes where the individual is diagnosed with COVID-19 during the episode. In contrast, in 2020, such episodes could be included or excluded at the election of the provider partner. All of these changes could lead to a decline in the program size and/or savings rates we are able to achieve.
Finally, the BPCI-A program is scheduled to expire in 2023 and it is not clear in what form, if any, CMS will renew the program, although in September 2020 CMS announced that it anticipated launching a mandatory bundled payment model upon the expiration of the BPCI-A program. If CMS does not renew the program, or makes significant changes in any successor program, it may have an impact on the number of episodes we are able to manage, our savings rate and, consequently, revenue and profitability in future periods.
COVID-19
Our operations in our Home & Community Services segment have been significantly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. As a precautionary measure in response to the pandemic, we temporarily halted IHEs in March 2020. Shortly following the suspension of in-home visits, we were able to expand our business model to perform vIHEs and made up for some of the lost volume for IHEs through vIHEs. We resumed in-home visits beginning in July 2020. We established personal protective equipment protocols with our major customers in order to be able to return to IHEs.
As a result of the pandemic, many of our customers postponed in-person IHEs to the second half of 2020. Although we continued to see some increase in IHE member cancellation rates, overall we saw significant incremental IHE volumes in the second half of 2020, particularly in the fourth quarter, as certain customers increased the volumes they placed with us and in-home IHEs represented the majority of those IHEs. In order to meet this volume growth, we onboarded additional providers into our network, which resulted in proportionally higher expenses. Additionally, in 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and particularly the resulting shift to virtual evaluations (which was most evident in the second quarter), had an impact on the quarterly volume and results of operations for the Home & Community Services segment. The shift to virtual evaluations was due to a combination of the pause in in-person IHEs between March and July 2020, the decline in acceptance rates for in-person IHEs and an increase in IHE member cancellation rates as individuals were less willing to receive IHEs in-person due to the pandemic. We also experienced some provider unwillingness to perform IHEs in the home during the pandemic. In early 2021, we believe this unwillingness has decreased significantly as we have seen a decline in the mix of virtual IHEs performed. We will continue to monitor these trends in IHEs for as long as the pandemic is ongoing.
Our Episodes of Care Services segment has also been affected by the pandemic. In the United States, at certain times during the course of the pandemic, governmental authorities recommended, and in certain cases required, that elective, specialty and other procedures and appointments, including certain acute and post-acute care services, be suspended or canceled to avoid non-essential patient exposure to medical environments and potential infection with the virus that causes COVID-19. In addition, the temporary suspension or cancellation of services was put in place to focus limited resources and personnel capacity toward the prevention of, and care for patients with, COVID-19. This resulted in fewer elective procedures and a general reduction in individuals seeking medical care, which contributed to a substantially lower number of episodes being managed in 2020.
In addition, CMS announced that healthcare providers could continue in the BPCI-A program with no change or they could choose one of the following two options for 2020:
•Healthcare providers could choose to eliminate upside and downside risk by excluding all episodes from reconciliation; or
•Healthcare providers could choose to exclude from reconciliation those episodes with a COVID-19 diagnosis during the episode.
Healthcare providers were required to make their election by September 25, 2020. The results of these elections made by the providers reduced the total number of episodes we managed during 2020 and will reduce the number of episodes we manage during 2021, and therefore reduce our program size. This impact on program size was partially offset by a higher savings rate due to a combination of improved performance by some of our partners as well as partners that were underperforming choosing to exclude some or all of their episodes from reconciliation in 2020. Subsequently, CMS announced that all episodes in 2021 with a COVID-19 diagnosis would be automatically excluded from reconciliation, which will reduce program size for all of 2021. There can be no assurance that the positive impact on our savings rate in 2020 will continue in 2021.
Each of these pandemic-related changes has had a material impact on program size in 2020, is expected to have a material impact on program size during at least part of 2021 and could have the effect of reducing program size for all of 2021 through 2023. Because our administrative fee is calculated as a percentage of program size and we receive a portion of the savings achieved in management of an episode, the decrease in episodes and related reduction in overall program size have had, and we expect will continue to have, a negative effect on our revenue. Some of these measures and challenges will likely continue for the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, which is
uncertain, and will harm the results of operations, liquidity and financial condition of our provider partners and our business. Lastly, our representatives may be prohibited from entering hospitals, skilled nursing facilities and other post-acute facilities as a result of the pandemic, which affects our ability to manage post-acute care and could have a material impact on the savings rate being generated by the program.
During the fourth quarter of 2020 and into January 2021, the daily average number of new cases of COVID-19 increased once again. Rates began to decline significantly in February 2021, partly related to the federal roll out of the vaccine. We continue to monitor trends related to COVID-19 and their impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Remedy Partners Transactions
In 2019, Cure TopCo acquired 100% of the outstanding equity of Remedy Partners. A controlling interest was initially acquired by New Mountain Capital on January 15, 2019, which we refer to as the “Remedy Partners Acquisition.” At that point, we and Remedy Partners were considered to be under common control and combined financial statements were presented from January 15, 2019 to November 26, 2019. On November 26, 2019, a series of transactions were affected which resulted in Remedy Partners becoming our wholly owned subsidiary, which we refer to as the “Remedy Partners Combination,” and consolidated financial statements were presented from that date. In connection with the Remedy Partners Transactions, we incurred significant transaction costs, primarily diligence-related costs and professional fees, including those related to integration. We assigned values to the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed based upon their fair values at the acquisition date. We also acquired intangible assets, consisting primarily of customer relationships, with a value of $118.0 million, acquired software with a value of $43.0 million, which will increase our amortization expenses in future periods. Additionally, we acquired a trade name with a value of $6.0 million, that was subsequently impaired in December 2019 as a result of our rebranding to Signify, which resulted in a decrease in amortization expense in 2020 and future periods compared to 2019. As a result of the Remedy Partners Acquisition, we also recorded $408.4 million in goodwill, which represents the amount by which the purchase price exceeded the fair value of the net assets acquired.
Because we were not under common control with, and did not own Remedy Partners in 2018 and due to the above factors, our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 are not directly comparable to our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018.
TAV Health acquisition
On March 31, 2019, Cure TopCo acquired TAV Health. TAV Health formed the basis for our Signify Community solution. As part of the TAV Health acquisition, we assigned values to the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed based upon their fair values at the acquisition date. We also acquired intangible assets, consisting primarily of acquired software with a value of $7.7 million and customer relationships with a value of $0.5 million, which we also expect will increase our amortization expense in future periods. As a result of the TAV Health acquisition, we also recorded $47.9 million in goodwill, which represents the amount by which the purchase price exceeded the fair value of the net assets acquired. Because we did not own TAV Health in 2018 and due to the above factors, our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 are not directly comparable to our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Cost of being a public company
To operate as a public company, we will be required to continue to implement changes in certain aspects of our business and develop, manage and train management level and other employees to comply with ongoing public company requirements. We will also incur new expenses as a public company, including costs related to our public reporting obligations, which includes increased professional fees for accounting, proxy statements and stockholder meetings, equity plan administration, stock exchange fees, transfer agent fees, SEC and Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, Inc., or FINRA fees, filing fees, legal fees and offering expenses. In addition, we are party to the Tax Receivable Agreement with the TRA Parties and are required to make certain distributions to them in accordance with the terms of the Tax Receivable Agreement. See “-Liquidity and capital resources-Tax Receivable Agreement.”
Effects of the reorganization on our corporate structure
Signify Health was formed for the purpose of the IPO, which was effective in February 2021 and had no activities of its own prior to such date. Signify Health is a holding company and its sole material asset, following the Reorganization Transactions, is a controlling ownership and profits interest in Cure TopCo. All of our business will be conducted through Cure TopCo and its consolidated subsidiaries and affiliates, and the financial results of Cure TopCo and its consolidated subsidiaries will be included in the consolidated financial statements of Signify Health for periods subsequent to the Reorganization Transactions and IPO.
Cure TopCo is currently taxed as a partnership for federal income tax purposes and, as a result, its members, including Signify Health, pay taxes with respect to their allocable share of its net taxable income. We expect that redemptions and exchanges of LLC Units will result in increases in the tax basis in our share of the tangible and intangible assets of Cure TopCo that otherwise would not have been available. These increases in tax basis may reduce the amount of tax that we would otherwise be required to pay in the future. The Tax Receivable Agreement requires Signify Health to pay to the TRA Parties 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that we actually realize from these tax basis increases and other tax attributes discussed herein. Furthermore, payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement will give rise to additional tax benefits and therefore additional payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement.
Components of our results of operations
Revenue
Our revenue is generated from contracts with our customers within our two operating segments, Home & Community Services and Episodes of Care Services, under contracts that contain various fee structures. Through our Home & Community Services segment, we offer IHEs, performed either within the patient’s home, virtually or at a healthcare provider facility primarily to Medicare Advantage health plans (and to some extent Medicaid). Additionally, we offer certain diagnostic screening and other ancillary services and, through our Signify Community solution, services to address healthcare concerns related to SDOH. Through our Episodes of Care Services segment, we primarily provide services designed to improve the quality and efficiency of healthcare delivery by developing and managing episodic payment programs in partnership with healthcare providers primarily under the BPCI-A program with CMS.
In our Home & Community Services segment, we primarily generate revenue through IHEs. Revenue is recognized when the IHEs are submitted to our customers on a daily basis. Submission to the customer occurs after the IHEs are completed and coded, a process which may take one to several days after completion of the evaluation. We are paid a flat fee for each completed IHE regardless of the member’s location or the outcome of an IHE. We earn a separate fee for any additional diagnostic screenings the health plan elects to provide for the relevant member. Revenue is recognized when the additional screening occurs.
We have entered into EAR agreements with one of our customers. Beginning in 2020, revenue generated under the underlying customer contracts includes an estimated reduction in the transaction price for IHEs associated with the initial grant date fair value of the outstanding customer EARs. The total grant date fair value of the outstanding EAR agreements was $51.8 million and will be recorded against revenue through December 2022. See “-Liquidity and capital resources-Customer Equity Appreciation Rights agreements.”
In our Episodes of Care Services segment, we primarily generate revenue through episodes of care under the BPCI-A program. We participate as a “convener participant” under the BPCI-A program. As a convener participant, we hold a contract directly with CMS and are responsible for developing and monitoring a BPCI-A episode of care program in partnership with healthcare providers. We enter into back-to-back contracts with provider partners interested in participating in BPCI-A episode of care programs through which we assist with compliance with CMS rules and program requirements and provide a suite of analytic, technology and post-acute management services. Under the BPCI-A program, we recognize the revenue attributable to episodes reconciled during each six-month episode performance measurement period over a 13-month performance obligation period that commences in the second or fourth quarter of each year, depending on the relevant contract with our provider partners. The 13-month performance obligation period begins at the start of the relevant episodes of care and extends through the
receipt or generation of the semiannual reconciliation for the relevant performance measurement period, as well as the provision and explanation of statements of performance to each of our customers. We are generally paid an administrative fee, which is paid out of savings, and also share in the savings or losses generated by our provider partners as compared to BPCI-A’s benchmark episode price for a particular episode. The transaction price is 100% variable, and therefore we estimate the amount which we expect to be entitled to receive for each episode performance measurement period over a 13-month performance obligation period. In making this estimate, we consider inputs such as the overall program size, which is defined by the historic cost and the frequency of occurrence of defined episodes of care. Additionally, we estimate rates for shared savings or losses by using data sources such as historical trend analysis together with indicative data of the current volume of episodes. Although our estimates are based on the information available to us at each reporting date, several factors may cause actual revenue earned to differ from the estimates recorded in each period. These include, among others, limited historical experience, as the current BPCI-A program only commenced in the fourth quarter of 2018 and has been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, and other limitations of the program beyond our control. See “Critical accounting policies-Revenue recognition.”
Operating expenses
Operating expenses are composed of:
•Service expense. Service expense represents direct costs associated with generating revenue. These costs include fees paid to providers for performing IHEs, provider travel expenses and the total cost of payroll, related benefits and other personnel expenses for employees in roles that serve to provide direct revenue generating services to customers. Additionally, service expense also includes costs related to the use of certain professional service firms, member engagement expenses, coding expenses and certain other direct costs.
•Selling, general and administrative expense (“SG&A”). SG&A includes the total cost of payroll, related benefits and other personnel expense for employees who do not have a direct role associated with revenue generation, including those involved with developing new service offerings. SG&A includes all general operating costs including, but not limited to, rent and occupancy costs, telecommunications costs, information technology infrastructure and operations costs, software licensing costs, advertising and marketing expenses, recruiting expenses, costs associated with developing new service offerings and expenses related to the use of certain subcontractors and professional services firms. We expect to incur significant additional legal, accounting and other expenses associated with being a public company, including, among others, costs associated with our compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and other regulatory requirements.
•Transaction-related expenses. Transaction-related expenses primarily consist of expenses incurred in connection with acquisitions and other corporate development such as mergers and acquisitions activity that did not proceed, strategic investments and similar activities, including consulting expenses, compensation expenses and other integration-type expenses. Additionally, expenses associated with the IPO are included in transaction-related expenses.
•Asset impairment. Asset impairment includes charges resulting from the impairment of long-lived assets when it is determined that the carrying value exceeds the estimated fair value of the asset.
•Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation expense includes depreciation of property and equipment, including leasehold improvements, computer equipment, furniture and fixtures and software. Amortization expense includes amortization of capitalized internal-use software and software development costs, customer relationships, acquired software and certain trade names.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net is composed of:
•Interest expense. Interest expense consists of accrued interest and related payments on our outstanding long-term debt and Revolving Credit Facility, as well as the amortization of debt issuance costs.
•Other (income) expense, net. Other (income) expense, net primarily consists of changes in fair value of the customer EARs as measured at the end of each period. Interest and dividends on cash and cash equivalents are also included in other (income) expense, net.
Noncontrolling interest
In connection with the reorganization transactions, we were appointed as the sole managing member of Cure TopCo pursuant to the Amended LLC Agreement. Because we will manage and operate the business and control the strategic decisions and day-to-day operations of Cure TopCo and will also have a substantial financial interest in Cure TopCo, we will consolidate the financial results of Cure TopCo, and a portion of our net income (loss) will be allocated to the noncontrolling interest to reflect the entitlement of the Continuing Pre-IPO LLC Members to a portion of Cure TopCo’s net income (loss). We hold approximately 74.5% of Cure TopCo’s outstanding LLC Units and the remaining LLC Units of Cure TopCo are held by the Continuing Pre-IPO LLC Members.
Income tax expense
Our business was historically operated through Cure TopCo, a limited liability company treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes, which is generally not subject to U.S. federal or certain state income taxes. In connection with the Reorganization Transactions and the IPO, we acquired LLC Units in Cure TopCo. Accordingly, we will be subject to U.S. federal and state income tax with respect to our allocable share of the income of Cure TopCo.
Results of operations
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following is a discussion of our consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and our combined-consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019. A discussion of the results by each of our two operating segments, Home & Community Services and Episodes of Care Services, follows the discussion of our combined-consolidated results.
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenue
Our total revenue was $610.6 million in 2020, representing an increase of $108.8 million, or 21.7%, from $501.8 million in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by a $73.6 million increase in revenue from our Home & Community Services segment and a $35.2 million increase in revenue from our Episodes of Care Services segment. See “Segment results” below.
Operating expenses
Our total operating expenses were $593.0 million in 2020, representing an increase of $82.4 million, or 16.1%, from $510.6 million in 2019. This increase was driven by the following:
•Service expense-Our total service expense was $306.7 million in 2020, representing an increase of $59.5 million, or 24.1%, from $247.2 million in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by expenses related to our network of providers, which increased by $28.3 million driven by the higher IHE volume partially offset by the mix of vIHEs performed during the year, which have a lower cost per evaluation than in-person IHEs. Compensation-related expenses increased by $20.4 million to support the overall growth in both segments. Additionally, the following expenses increased in 2020 primarily driven by the overall higher IHE volume; (1) the costs of providing other ancillary services, including certain laboratory and testing fees, increased by $4.2 million; (2) member outreach and other related expenses increased by approximately $3.2 million; and (3) other variable costs increased by $1.2 million. The impact of COVID-19 also resulted in approximately $2.1 million in incremental costs for personal protective equipment used by our providers while conducting IHEs during the pandemic and $2.0 million in one-time costs, including costs related to COVID-19 tests for our providers, which were partially offset by a decrease in travel and entertainment costs for both segments of $1.9 million due to the COVID-19 imposed travel restrictions.
•Selling, general and administrative expense-Our total SG&A expense was $208.0 million in 2020, representing an increase of $39.4 million, or 23.4%, from $168.6 million in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by compensation-related expenses, which increased by $33.6 million due to additional headcount to support the overall growth in our business and including higher bonus expense as a result of outperforming established bonus targets in 2020. Additionally, stock-based compensation expense increased $8.2 million due to additional equity-based grants. Other costs also increased, primarily to support the growth in our business, including: professional and consulting fees, which increased by $8.0 million; facilities-related expenses, including rent expense under our operating leases, which increased by $1.7 million; and information technology-related expenses, including infrastructure and software costs of $0.8 million. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in employee travel and entertainment of $4.2 million, driven by COVID-19 related travel restrictions, and a decrease in other variable costs of $0.5 million.
•Transaction-related expenses-Our total transaction-related expenses were $15.2 million in 2020, representing a decrease of $7.2 million, or 32.3%, from $22.4 million in 2019. In 2020, the transaction-related expenses related to the Remedy Partners Combination at the end of 2019 and integration of Remedy Partners, expenses incurred in connection with potential acquisitions and other corporate development activities that did not proceed, as well as costs incurred in connection with our IPO. These transaction-related expenses consisted primarily of consulting, compensation and integration-type expenses. In 2019, the transaction-related expenses related to the Remedy Partners Acquisition, the TAV Health acquisition, as well as certain integration-related expenses associated with acquisitions made in prior years. These transaction-related expenses consisted primarily of consulting, compensation and integration-type expenses.
•Asset impairment-Our total asset impairment was $0.8 million in 2020, representing a decrease of $5.6 million, or 87.9%, from $6.4 million in 2019. The asset impairment in 2020 resulted from the discontinued use of certain software assets. The asset impairment in 2019 was primarily related to the discontinued use of certain trade names following the Remedy Partners Acquisition, which resulted in a $4.9 million asset impairment. Additionally, in 2019, we discontinued the use of certain software resulting in an asset impairment of $1.5 million.
•Depreciation and amortization-Our total depreciation and amortization expense was $62.3 million in 2020, representing a decrease of $3.7 million, or 5.7%, from $66.0 million in 2019. This decrease in depreciation and amortization was primarily driven by a net decrease in amortization expense of $5.4 million primarily relating to assets becoming fully amortized in 2019 as well as the discontinued use of certain trade names following the Remedy Partners Acquisition, which resulted in an asset impairment in the fourth quarter of 2019. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in depreciation expense of $1.7 million, primarily driven by additional capital expenditures over the past year.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net was $31.2 million in 2020, representing an increase of $11.6 million, or 59.6%, from $19.6 million in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by an increase in other expense (income), net of $10.6 million and an increase in interest expense of $1.0 million. The increase in other expense (income), net was driven by $9.2 million in expense related to the quarterly remeasurement of the fair value of the outstanding customer EAR liabilities in 2020 and a decrease of $1.4 million in interest income related to lower interest rates and lower average excess cash balances held throughout 2020 compared to 2019. Interest expense increased by $1.0 million primarily driven by borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility during 2020 and the borrowing of $140.0 million pursuant to the 2020 Incremental Term Loans, which was partially offset by lower interest rates and quarterly principal payments of long-term debt under our Credit Agreement. See “Indebtedness”.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense was $0.9 million in 2020, representing an increase of $0.8 million from $0.1 million in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by additional taxes incurred in 2020 as a result of the increase in taxable income following the Remedy Partners Combination.
Segment results
We evaluate the performance of each of our two operating segments based on segment revenue and segment adjusted EBITDA. Service expense for each segment is based on direct expenses associated with revenue generating activities of each segment. We allocate SG&A expenses to each segment based on the relative proportion of direct employees.
The following table summarizes our segment revenue and the percentage of total combined-consolidated revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Home & Community Services revenue was $450.6 million in 2020, representing an increase of $73.6 million, or 19.5%, from $377.0 million in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by Evaluations revenue, which increased by $71.8 million, including a $12.4 million reduction as a result of the customer EARs, which became effective in 2020. The higher Evaluations revenue was driven by increased IHE volume partially offset by the introduction and mix of vIHEs performed during 2020, which have a lower price per evaluation than in-person IHEs. Other revenue increased by $1.8 million, primarily related to our Signify Community product.
Episodes of Care Services revenue was $160.0 million in 2020, representing an increase of $35.2 million, or 28.2%, from $124.8 million in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by an increase of $41.5 million in Episodes revenue, which was partially offset by a $6.3 million decrease in Other revenue. The increase in Episodes revenue was primarily driven by an improved savings rate partially offset by a decrease in program size primarily driven by the impact of COVID-19. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized approximately $22.3 million of revenue representing changes in estimates of variable consideration upon receipt and analysis of reconciliations from CMS in the second and fourth quarters of 2020 as a result of the improved savings rate and changes in program size. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we also recorded approximately $9.2 million of revenue related to changes in estimates based on new information received during the third quarter of 2020 primarily related to the impact of COVID-19 on program size and related CMS-imposed changes offered to providers that had an overall beneficial impact on savings rates. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized approximately $2.1 million of revenue representing changes in estimates of variable consideration upon receipt and analysis of reconciliations from CMS. Other revenue decreased by $6.3 million in 2020 primarily driven by a decreased focus on our complex care management services product offering following the termination and sale of two customer contracts in early 2019.
Home & Community Services Adjusted EBITDA was $96.3 million in 2020, representing an increase of $5.8 million, or 6.4%, from $90.5 million in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by the increase in revenue partially offset by the impact of COVID-19, including the shift to vIHEs, which have a lower price per evaluation than in-person IHEs and higher operating expenses as a result of the investments to support our growth and technology.
Episodes of Care Services Adjusted EBITDA was $28.6 million in 2020, representing an increase of $25.8 million from $2.8 million in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by the increase in revenue, including the impact of the improved savings rate, the increase in program size due to additional partners entering the program at the start of 2020, and changes in program size estimates, which resulted in changes in estimated revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 partially offset by the impact of COVID-19 related program size reductions. Additionally, the Remedy Partners Acquisition occurred during January 2019. As a result, operating results for Remedy Partners were included for the full year ended December 31, 2020 but were not included for the full year ended December 31, 2019.
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following is a discussion of our combined-consolidated results of operations for each of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018. A discussion of the results by each of our two operating segments, Home & Community Services and Episodes of Care Services, follows the discussion of our combined-consolidated results.
The following table summarizes our combined-consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018:
Revenue
Our total revenue was $501.8 million in 2019, representing an increase of $163.9 million, or 48.5%, from $337.9 million in 2018. This increase was primarily driven by a $96.9 million increase in revenue from our Episodes of Care Services segment as a result of the Remedy Partners Acquisition and a $67.0 million increase in revenue from our Home & Community Services segment. See “Segment results” below.
Operating expenses
Our total operating expenses were $510.6 million in 2019, representing an increase of $165.4 million, or 47.9%, from $345.2 million in 2018. This increase was driven by the following:
•Service expense-Our total service expense was $247.2 million in 2019, representing an increase of $50.9 million, or 25.9%, from $196.3 million in 2018. This increase was primarily driven by $30.7 million related to the Remedy Partners Acquisition. Additionally, expenses related to our network of providers increased by $8.9 million driven by the increase in IHE volume, the costs of providing other ancillary services, including certain laboratory and testing fees, increased by $5.2 million, compensation related expenses increased $5.2 million to support the overall growth in our business, including the impact of the TAV Health acquisition, and other variable costs increased by $0.9 million.
•Selling, general and administrative expense-Our total SG&A expense was $168.6 million in 2019, representing an increase of $100.7 million, or 148.5%, from $67.9 million in 2018. $76.2 million of this increase was driven by the Remedy Partners Acquisition. In addition, compensation related expenses increased by $19.2 million to support the overall growth in our business, including the impact of the TAV Health acquisition. Other costs also increased primarily to support the growth in our business, including: employee travel and entertainment, which increased by $1.8 million, professional and consulting fees, which increased by $1.4 million, facilities-related expenses, including rent expense under our operating leases, which increased by $1.4 million and information technology expenses including infrastructure and software costs, which increased by $1.1 million. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $0.4 million in other variable costs.
•Transaction-related expenses-Our total transaction-related expenses were $22.4 million in 2019, representing an increase of $1.4 million, or 6.9%, from $21.0 million in 2018. In 2019, the transaction-related expenses related to the acquisition and integration of Remedy Partners, including our initial combination with Remedy Partners in January 2019, the TAV Health acquisition, as well as certain integration-related expenses associated with acquisitions made in prior years. These transaction-related expenses related to consulting, compensation and integration-type expenses. In 2018, the transaction-related expenses primarily related to integration costs associated with acquisitions made in late 2017. These transaction-related expenses related to consulting, compensation and integration-type expenses.
•Asset impairment-Our total asset impairment was $6.4 million in 2019, representing a decrease of $10.6 million, or 62.4%, from $17.0 million in 2018. The asset impairment in 2019 was primarily related to the discontinued use of certain trade names following the Remedy Partners Acquisition, which resulted in a $4.9 million asset impairment. Additionally, in 2019, we discontinued the use of certain software resulting in an asset impairment of $1.5 million. The asset impairment in 2018 was primarily related to the discontinued use of certain trade names following our rebranding, which resulted in a $16.0 million asset impairment. Additionally, certain property and equipment were impaired for a total of $1.0 million in 2018.
•Depreciation and amortization-Our total depreciation and amortization expense was $66.0 million in 2019, representing an increase of $23.0 million, or 53.4%, from $43.0 million in 2018. This increase was primarily driven by $25.7 million related to the Remedy Partners Acquisition, which resulted in the acquisition of $167.0 million in intangible assets, comprised of customer relationships of $118.0 million, acquired software of $43.0 million and a trade name of $6.0 million, as well as $6.6 million in property and equipment. This increase in depreciation and amortization expense was partially offset by a decrease of $1.7 million in amortization expense primarily driven by impairment of certain software assets which were being amortized in 2018 and a decrease of $1.0 million in depreciation expense as a result of assets becoming fully depreciated during 2019.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net was $19.6 million in 2019, representing a decrease of $1.8 million, or 8.2%, from $21.4 million in 2018. This decrease was primarily driven by an increase in other (income) expense, net of approximately $1.6 million and a decrease in interest expense of $0.2 million. The increase in other (income) expense, net was
driven by an increase of $1.6 million in interest income on excess cash balances held throughout the year. The decrease in interest expense was primarily driven by lower interest rates partially offset by an increase in the outstanding principal of long-term debt under our Credit Agreement.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense was $0.1 million in 2019, representing a decrease of $0.1 million, or 54.4%, from $0.2 million in 2018. This decrease was primarily driven by additional taxes incurred in 2018 related to predecessor entities.
Segment results
We evaluate the performance of each of our two operating segments based on segment revenue and segment adjusted EBITDA. Service expense for each segment is based on direct expenses associated with revenue generating activities of each segment. We allocate SG&A expenses to each segment based on the relative proportion of direct employees.
The following table summarizes our segment revenue and the percentage of total combined-consolidated revenue for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018:
Home & Community Services revenue was $377.0 million in 2019, representing an increase of $67.0 million, or 21.6%, from $310.0 million in 2018. This increase was primarily driven by increased IHE volume resulting in an increase in Evaluations revenue of $59.6 million, of which $57.9 million was driven by the expansion with existing customers and $1.7 million was driven by the addition of new customers. Additionally, other revenue was $7.4 million in 2019, primarily related to the TAV Health acquisition, which formed the basis for our Signify Community product and the introduction of new product offerings to our customers.
Episodes of Care Services revenue was $124.8 million in 2019, representing an increase of $96.9 million, or 347.9%, from $27.9 million in 2018. This increase was primarily driven by the Remedy Partners Acquisition which contributed $107.8 million in Episodes revenue for 2019. Other revenue decreased by $10.9 million driven by the termination and sale of two customer contracts relating to our complex care management services and a shift in business strategy related to that product offering.
Home & Community Services Adjusted EBITDA was $90.5 million in 2019, representing an increase of $14.4 million, or 19.0%, from $76.1 million in 2018. This increase was primarily driven by the increased revenue partially offset by higher operating expenses as a result of the investments to support our growth and technology.
Episodes of Care Services Adjusted EBITDA was $2.8 million in 2019, representing a decrease of $0.2 million, or 6.4%, from $3.0 million in 2018. This decrease was primarily driven by the termination and sale of two customer contracts relating to our complex care management services and a shift in business strategy related to that product offering which resulted in a decrease of approximately $3.8 million in segment Adjusted EBITDA. This decrease was partially offset by the Remedy Partners Acquisition, which since 2019 has comprised a majority of this segment, and contributed approximately $3.6 million in segment Adjusted EBITDA.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table sets forth unaudited statement of operations data for each of the quarters presented. We have prepared the quarterly statement of operations data on a basis consistent with the audited combined-consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In the opinion of management, the financial information reflects all adjustments, consisting of normal recurring adjustments, which we consider necessary for a fair presentation of this data. This information should be read in conjunction with the combined-consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The results of historical periods are not necessarily indicative of the results for any future period.
Liquidity and capital resources
Liquidity describes our ability to generate sufficient cash flows to meet the cash requirements of our business operations, including working capital needs to meet operating expenses, debt service, acquisitions and other commitments and contractual obligations. We consider liquidity in terms of cash flows from operations and their sufficiency to fund our operating and investing activities.
Our primary sources of liquidity are our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash provided by operating activities and borrowings under our Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $72.6 million. Our total indebtedness was $412.5 million as of December 31, 2020. See “-Indebtedness” below. In connection with the IPO, in February 2021, we received net proceeds of $609.7 million. Based on our current expectations, we believe that these sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund our working capital requirements and to meet our commitments for at least the next 12 months.
Our principal liquidity needs have been working capital and general corporate needs, debt service, capital expenditures and acquisitions to help achieve our growth strategy. Our capital expenditures for property and equipment to support growth in the business were $13.9 million, $12.6 million and $6.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. In addition to these historical liquidity needs, we expect our future liquidity needs will also be comprised of cash to (1) provide capital to facilitate the organic and inorganic growth of the business, (2) make payments under our Tax Receivable Agreement and (3) pay income taxes.
Our liquidity may fluctuate on a quarterly basis due to our agreements with CMS under the BPCI-A program. Cash receipts generated under these contracts, which represents the majority of revenue in our Episodes of Care Services segment, are subject to a semiannual reconciliation cycle, which occurs in the second and fourth quarters of each year. As a result, we typically receive cash receipts under these contracts during the first and third quarters of each year, which can cause our liquidity position to fluctuate from quarter to quarter.
In October 2020, we paid $54.0 million to repurchase certain equity units that were originally issued to TAV Health in connection with the TAV Health acquisition. In November 2020, we entered into the 2020 November Incremental Term Loans under our existing Credit Agreement with a total principal amount of $125.0 million. The proceeds were used to repay the $77.0 million in borrowings then outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility, to fund a small acquisition, and for general corporate purposes. In December 2020, we entered into the 2020 December Incremental Term Loans under our existing Credit Agreement with a total principal amount of $15.0 million. See “-Indebtedness.”
During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had a negative impact on our liquidity, particularly in the Home & Community Services segment. IHEs were temporarily suspended and despite being able to pivot to vIHEs, the reduction in IHEs impacted revenue growth during portions of the year and therefore, temporarily had a negative impact on liquidity. Furthermore, as a result of the rapid shift to vIHEs and other customer claims processing system delays, we had experienced certain temporary collection delays from a few large Home & Community Services customers, which temporarily resulted in a negative impact on operating cash flows during the first three quarters of 2020. We collected the majority of these amounts in the fourth quarter of 2020. In our Episodes of Care Services segment, the lower number of episodes managed in 2020 has not yet had an impact on our liquidity because of the timing of the semiannual reconciliations and related cash receipts from CMS under the BPCI-A program. We expect to see the impact on our liquidity of the lower number of episodes managed reflected in the cash payment we receive from CMS in the third quarter of 2021.
We believe that our cash flow from operations, availability under our Credit Agreement and available cash and cash equivalents on hand will be sufficient to meet our liquidity needs for at least the next 12 months. We anticipate that to the extent that we require additional liquidity, it will be funded through the incurrence of additional indebtedness, the issuance of additional equity, or a combination thereof. We cannot assure you that we will be able to obtain this additional liquidity on reasonable terms, or at all. Additionally, our liquidity and our ability to meet our obligations and fund our capital requirements are also dependent on our future financial performance, which is subject to general economic, financial and other factors that are beyond our control. See “Risk factors.”
Accordingly, we cannot assure you that our business will generate sufficient cash flow from operations or that future borrowings will be available from additional indebtedness or otherwise to meet our liquidity needs. If we decide to pursue one or more significant acquisitions, we may incur additional debt or sell or issue additional equity to finance such acquisitions, which could possibly result in additional expenses or dilution.
Indebtedness
On December 21, 2017, our subsidiaries, Cure Intermediate 3, LLC (f/k/a Chloe Ox Intermediate 3, LLC and Ox Parent, LLC) as “Holdings” and Signify Health, LLC (f/k/a Cure Borrower, LLC and Chloe Ox Parent, LLC), as “Borrower,” entered into a credit agreement (as subsequently amended, restated, supplemented and/or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Credit Agreement”) with UBS AG, Stamford Branch as administrative agent and collateral agent (the “Administrative Agent”), the guarantors party thereto from time to time and the lenders party thereto from time to time, consisting of term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $260.0 million (the “Initial Term Loans”) and a revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $35.0 million (the “Revolving Credit Facility”). On June 22, 2018, Holdings, the Borrower, the Administrative Agent, the guarantors party thereto and the lenders party thereto entered into the first amendment to the Credit Agreement to amend and restate the Credit Agreement in order to, among other things, refinance the Initial Term Loans with a new tranche of term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $260.0 million (the “2018 Term Loans”). On April 23, 2019, Holdings, the Borrower, the Administrative Agent, the guarantors party thereto and the lenders party thereto executed the second amendment to the Credit Agreement to borrow an additional $20.0 million of term loans (the “2019 Term Loans”). On December 9, 2019, Holdings, the Borrower, the Administrative Agent, the guarantors party thereto and the lenders party thereto executed the third amendment to the Credit Agreement to increase the revolving credit commitments by an aggregate principal amount of $45.0 million, resulting in a total of $280.0 million of Term Loans outstanding and borrowing capacity of $80.0 million under the Revolving Credit Facility. On November 17, 2020, Holdings, the Borrower, the Administrative Agent, the guarantors party thereto and the lenders party thereto entered into the fourth amendment to the Credit Agreement to amend and restate the Credit Agreement in order to, among other things, incur additional indebtedness in the form of a new tranche of term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $125.0 million (the “2020 November Incremental Term Loans”). On December 7, 2020, Holdings, the Borrower, the Administrative Agent, the guarantors party thereto and the lenders party thereto entered into the fifth amendment to the Credit Agreement to borrow an additional $15.0 million of term loans (the “2020 December Incremental Loans” and together with the 2020 November Incremental Term Loans, the “Incremental Term Loans,” and, the Incremental Term Loans together with the 2018 Term Loans and the 2019 Term Loans, the “Term Loans”). The obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of the assets of Holdings, the Borrower and its wholly owned domestic subsidiaries (subject to customary exceptions and exclusions), including a pledge of the equity of each of its subsidiaries.
The Term Loans are payable in quarterly installments of 0.25% of the aggregate principal amount of Term Loans outstanding and mature on December 21, 2024. The Revolving Credit Facility matures on December 21, 2022.
Prior to June 22, 2018, the Initial Term Loans bore interest at a rate of the base rate plus 4.00% for base rate loans or the eurocurrency rate plus 5.00% for eurocurrency rate loans. Since June 22, 2018, the 2018 Term Loans and the 2019 Term Loans have had an interest rate of the base rate plus 3.50% for base rate loans or the eurocurrency rate plus 4.50% for eurocurrency rate loans. The Incremental Term Loans have an interest rate of the base rate plus 4.25% for base rate loans or the eurocurrency rate plus 5.25% for eurocurrency rate loans. Prior to June 22, 2018, borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility bore interest at a rate of the base rate plus 4.00% for base rate loans or the eurocurrency rate plus 5.00% for eurocurrency rate loans and letter of credit fees and, undrawn commitment fees equal to 0.50%. From June 22, 2018 until delivery of financial statements for the first full quarter after June 22, 2018, borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility bore interest at a rate of the base rate plus 3.50% for base rate loans or the eurocurrency rate plus 4.50% for eurocurrency rate loans and letter of credit fees and, in the case of undrawn commitment fees, 0.50%. Since delivery of financial statements for the first full quarter after June 22, 2018, the interest rate for borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility has been based on the consolidated first lien net leverage ratio pricing grid below. In each case, eurocurrency rate loans are subject to a 1.00% floor for the 2018 Term Loans and the 2019 Term Loans and 0.00% for revolving loans. Term loans borrowed at the base rate are subject to a 2.00% floor.
In addition, the Credit Agreement contains covenants that, among other things, restrict the ability of the Borrower and its restricted subsidiaries to make certain restricted payments, incur additional debt, engage in certain asset sales, mergers, acquisitions or similar transactions, create liens on assets, engage in certain transactions with affiliates, change its business or make investments. Following our IPO, the Credit Agreement will continue to contain these covenants, including a covenant that may limit or restrict the Borrower’s ability to make dividends or other distributions to us. In addition, the Credit Agreement contains a springing financial covenant requiring the Borrower to maintain its Consolidated First Lien Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) at or below 5.75:1.00 as of the last day of any fiscal quarter in which the principal amount of all revolving loans and letters of credit (other than undrawn letters of credit) exceed 35% of the revolving credit commitments at such time.
Comparative cash flows
The following table sets forth our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $43.5 million in 2020, an increase of $1.8 million, compared to $41.7 million in 2019.
Net loss was $14.5 million in 2020, as compared to $28.5 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to growth in Home & Community Services and Episodes of Care Services revenue partially offset by an increase in operating expenses to support the growth in the overall business. Non-cash items were $99.2 million in 2020 as compared to $79.9 million in 2019. The increase in non-cash items included in net loss was primarily driven by the fair value of the Customer EARs.
The effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities was a cash decrease of $39.4 million in 2020, as compared to a decrease of $8.6 million in 2019. The most significant drivers contributing to this net decrease of $30.8 million relate to the following:
•A net decrease in the cash impact related to accounts receivable of $64.7 million in 2020. Accounts receivable related to the Episodes of Care Services segment increased as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 by a total of $58.2 million primarily due to increased revenue as a result of the higher Episodes savings rate. Accounts receivable related to the Home & Community Services segment
increased $44.3 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 primarily as a result of the high fourth quarter IHE volume resulting in increased revenue;
•A net decrease related to contract assets and liabilities of $3.8 million driven by the results of the semiannual reconciliations and improvements in the Episodes savings rate, partially offset by the negative impact of COVID-19 on program size in 2020 resulting in an increase in estimated revenue under the BPCI-A program;
•A net increase related to accounts payable and accrued expenses of $37.7 million primarily due to growth in the company, an improved Episodes savings rate leading to a higher shared savings payable and an increase in accrued compensation expenses. Accounts payable and accrued expenses increased $40.5 million in 2020 as compared to an increase of $2.8 million in 2019;
•A net increase related to other current liabilities of $5.2 million primarily driven by an increase in deferred revenue related to a payment in advance of services from a customer and an increase in the estimated sales tax reserve as described in Note 17 to our audited combined-consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Other current liabilities increased $6.8 million in 2020 compared to an increase of $1.6 million in 2019; and
•A net increase related to other noncurrent liabilities of $3.1 million as a result of an increase in deferred rent due to additional facility space. Other noncurrent liabilities increased $9.9 million in 2020 as compared to a net increase of $6.8 million in 2019.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $41.7 million in 2019, an increase of $6.1 million, compared to $35.6 million in 2018. This increase was primarily the result of a decrease in net loss of $0.4 million, a $13.3 million increase in non-cash items partially offset by a $1.1 million gain on sale of assets and a $6.5 million decrease related to the effect of changes in operating assets.
Net loss was $28.5 million in 2019, as compared to $28.9 million in 2018. The decrease was primarily due to the Remedy Partners Acquisition and growth in Home & Community Services revenue partially offset by an increase in operating expenses to support the growth in the business. Non-cash items were $79.9 million in 2019 as compared to $66.6 million in 2018. The increase in non-cash items was primarily driven by the Remedy Partners Acquisition and the associated increase in intangible assets subject to amortization.
The effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities was a cash decrease of $8.6 million in 2019, as compared to a decrease of $2.1 million in 2018. The most significant drivers contributing to this decrease relate to the following:
•An increase in accounts receivable of $37.8 million in 2019 primarily as a result of the Remedy Partners Acquisition which resulted in an increase of approximately $34.4 million and an increase of approximately $3.4 million driven by higher revenue and timing of collections compared to an increase of $8.0 million in 2018;
•A net decrease in contract assets and liabilities for a net increase to cash impact of $17.4 million driven by the Remedy Partners Acquisition and timing of semiannual reconciliations and estimated revenue under the BPCI-A program; and
•A net increase in other noncurrent liabilities of $5.8 million as a result of an increase in deferred rent due to additional facility space and the Remedy Partners Acquisition. Other noncurrent liabilities increased $6.8 million in 2019 as compared to a net increase of $1.0 million in 2018.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $49.8 million in 2020, a decrease of $132.7 million, compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $82.9 million in 2019. This decrease was primarily the result of cash acquired from the Remedy Partners Acquisition of $136.0 million in 2019. Investing activities also included the initial cash consideration related to the acquisition of PatientBlox in 2020 for $14.7 million and the purchase of a long-term equity investment for $1.0 million in 2020 and the acquisition of TAV Health in 2019 for $28.8 million. Capital expenditures for property and equipment were $13.9 million in 2020 compared to $12.6 million in 2019. The
$1.3 million increase in capital expenditures for property and equipment was primarily driven by investments in certain facilities and other requirements to support the growth in the business. Capital expenditures for internal-use software development were $20.2 million in 2020 compared to $12.9 million in 2019. The $7.3 million increase in capital expenditures for internal-use software development was primarily driven by additional investments in our technology platforms to support future growth.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $82.9 million in 2019, an increase of $96.0 million, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $13.1 million in 2018. This increase was primarily the result of cash acquired from the Remedy Partners Acquisition of $136.0 million in 2019, partially offset by the acquisition of TAV Health for $28.8 million. Capital expenditures for property and equipment were $12.6 million in 2019 compared to $6.6 million in 2018. The $6.0 million increase in capital expenditures for property and equipment was primarily driven by the Remedy Partners Acquisition. Capital expenditures for internal-use software development were $12.9 million in 2019 compared to $6.5 million in 2018. The $6.4 million increase in capital expenditures for internal-use software development was primarily driven by the Remedy Partners Acquisition and additional investments in our technology platforms to support future growth.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $33.1 million in 2020, an increase of $127.9 million, compared to net cash used in financing activities of $94.8 million in 2019. The primary source of cash from financing activities in 2020 was proceeds of $140.0 million from the issuance of the 2020 Incremental Term Loans. Additionally, we received approximately $1.0 million in net income tax refunds on behalf of New Remedy and $2.9 million in proceeds related to the issuance of common stock under stock plans. These sources of cash in 2020 were partially offset by the repurchase of Cure TopCo and Cure Aggregator member units for $56.9 million, payment of contingent consideration of $38.2 million related to a 2017 acquisition, tax distributions to members of Cure Aggregator and Cure TopCo of $8.2 million, payment of debt issuance costs of $5.1 million and scheduled principal payments on long-term debt under our Credit Agreement of $2.8 million. The use of cash in 2019 was primarily driven by an $83.8 million payment to the sellers of Remedy Partners in connection with the Remedy Partners Acquisition, tax distributions to members of Cure Aggregator and Cure TopCo of $22.5 million, tax payments on behalf of New Remedy of $5.1 million and scheduled principal payments on long-term debt under our Credit Agreement of $2.8 million. These uses of cash in 2019 were partially offset by $20.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of incremental long-term debt and $3.0 million in proceeds from a third-party investor to which new member units in Cure Aggregator were issued.
Net cash used in financing activities in 2019 was $94.8 million, an increase of $72.9 million, compared to $21.9 million in 2018. The use of cash in 2019 was primarily driven by an $83.8 million payment to the sellers of Remedy Partners in connection with the Remedy Partners Acquisition. Additionally, in 2019, we made tax distributions to members of Cure Aggregator of $22.5 million, tax payments on behalf of New Remedy of $5.1 million, repurchased certain member units from certain former employee investors for $3.1 million and made scheduled principal payments on long-term debt under our Credit Agreement of $2.8 million. These financing outflows were partially offset by proceeds of $20.0 million in incremental long-term debt under our Credit Agreement to fund the TAV Health acquisition and $3.0 million in proceeds from a third-party investor to which new member units in Cure Aggregator were issued. The use of cash in financing activities in 2018 was primarily driven by tax distributions made to members of $18.3 million, the repurchase of certain member units from certain former employee investors for $4.1 million and scheduled principal payments on long-term debt under our Credit Agreement of $2.0 million. These financing outflows in 2018 were partially offset by $3.0 million in proceeds from a third-party investor to which new member units in Cure Aggregator were issued.
Dividend Policy
Assuming Cure TopCo makes distributions to its members in any given year, the determination to pay dividends, if any, to our Class A common stockholders out of the portion, if any, of such distributions remaining after our payment of taxes, Tax Receivable Agreement payments and expenses (any such portion, an “excess distribution”) will be made at the sole discretion of our Board of Directors. Our Board of Directors may change our dividend policy at any time. See “Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.”
Tax Receivable Agreement
We are a party to the Tax Receivable Agreement with the TRA Parties, under which we generally are required to pay to the TRA Parties 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax that we actually realize as a result of (i) certain favorable tax attributes we acquired from the Blocker Companies in the Mergers (including net operating losses, the Blocker Companies’ allocable share of existing tax basis and refunds of taxes attributable to pre-Merger tax periods), (ii) increases in our allocable share of existing tax basis and tax basis adjustments that may result from (x) future redemptions or exchanges of LLC Units by Continuing Pre-IPO LLC Members for cash or Class A common stock, (y) the IPO Contribution and (z) certain payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement and (iii) deductions in respect of interest and certain compensatory payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement. These payment obligations are our obligations and not obligations of Cure TopCo. Our obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement also apply with respect to any person who is issued LLC Units in the future and who becomes a party to the Tax Receivable Agreement. We do not anticipate making payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement until after the 2021 tax return has been finalized.
Customer Equity Appreciation Rights Agreements
In each of December 2019 and September 2020, we entered into EAR agreements with one of our customers. Pursuant to the agreements, certain revenue targets are established for the customer to meet in the next three years. If they meet those targets, they retain the EAR. If they do not meet such targets, they forfeit all or a portion of the EAR. Each EAR agreement allows the customer to participate in the future growth in the fair market value of our equity and can only be settled in cash (or, under certain circumstances, in whole or in part with a replacement agreement containing substantially similar economic terms as the original EAR agreement) upon a change-in-control of us, other liquidity event, or upon approval of our Board of Directors with the consent of New Mountain Capital subject to certain terms and conditions. Each EAR will expire 20 years from the date of grant, if not previously settled.
Pursuant to the terms of the EAR agreements, the value of the EARs will be calculated as an amount equal to the non-forfeited portion of a defined percentage (3.5% in the case of the December 2019 EAR and 4.5% in the case of the September 2020 EAR) of the excess of (i) the aggregate fair market value of the Reference Equity (as defined below) as of the applicable date of determination over (ii) a base threshold equity value defined in each agreement. Pursuant to the terms of each agreement, the “Reference Equity” is the Class A common stock of the Company and the aggregate fair market value of the Reference Equity will be determined by reference to the volume-weighted average trading price of the Company’s Class A common stock (assuming all of the holders of LLC Units redeemed or exchanged their LLC Units for a corresponding number of newly issued shares of Class A common stock) over a period of 30 calendar days. In addition, following the IPO, the base threshold equity value set forth in each agreement was increased by the aggregate offering price of the IPO.
If a change in control occurs on or prior to July 1, 2021, in the case of the September 2020 EAR, the manner in which the value of each EAR is calculated is subject to adjustment. As defined in each EAR, a change in control prior to an initial public offering will be deemed to have occurred if New Mountain Capital ceases to beneficially own, directly or indirectly, at least a majority of the total voting power of Signify Health, LLC (f/k/a Cure Borrower, LLC) or ceases to have the right, directly or indirectly, to elect or designate for election at least a majority of the board of directors of Signify Health, LLC. Following an initial public offering, a change in control will be deemed to have occurred if any person or group of persons other than New Mountain Capital shall beneficially own 35% or more of the total voting power of Signify Health, LLC or New Mountain Capital ceases to have the right, directly or indirectly, to elect or designate for election at least a majority of the board of directors of Signify Health, LLC. New Mountain Capital holds a majority of our total voting power and has the right, both by voting power and contractually, to designate for election at least a majority of the board of directors of Signify Health, LLC, and as a result, the Reorganization Transactions and the IPO did not affect the EAR agreements or impact the manner in which the value of each EAR is calculated except as set forth above.
As of December 31, 2020, cash settlement was not considered probable, due to the change in control and liquidity provisions of each EAR. The grant date fair value of the December 2019 customer EAR was estimated to be $15.2 million and is being recorded as a reduction of revenue through December 31, 2022, coinciding with the three-year performance period. The grant date fair value of the September 2020 customer EAR was estimated to be
$36.6 million and is being recorded as a reduction of revenue through December 31, 2022, coinciding with the 2.5-year performance period. As of December 31, 2020, the total estimated fair market value of the outstanding EAR agreements was approximately $78.5 million.
Non-GAAP financial measures
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are not measures of financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered substitutes for GAAP measures, including net income or loss, which we consider to be the most directly comparable GAAP measure. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin have limitations as analytical tools, and when assessing our operating performance, you should not consider these non-GAAP financial measures in isolation or as substitutes for net income or loss or other consolidated income statement data prepared in accordance with GAAP. Other companies may calculate Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss before interest expense, income tax expense, depreciation and amortization and certain items of income and expense, including asset impairment, other (income) expense, net, transaction-related expenses, equity-based compensation, remeasurement of contingent consideration, management fees and non-recurring expenses. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides a useful measure to investors to assess our operating performance because it eliminates the impact of expenses that do not relate to ongoing business performance, and that the presentation of this measure enhances an investor’s understanding of the performance of our business.
Adjusted EBITDA is a key metric used by management and our board of directors to assess the performance of our business. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides a useful measure to investors to assess our operating performance because it eliminates the impact of expenses that do not relate to ongoing business performance, and that the presentation of this measure enhances an investor’s understanding of the performance of our business. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA Margin is helpful to investors in measuring the profitability of our operations on a consolidated level.
Our use of the terms Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin may vary from the use of similar terms by other companies in our industry and accordingly may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin have important limitations as analytical tools. For example, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin:
•do not reflect any cash capital expenditure requirements for the assets being depreciated and amortized that may have to be replaced in the future;
•do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•do not reflect the impact of certain cash charges resulting from matters we consider not to be indicative of our core operations;
•do not reflect the interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•do not reflect equity-based compensation expense and other non-cash charges; and exclude certain tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us.
Adjusted EBITDA increased by $31.6 million, or 34.8%, to $124.9 million in 2020 from $93.3 million in 2019. Adjusted EBITDA increased by $14.2 million, or 18.0%, to $93.3 million in 2019 from $79.1 million in 2018.
We define Adjusted EBITDA Margin as Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA Margin is helpful to investors in measuring the profitability of our operations on a consolidated level. Adjusted EBITDA Margin increased by 186 basis points to 20.5% in 2020 from 18.6% in 2019. Adjusted EBITDA Margin decreased by 482 basis points to 18.6% in 2019 from 23.4% in 2018.
The following table shows a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
(a) Asset impairment in 2020 was primarily related to the discontinued use of certain software which resulted in a $0.8 million asset impairment. Asset impairment in 2019 was primarily related to the discontinued use of certain trade names following the Remedy Partners Acquisition (as defined below), which resulted in a $4.9 million asset impairment. Additionally, we discontinued the use of certain software resulting in an asset impairment of $1.5 million in 2019.
(b) Represents other non-operating (income) expense that consists primarily of the quarterly remeasurement of fair value of the outstanding customer EARs, as well as interest and dividends earned on cash and cash equivalents.
(c) Represents transaction-related expenses that consist primarily of expenses incurred in connection with acquisitions and other corporate development activities, such as mergers and acquisitions activity that did not proceed, strategic investments and similar activities. Expenses incurred in connection with our IPO, which cannot be netted against proceeds, are also included in transaction-related expenses.
(d) Represents expense related to equity incentive awards, including incentive units and stock options, granted to certain employees, officers and non-employee directors as long-term incentive compensation. We recognize the related expense for these awards ratably over the vesting period or as achievement of performance criteria become probable.
(e) Represents the reduction of revenue related to the grant date fair value of the customer EARs granted pursuant to the customer EAR agreements we entered into in December 2019 and September 2020.
(f) Represents the remeasurement of contingent consideration due to the selling shareholders of Censeo Health, a business acquired in 2017, pending the resolution of an Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) tax matter. The matter was resolved in 2020.
(g) Represents the annual advisory fee paid to New Mountain Capital under the Management Services Agreement. The Management Services Agreement was terminated in November 2019 in connection with the consummation of the Remedy Partners Combination.
(h) Represents certain gains and expenses incurred that are not expected to recur, including those associated with the closure of certain facilities, the sale of certain assets and the early termination of certain contracts.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table presents information relating to our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Represents amounts due under existing operating leases related to our offices and other facilities.
(2) Includes $92.5 million of interest based on interest rates in place and the amounts outstanding as of December 31, 2020. Actual payments may differ as the interest rates under our Credit Agreement are variable.
(3) Represents amount due to former sellers of PatientBlox, an entity we acquired in 2020, upon the achievement of certain agreed milestones.
(4) Represents non-cancelable commitments for the purchase of software, goods and services.
As of December 31, 2020, cash settlement related to the outstanding EARs was not considered probable, due to the change in control and liquidity provisions of the EARs, and therefore an amount related to this commitment is not included in the above table.
As of December 31, 2020, cash settlement related to the outstanding synthetic equity units, was not considered probable due to the change in control provisions included in the outstanding synthetic equity unit awards, and therefore an amount related to the synthetic equity units commitment is not included in the above table. In February 2021, in connection with the IPO, the outstanding synthetic equity units were converted to synthetic common units and will be eligible for a cash payment upon each vesting date based on the preceding 30 day average stock price of our Class A common stock. We expect to begin making payments related to these awards during 2021.
The Tax Receivable Agreement became effective in connection with the Reorganization Transactions in February 2021. Accordingly, there was no contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and no amounts are included in the table above. We anticipate making payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement following the completion of the 2021 corporate tax return during the course of 2022.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
Except for operating leases and certain letters of credit entered into in the normal course of business, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Critical accounting policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, income and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base these estimates on our historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results experienced may vary materially and adversely from our estimates. Revisions to estimates are recognized prospectively. We believe the following critical accounting policies could potentially produce materially
different results if we were to change underlying assumptions, estimates or judgments. See Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies” to our combined-consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a summary of our significant accounting policies.
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue as the control of promised services is transferred to our customers and we generate all of our revenue from contracts with customers. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for these services. The measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make certain judgments and estimates.
Effective January 1, 2019, we adopted the new accounting standard Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), under the modified retrospective method. Under the modified retrospective method, we were not required to restate comparative financial information prior to the adoption of this standard and, therefore, such information presented prior to January 1, 2019 continues to be reported under our previous accounting policies.
We apply the five-step model to recognize revenue from customer contracts. The five-step model requires us to (i) identify the contract with the customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, including variable consideration to the extent that it is probable that a significant future reversal will not occur, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the respective performance obligations in the contract, and (v) recognize revenue when, or as, we satisfy the performance obligation.
The unit of measure for revenue recognition is a performance obligation, which is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct or series of distinct goods or services to the customer. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. We satisfy substantially all of our performance obligations, which generally are related to a series of distinct services as described below, and recognize revenue over time instead of at a point in time.
Our customer contracts have either (1) a single performance obligation as the promise to transfer services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and is, therefore, not distinct; (2) a series of distinct performance obligations; or (3) multiple performance obligations, most commonly due to the contract covering multiple service offerings. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the contract’s transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on the basis of the relative standalone selling price of each distinct service in the contract.
Home & Community Services
In our Home & Community Services segment, revenue is recognized when the IHEs are submitted to our customers on a daily basis. Submission to the customer occurs after the IHEs are completed and coded, a process which may take one to several days after completion of the evaluation. The pricing for the IHEs is generally based on a fixed transaction fee, which is directly linked to the usage of the service by the customer during a distinct service period. Customers are invoiced for evaluations performed each month and remit payment accordingly. The IHEs are recognized as a single performance obligation which qualify for point-in-time revenue recognition since the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits provided daily as we perform.
The transaction price for certain of our IHEs is reduced by the grant date fair value of outstanding customer EARs. See “-Critical accounting policies-Customer Equity Appreciation Rights.”
The remaining sources of revenue in our Home & Community Services segment, which relate to ancillary diagnostic and evaluative services we provide, are recognized over time as the performance obligations are satisfied and are primarily based on a fixed fee. Therefore, they do not require estimates and assumptions by management. See Note 6, “Revenue Recognition” to our combined-consolidated financial statements for further details regarding our revenue recognition policies.
Episodes of Care Services
The episodes solutions we provide in our Episodes of Care Services segment are an integrated set of services which represent a single performance obligation in the form of a series of distinct services. This performance obligation is satisfied over time as the various services are delivered. We primarily offer these services to customers under the BPCI-A program.
Under the BPCI-A program, we recognize the revenue attributable to episodes reconciled during each six-month episode performance measurement period over a 13-month performance obligation period that commences in the second or fourth quarter of each year, depending on the relevant contract with our provider partners. The 13-month performance obligation period begins at the start of the relevant episodes of care and extends through the receipt or generation of the semiannual reconciliation for the relevant performance measurement period, as well as the provision and explanation of statements of performance to each of our customers. The transaction price is 100% variable and therefore we estimate an amount in which we expect to be entitled to receive for each six-month episode performance measurement period over a 13-month performance obligation period.
For each partner agreement, the fees are generally twofold, an administrative fee, which is based on a stated percentage of program size and is paid out of savings, and a defined share of program savings or losses, if any. In order to estimate this variable consideration, management estimates the expected program size as well as the expected savings rate for each six-month period of episodes of care. The estimate is performed both at the onset of each performance measurement period based on information available at the time and at the end of each reporting period. In making the estimate, we consider inputs such as the overall program size which is defined by the historic cost multiplied by the frequency of occurrence of defined episodes of care. Additionally, we estimate savings rates by using data sources such as historical trend analysis together with indicative data of the current volume of episodes.
We adjust our estimates at the end of each six-month performance measurement period, generally in the second and fourth quarter each year, and may further adjust at the end of each reporting period to the extent new information indicates a change is needed. We apply a constraint to the variable consideration estimate in circumstances where we believe the claims data received is incomplete or inconsistent, so as not to have the estimates result in a significant revenue reversal in future periods. Although our estimates are based on the information available to us at each reporting date, several factors may cause actual revenue earned to differ from the estimates recorded each period. These include, among others, limited historical experience as the current BPCI-A program only commenced in the fourth quarter of 2018, CMS-imposed restrictions on the definition of episodes and benchmark prices, healthcare provider participation, the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 and other limitations of the program beyond our control.
The remaining sources of revenue in our Episodes of Care Services segment are recognized over time when, or as, the performance obligations are satisfied and are primarily based on a fixed fee or per member per month fee. Therefore, they do not require significant estimates and assumptions by management. See Note 6, “Revenue Recognition” to our combined-consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details regarding revenue recognition policies.
Allowance for doubtful accounts
We continuously monitor collections and payments from our customers. We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts based on the best facts available to management. We consider historical realization data, accounts receivable aging trends and other operational trends to estimate the collectability of receivables. After all reasonable attempts are made to collect a receivable, the receivable is written off against the allowance for doubtful accounts. As of December 31, 2020, we had an allowance for doubtful accounts of $5.1 million, which represented 1.9% of total accounts receivable, net. We continue to assess our receivable portfolio and collections in light of the current economic environment and its impact on our estimation of the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts.
Equity-based compensation
Equity-based compensation represents the cost related to equity-based awards granted to employees and non-employee directors. Equity-based compensation prior to the IPO consisted of awards that were profits interest units for federal income tax purposes. The profits interest units had time-based and performance-based vesting criteria. In connection with the IPO, the profits interest units were reclassified into common units and remain subject to the same time-based and performance-based vesting criteria. See “Item 11. Executive Compensation - Other compensation plans - Incentive Units.” We recognize equity-based compensation for all equity-based awards based on the grant date fair value of the award. Forfeitures are recorded as they occur.
Awards with time-based vesting generally vest over time, with a portion of the awards vesting on the grant date anniversary and other awards vesting on December 31 of each year. The resulting compensation expense related to time-based service awards is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period and is included within SG&A expense or service expense in the accompanying combined-consolidated statements of operations based on the role of the grantee. For those awards with performance-based vesting, the total cash on cash return of the private equity owners as defined in the award agreement must exceed certain multiples set forth in the award agreement in order to vest, and is also generally dependent upon the participant’s continued employment. The criteria associated with the performance-vesting criteria has not been probable to date. As such, we have not recorded any equity-based compensation expense related to the equity-based awards that are subject to performance-based vesting criteria.
Grant date fair value of these equity-based awards was calculated based on a Monte Carlo option pricing simulation. Our total equity value represents a key input for determining the fair value of the underlying common units. Prior to the IPO, a discount for lack of marketability was applied to the per unit fair value to reflect increased risk arising from the inability to readily sell our common units.
In order to estimate the fair value of our common units prior to the IPO, we used a combination of the market approach and the income approach. We used a combination of these standard valuation techniques rather than picking just one overall approach, as we believe that the market approach on its own provides a less reliable evaluation of the fair value than an income approach because such an approach relies solely on data and trends of companies in similar market segments with similar characteristics. By contrast, the income approach incorporates management’s best estimates of future performance based on both company and industry-specific factors and incorporates management’s long-term strategy for positioning and operating the business.
For the market approach, we utilized the guideline company method by selecting certain companies that we considered to be the most comparable to us in terms of size, growth, profitability, risk and return on investment, among others. We then used these guideline companies to develop relevant market multiples and ratios. The market multiples and ratios were applied to our financial projections based on assumptions at the time of the valuation in order to estimate our total enterprise value. Since there is not an active market for our common units, a discount for lack of marketability was then applied to the resulting value.
For the income approach, we performed discounted cash flow analyses utilizing projected cash flows, which were discounted to the present value in order to arrive at an enterprise value. The key assumptions used in the income approach include management’s financial projections which are based on highly subjective assumptions as of the date of valuation, a discount rate, and a long-term growth rate.
The Monte Carlo simulation also requires additional inputs to estimate the grant date fair value of an award, including an assumption for expected volatility, expected dividend yield, risk-free rate and an expected life. Since we were historically privately held, we calculate expected volatility using comparable peer companies with publicly traded shares over a term similar to the expected term of the underlying award. At the time of grant, we had no intention to pay dividends on our common units, and therefore, the dividend yield percentage is zero. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury constant maturity interest rate whose term is consistent with the expected
life of the profits interests. Profits interest awards granted during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 included the following weighted average assumptions (annualized percentages):
In addition, Remedy Partners historically maintained an equity incentive plan whereby certain employees and directors were granted stock options. In November 2019, at the conclusion of the Remedy Partners Acquisition, outstanding Remedy Partners stock options were converted to stock options in New Remedy. No additional stock option grants were made following the Remedy Partners Acquisition. In connection with the IPO, these stock options were converted into stock options in Signify Health, Inc. The grant date fair value of the outstanding stock options was estimated using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the input of subjective assumptions, including estimated share price, volatility over the expected term of the awards, expected term, risk free interest rate and expected dividends, as described above. Expected volatility, expected dividend yield and risk-free interest rate were all calculated in similar ways for the Remedy Partners stock options as described above for the valuation of the profits interests. The expected term of the stock options represents the period the stock options are expected to be outstanding. We used the simplified method for estimating the expected term of the stock options. We continue to record equity-based compensation expense related to outstanding Remedy Partners stock options over the remaining vesting periods, to the extent the former Remedy Partners employees who received the stock option grants remain our employees.
Customer Equity Appreciation Rights
In December 2019 and September 2020, we entered into EAR agreements with one of our customers. See “-Liquidity and capital resources-Customer Equity Appreciation Rights agreements.” Although the initial EAR agreement was executed in December 2019, the service period did not begin until 2020 and, therefore, there was no impact on our results of operations until 2020.
The initial grant date fair values of the EARs are each estimated in a similar manner, subject to the same management assumptions, as described for equity-based compensation as the EARs are a form of equity-based award. However, since the EARs are granted to a customer, they are also subject to accounting guidance for revenue recognition. Accordingly, their initial grant date fair values are recorded as a reduction to the transaction price over the service period for the associated customer’s IHE services. Forfeitures, if any, as a result of annual purchase commitments not being met, will be recognized as revenue in the period the forfeiture occurs.
As the awards will ultimately be settled in cash, they are classified as noncurrent liabilities with estimated changes in fair market value recorded each accounting period based on current management assumptions related to the valuation approaches described for equity-based compensation above. These changes in fair market value are recorded in other expense (income), net on the combined-consolidated statement of operations.
Business combinations
We account for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting, which requires the acquiring entity in a business combination to recognize the fair value of all assets acquired, liabilities assumed and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree, and establishes the acquisition date as the fair value measurement point. Accordingly, we recognize assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations, including contingent assets and liabilities and noncontrolling interests in the acquiree, based on fair value estimates as of the date of acquisition.
Discounted cash flow models are typically used in these valuations if quoted market prices are not available, and the models require the use of significant estimates and assumptions including, but not limited to (1) estimating future revenue, expenses and cash flows expected to be collected; and (2) developing appropriate discount rates, long-term growth rates and probability rates. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but we recognize that the assumptions are inherently uncertain.
We recognize and measure goodwill, if any, as of the acquisition date, as the excess of the fair value of the consideration paid over the fair value of the identified net assets acquired. The primary drivers that generate goodwill are the value of synergies with our existing operations, ability to grow in the market, and estimates of market share at the date of purchase. Goodwill recorded in an acquisition is assigned to applicable reporting units based on expected revenues or expected cash flows. Identifiable intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their useful lives.
Pushdown accounting establishes a new basis for the assets and liabilities of an acquired company based on a “pushdown” of the acquirer’s stepped-up basis to the acquired company in connection with a change-in-control event. We elected to apply pushdown accounting in the reporting period in which the change-in-control event occurred as it relates to the January 2019 acquisition of Remedy Partners. The decision to apply pushdown accounting is irrevocable. The election of pushdown accounting required the recognition of the new basis of accounting established for the individual assets and liabilities of Remedy Partners as of the date New Mountain Capital acquired Remedy Partners. Goodwill was calculated and recognized consistent with business combination accounting, resulting in the pushdown of $408.4 million in goodwill as of December 31, 2019.
Acquisition-related contingent consideration is initially measured and recorded at its estimated fair value as an element of consideration paid in connection with an acquisition. Subsequent adjustments are recognized in SG&A expense in the combined-consolidated statements of operations. We determine the fair value of acquisition-related contingent consideration, and any subsequent changes in fair value using a discounted probability-weighted approach. This approach takes into consideration certain Level 3 unobservable inputs. These unobservable inputs include probability assessments of expected future cash flows over the period in which the obligation is expected to be settled and applies a discount factor that captures the uncertainties associated with the obligation. Acquisition-related contingent consideration as of December 31, 2019 was $39.8 million, related to an acquisition made in 2017. This contingent consideration was paid in full for $40.0 million in July 2020. Acquisition-related contingent consideration as of December 31, 2020 was $15.2 million, related to the acquisition of PatientBlox in 2020.
Recoverability of goodwill, intangible assets, and other long-lived assets subject to amortization
Goodwill is an asset which represents the future economic benefits which arise from the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of acquired net assets in a business combination, including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets. Goodwill is not amortized, but rather is tested for impairment annually, or more frequently whenever there are triggering events or changes in circumstances which indicate that the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable and an impairment loss may have been incurred. As of December 31, 2019, we had goodwill of approximately $578.8 million, which represented 42% of our consolidated total assets. As of December 31, 2020, we had goodwill of approximately $596.7 million, which represented 39.2% of our consolidated total assets.
We assess goodwill for impairment at least annually, during the fourth quarter, and more frequently if indicators of impairment exist. Impairment testing for goodwill is performed at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is an operating segment or one level below an operating segment if the component constitutes a business for which discrete financial information is available, and management regularly reviews the operating results of that component. Our reporting units are the same as our reportable segments, Home & Community Services and Episodes of Care Services.
We perform an assessment of goodwill utilizing either a qualitative or quantitative impairment test. The qualitative impairment test assesses several factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If management concludes it is more likely than not that the fair value of the entity is less than its carrying amount, a quantitative fair value test is performed.
In a quantitative impairment test, management assesses goodwill by comparing the carrying amount of each reporting unit to its fair value. We estimate the fair value of each of our reporting units using either an income approach, a market valuation approach, a transaction valuation approach or a blended approach.
If the fair value exceeds the carrying value of a reporting unit, goodwill is not considered impaired. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, goodwill is considered impaired and we would recognize an impairment loss equal to the excess of a reporting unit’s carrying amount over its fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
We perform discounted cash flow analyses which utilize projected cash flows as well as a residual value, which is discounted to the present value in order to arrive at a reporting unit fair value. The determination of whether or not goodwill has become impaired involves a significant level of judgment in the assumptions and estimates underlying the approach used to determine the value of our reporting units. Actual results could differ from management’s estimates, and such differences could be material to our combined-consolidated financial position and results of operations. See “Risk factors.”
We performed a quantitative assessment in 2020 for our Home & Community Services reporting unit and our Episodes of Care Services reporting unit. Given the significant excess of the estimated fair value over the carrying value for each reporting unit, we do not believe an inconsequential change in the underlying assumptions would have a significant impact on the results and result in a goodwill impairment. However, if there are any unfavorable changes in growth assumptions, particularly related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, if growth related to new product lines does not materialize over time or if the long-term construct of the BPCI-A program or any successor program is materially changed, this could lead to a potential failure in the goodwill impairment testing process in future periods.
We review the carrying value of other long-lived assets or groups of assets, including property and equipment, internally developed software costs and other intangible assets, to be used in operations whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable.
Intangible assets with definite lives subject to amortization include customer relationships, acquired and capitalized software and trade names. Acquired intangible assets are initially recorded at fair value and are amortized on a basis consistent with the timing and pattern of expected cash flows used to value the intangible asset, generally on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life. Capitalized software is recorded for certain costs incurred for the development of internal-use software. These costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected economic life of the software.
We assess the recoverability of an asset or group of assets by determining whether the carrying value of the asset or group of assets exceeds the sum of the projected undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the assets over the remaining economic life of the asset or the primary asset in the group of assets. If such testing indicates the carrying value of the asset or group of assets is not recoverable, we estimate the fair value of the asset or group of assets using various valuation methodologies, including discounted cash flow models and quoted market values, as necessary. If the fair value of those assets or groups of assets is less than carrying value, we record an impairment loss equal to the excess of the carrying value over the estimated fair value.
There was no impairment of property and equipment during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019. We incurred an asset impairment charge of $1.0 million on property and equipment that was no longer being used for the year ended December 31, 2018.
We recorded an asset impairment charge of $0.8 million and $1.5 million related to certain acquired and capitalized software during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, as a result of the discontinued use of the software.
We recorded an asset impairment charge of $4.9 million on a trade name during the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of the discontinued use of certain trade names due to our rebranding which was announced in December 2019. We recorded an asset impairment charge of $16.0 million on trade names during the year ended December 31, 2018 as a result of the discontinued use of certain trade names due to our rebranding in 2018.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Below, we include a description of certain recent accounting pronouncements that may have an impact on our financial statements. See Note 2 to our combined-consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
In May 2014, FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The new revenue recognition standard provides a five-step model to determine when and how revenue is recognized. The core principle is that a company should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. This guidance was effective for nonpublic companies for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2018 and is applied either retrospectively to each period presented or as a cumulative-effect adjustment as of the date of adoption. We used the modified retrospective method to adopt the new revenue recognition guidance on January 1, 2019. Adoption of the new standard did not have a material impact to our revenue recognition, with approximately $0.2 million recognized as a cumulative impact increase in accumulated deficit upon adoption. Remedy Partners adopted this new accounting guidance effective January 1, 2019, prior to our acquisition of Remedy Partners and its inclusion in our combined-consolidated financial statements. This new guidance did have a material impact on the timing of revenue recognition for Remedy Partners.
In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-08, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718) and Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Codification Improvements-Share-Based Consideration Payable to a Customer (“ASU 2019-08”). ASU 2019-08 requires that an entity measure and classify share-based payment awards granted to a customer by applying the guidance in Topic 718. The amount recorded as a reduction of the transaction price is required to be measured on the basis of the grant-date fair value of the share-based payment award in accordance with Topic 718. The grant date is the date at which a grantor (supplier) and a grantee (customer) reach a mutual understanding of the key terms and conditions of a share-based payment award. ASU 2019-08 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. We elected to early adopt this new guidance for interim periods in 2020 as it relates to the customer EARs. The initial grant date fair value of the EAR agreements is being recorded as a reduction of the transaction price.
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). The new lease standard requires lessees to recognize leases on the balance sheet by recording a right-of-use asset and lease liability. This guidance is effective for nonpublic entities for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2021. Early adoption is permitted. We are evaluating the impact of this new guidance on our financial statements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326) (“ASU 2016-13”). ASU 2016-13 introduces the current expected credit losses methodology for estimating allowances for credit losses. ASU 2016-13 applies to all financial instruments carried at amortized cost and off-balance-sheet credit exposures not accounted for as insurance, including loan commitments, standby letters of credit, and financial guarantees. The new accounting standard does not apply to trading assets, loans held for sale, financial assets for which the fair value option has been elected, or loans and receivables between entities under common control. ASU 2016-13 is effective for nonpublic entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. We are evaluating the impact of this new guidance on our financial statements.
Emerging growth company status
Pursuant to the JOBS Act, an emerging growth company is provided the option to adopt new or revised accounting standards that may be issued by FASB or the SEC either (i) within the same periods as those otherwise applicable to non-emerging growth companies or (ii) within the same time periods as private companies. We intend to take advantage of the exemption for complying with new or revised accounting standards within the same time periods as private companies. Accordingly, the information contained herein may be different than the information you receive from other public companies.
We also intend take advantage of some of the reduced regulatory and reporting requirements of emerging growth companies pursuant to the JOBS Act so long as we qualify as an emerging growth company, including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation and exemptions from the requirements of holding non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation and golden parachute payments.