Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This discussion and analysis may include statements regarding our expectations with respect to our future performance, liquidity, and capital resources. Such statements, along with any other non-historical statements in the discussion, are forward-looking. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, factors listed in other documents we file with the SEC. We do not assume an obligation to update any forward- looking statement. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any of the forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K. See “SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD- LOOKING STATEMENTS” above.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the results of our operations for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. Certain columns may not add due to rounding.
Revenues
For the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, revenues were $3,979,049 and $4,362,585 respectively. The decrease was primarily due to the COVID 19 pandemic which had significant impact on the restaurant supply industry.
Cost of goods sold
For the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, cost of goods sold were $2,153,311 and $2,851,940 respectively. The decrease was primarily due to the COVID 19 pandemic which had significant impact on the restaurant supply industry.
Gross Profit
For the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, gross profit was $1,825,738 and $1,510,645, respectively. The increase was primarily due to the higher margin from the Indigo dye and NUG business. The gross profit margin was 45.88% and 34.63%, respectively, for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
Selling, general and administrative, expenses
For the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, selling, general and administrative expenses were $5,767,335 and $13,636,211 respectively. The decrease was due to a decrease in stock compensation expenses for employees, legal, and consulting fees during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Non-operating income expenses
The Company had total non-operating expense of $2,091,204 and $9,408,995 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in non-operating income is mainly related to the changes in fair value of derivative liabilities.
Net loss
Net loss totaled $5,926,134 for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to a net loss of $21,534,571 for the year ended June 30, 2020. The decrease was due to a decrease in stock compensation expenses for employees, legal, and consulting fees during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Outstanding Litigation
The Company is a plaintiff, in Contra Costa County, California, in a suit against Diversified Products Group Inc. (DPG), including its former employees and Chairman of the Company. The matter has been settled and is pending dismissal of the entire action.
On December 11, 2013, the Company was served with a complaint from two convertible note holders and investors in the Company. On February 21, 2017, the Company signed a settlement agreement with the plaintiffs in the matter of Hannan vs. Sugarmade. Under the terms of the settlement agreement, the company agreed to pay the plaintiffs $227,000 to settle all claims against the Company, which included the payoff of two notes outstanding. The parties had estimated the value of the notes at approximately $80,000. As of June 30, 2020, third parties had purchased two (2) notes of approximately $80,000. As of June 30, 2021, there remains a balance, plus accrued interest on the $227,000 and on the $80,000 due under the notes.
There can be no assurances the ultimate liability relative to these lawsuits will not exceed what is outlined above.
Related Party Transactions
On January 23, 2013, SWC received a loan from an employee for $40,000. The loan bears no interest. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, the balance of loans payable is $15,427 and $15,427, respectively.
On July 7, 2016, SWC received a loan from an employee. The amount of the loan bears no interest and amortized on a monthly basis over the life of the loan. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, the balance of the loans payable were $49,447 and $30,000, respectively.
On November 21, 2016, SWC received a loan from an employee. The amount of the loan bears no interest and due in September 30, 2017. As of June 30, 2021. the note was in default. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, the balance of the loans payable were $83,275 and $5,943, respectively.
On September 1, 2017, the Company had related party transaction with LMK Capital LLC, a related party company owned by Jimmy Chan, the Company’s CEO. The amount of the loan payable/receivable bears no interest and due on demand. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, the balance of the loan payable to LMK were $26,452 and $0, respectively, and the balance of loan receivable were $0 and $122,535, respectively.
On May 25, 2021, Lemon Glow received a loan from an officer. The amount of the loan bears no interest and due on demand. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, the balance of the loans were $3,000 and $0, respectively.
Leverage Ratio
Due to net losses from the previous years, the Company’s insolvency is a result of their stockholder’s deficit. Total liabilities amounted to $14,662,733 and the stockholders’ equity was $4,770,218, resulting in a debt to equity ratio of 3.07:1.
Going Concern
The Company sustained continued operating losses during the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. The Company’s continuation as a going concern is dependent on its ability to generate sufficient cash flows from operations to meet its obligations, in which it has not been successful, and/or obtaining additional financing from its shareholders or other sources, as may be required.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern; however, the above condition raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to do so. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Management is endeavoring to increase revenue-generating operations. While priority is on generating cash from operations through the sale of the Company’s products, management is also seeking to raise additional working capital through various financing sources, including the sale of the Company’s equity and/or debt securities, which may not be available on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. If such financing is not available on satisfactory terms, we may be unable to continue our business as desired and our operating results will be adversely affected. In addition, any financing arrangement may have potentially adverse effects on us and/or our stockholders. Debt financing (if available and undertaken) will increase expenses, must be repaid regardless of operating results and may involve restrictions limiting our operating flexibility. If we issue equity securities to raise additional funds, the percentage ownership of our existing stockholders will be reduced and the new equity securities may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of the current holders of our common stock.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have primarily financed our operations through the sale of unregistered equity, loans and convertible notes payable. As of June 30, 2021, our Company had a cash balance of $1,396,944, current assets of $4,151,909 and total assets of $19,432,951. We had current liabilities of $8,815,251 and total liabilities of $14,662,733. Stockholders’ equity was $4,770,218 as of June 30, 2021.
The following is a summary of cash provided by or used in each of the indicated types of activities during the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020:
Net cash used in operating activities was $4,314,832 for the year ended June 30, 2021, and $1,984,876 for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was attributable to the change in accounts receivable, prepayments, accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was $372,210 and $132,494. The increase was attributable to investment proceeds from Lemon Glow and purchase of fixed assets.
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $5,642,982 for the year ended June 30, 2021. Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $2,524,003 for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in cash inflow in 2021 was mainly due to increased proceeds from equity sales.
Our capital requirements going forward will consist of financing our operations until we are able to reach a level of revenues and gross margins adequate to equal or exceed our ongoing operating expenses. Other than the notes payable discussed above, borrowings from our bank and the production credit facility with our suppliers, we do not have any credit agreements or other sources of liquidity immediately available to us.
Given estimates of our Company’s future operating results and our credit arrangements with our suppliers, we are currently forecasting that we will need to secure additional financing to obtain adequate financial resources to reach profitability. As of the date of this report, we estimate that the cash necessary to implement our current business plan for the next twelve (12) months is approximately $5,000,000.
Based on our need to raise additional funds to implement our business plans for the next twelve months, we have included a discussion concerning the presentation of our financial statements on a going concern basis in the notes to our financial statements and our independent public accountants have included a similar discussion in their opinion on our financial statements through June 30, 2021. We will be required in the near future to issue debt or sell our Company’s equity securities in order to raise additional cash, although there are no firm arrangements in place for any such financing at this time. We cannot provide any assurances as to whether we will be able to secure the necessary financing, or the terms of any such financing transaction if one were to occur. The failure to secure such financing could severely curtail our plans for future growth or in more severe scenarios, the continued operations of our Company.
Capital Expenditures
Our current plans call for our Company to expend significant amounts for capital expenditures for the foreseeable future beyond relatively insignificant expenditures for office furniture and information technology related equipment and employees as it is part of the requirement to build the infrastructure needed to support the current growth. At the same time, we will continually evaluating the production processes of our third party contract manufacturers to determine if there are investments, we could make in their processes to achieve manufacturing improvements and significant cost savings. Any such desired investments would require additional cash above our current forecast requirements.
Critical Accounting Policies Involving Management Estimates and Assumptions
Use of Fair Value
The Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (the “FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”)Topic 820 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value, establishes a three-level valuation hierarchy for disclosure of fair value measurement and enhances disclosure requirements for fair value measurements. The valuation hierarchy is based upon the transparency of inputs to the valuation of an asset or liability as of the measurement date. The three levels are defined as follows:
Level l - observable inputs that reflect quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
Level 2 - include other inputs that are directly or indirectly observable in the marketplace.
Level 3 - unobservable inputs which are supported by little or no market activities.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Background on FASB’s Development of New Revenue Recognition Standard
In May 2014, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606)” (“ASU 2014-09”). ASU 2014-09 requires an entity to recognize the amount of revenue to which it expects to be entitled for the transfer of promised goods or services to customers. ASU 2014-09 will replace most existing revenue recognition guidance in U.S. GAAP when it becomes effective and permits the use of either the retrospective or cumulative effect transition method. The guidance also requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from customer contracts. In August 2015, the FASB issued ASU No. 2015-14, “Deferral of the Effective Date” (“ASU 2015-14”), which defers the effective date for ASU 2014-09 by one year. For public entities, the guidance in ASU 2014-09 will be effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017 (including interim reporting periods within those periods), and for all other entities, ASU 2014-09 will be effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim reporting periods within annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019. In March 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-08, “Principal versus Agent Considerations (Reporting Revenue versus Net)” (“ASU 2016-08”), which clarifies the implementation guidance on principal versus agent considerations in the new revenue recognition standard. In April 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-10, “Identifying Performance Obligations and Licensing” (“ASU 2016-10”), which reduces the complexity when applying the guidance for identifying performance obligations and improves the operability and understandability of the license implementation guidance. In May 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-12 “Narrow-Scope Improvements and Practical Expedients” (“ASU 2016-12”), which amends the guidance on transition, collectability, noncash consideration and the presentation of sales and other similar taxes. In December 2016, the FASB further issued ASU 2016-20, “Technical Corrections and Improvements to Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“ASU 2016-20”), which makes minor corrections or minor improvements to the Codification that are not expected to have a significant effect on current accounting practice or create a significant administrative cost to most entities. The amendments are intended to address implementation and provide additional practical expedients to reduce the cost and complexity of applying the new revenue standard. These amendments have the same effective date as the new revenue standard.
Cash
Cash and cash equivalents consist of amounts held as bank deposits and highly liquid debt instruments purchased with an original maturity of three months or less.
From time to time, we may maintain bank balances in interest bearing accounts in excess of the $250,000 currently insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation for interest bearing accounts (there is currently no insurance limit for deposits in noninterest bearing accounts). We have not experienced any losses with respect to cash. Management believes our Company is not exposed to any significant credit risk with respect to its cash.
Accounts receivable
Accounts receivable are carried at their estimated collectible amounts, net of any estimated allowances for doubtful accounts. We grant unsecured credit to our customer’s deemed credit worthy. Ongoing credit evaluations are performed and potential credit losses estimated by management are charged to operations on a regular basis. At the time any particular account receivable is deemed uncollectible, the balance is charged to the allowance for doubtful accounts. The Company had accounts receivable net of allowances of $435,598 as of June 30, 2021 and of $134,517 as of June 30, 2020.
Inventory
Inventory consists of finished goods paper and paper-based products ready for sale and is stated at the lower of cost or market. We value inventories using the weighted average costing method (approximate FIFO costing method). We regularly review inventory and consider forecasts of future demand, market conditions and product obsolescence. If the estimated realizable value of our inventory is less than cost, we make provisions in order to reduce its carrying value to its estimated market value.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are carried at cost less accumulated depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization of property and equipment are computed principally using accelerated and straight-line methods using lives of 5-15 years for machine and equipment, 2-5 years for vehicles, 3-5 years for production, and 30 years for land improvements.
Expenditures for renewals and betterments are capitalized while repairs and maintenance costs are normally charged to the statement of operations in the year in which they are incurred. In situations where it can be clearly demonstrated that the expenditure has resulted in an increase in the future economic benefits expected to be obtained from the use of the asset, the expenditure is capitalized as an additional cost of the asset.
Upon sale or disposal of an asset, the historical cost and related accumulated depreciation or amortization of such asset were removed from their respective accounts and any gain or loss is recorded in the statements of income.
The Company reviews the carrying value of property, plant, and equipment for impairment whenever events and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable from the estimated future cash flows expected to result from its use and eventual disposition. In cases where undiscounted expected future cash flows are less than the carrying value, an impairment loss is recognized equal to an amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of assets. The factors considered by management in performing this assessment include current operating results, trends and prospects, the manner in which the property is used, and the effects of obsolescence, demand, competition and other economic factors. Based on this assessment, no impairment expenses for property, plant, and equipment was recorded in operating expenses during the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
Intangible assets, net
Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their estimated useful life. The Company monitors conditions related to these assets to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining amortization period. The Company tests its intangible assets with finite lives for potential impairment whenever management concludes events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. The original estimate of an asset’s useful life and the impact of an event or circumstance on either an asset’s useful life or carrying value involve significant judgment.
Derivative Instruments
The fair value of derivative instruments is recorded and shown separately under current liabilities. Changes in the fair value of derivatives liability are recorded in the consolidated statement of operations under non-operating income (expense).
Our Company evaluates all of its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the consolidated statements of operations. For stock-based derivative financial instruments, the Company uses a Lattice Binomial model to value the derivative instruments at inception and on subsequent valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Stock Based Compensation
Stock based compensation cost is measured at the date of grant, based on the calculated fair value of the stock-based award, and will be recognized as expense over the employee’s requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the award). We estimate the fair value of employee stock options granted using the Binomial Option Pricing Model. Key assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock options will include the exercise price of the award, the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant, the expected option term, the risk-free interest rate at the date of grant, the expected volatility and the expected annual dividend yield on our common stock.
Loss Per Share
We calculate basic earnings per share (“EPS”) by dividing our net loss by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period, without considering common stock equivalents. Diluted EPS is computed by dividing net income or net loss by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period and the weighted average number of dilutive common stock equivalents, such as options and warrants. Options and warrants are only included in the calculation of diluted EPS when their effect is dilutive. As of June 30, 2021, there are approximately 1,172,004,759 potential shares issuable upon conversion of convertible debts, and 10,578,880 shares of warrants were excluded in calculating diluted loss per share for the year ended June 30, 2021 due to the fact that issuance of the shares is anti-dilutive as a result of the Company’s net loss.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their perspective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which the temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are recorded, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
As a result of the implementation of certain provisions of ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”), which clarifies the accounting and disclosure for uncertainty in tax position, as defined, ASC 740 seeks to reduce the diversity in practice associated with certain aspect of the recognition and measurement related to accounting for income taxes. We adopted the provisions of ASC 740 as of October 2, 2008 and have analyzed filing positions in each of the federal and state jurisdictions where we are required to file income tax returns, as well as open tax years in these jurisdictions. We have identified the U.S. federal and California as our “major” tax jurisdictions and generally, we remain subject to Internal Revenue Service examination of our 2013 U.S. federal income tax returns. However, we have certain tax attribute carryforwards, which will remain subject to review and adjustment by the relevant tax authorities until the statute of limitations closes with respect to the year in which such attributes are utilized.
We believe that our income tax filing positions and deductions will be sustained on audit and do not anticipate any adjustments that will result in a material change to our financial position. Therefore, no reserves for uncertain income tax positions have been recorded pursuant to ASC 740. In addition, we did not record a cumulative effect adjustment related to the adoption of ASC 740. Our policy for recording interest and penalties associated with income-based tax audits is to record such items as a component of income taxes. We have no interest or penalties as of June 30, 2021.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). The new standard establishes an ROU model that requires a lessee to record a ROU asset and a lease liability on the balance sheet for all leases with terms longer than 12 months. Leases will be classified as either finance or operating, with classification affecting the pattern of expense recognition in the income statement. The new standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within those fiscal years. A modified retrospective transition approach is required for lessees for capital and operating leases existing at, or entered into after, the beginning of the earliest comparative period presented in the financial statements, with certain practical expedients available. The Company have adopted this ASU on the consolidated financial statements in the quarter ended September 30, 2019.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, “Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes”. The pronouncement simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes”. The pronouncement also improves consistent application of and simplifies U.S. GAAP for other areas of Topic 740 by clarifying and amending existing guidance. ASU 2019-12 will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2021, with early adoption permitted. We are still evaluating the impact this guidance will have on our consolidated financial statements.
In January 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-01, Investments - Equity Securities (Topic 321), Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323), and Derivative and Hedging (Topic 815), which clarifies the interaction of rules for equity securities, the equity method of accounting, and forward contracts and purchase options on certain types of securities. The guidance clarifies how to account for the transition into and out of the equity method of accounting when considering observable transactions under the measurement alternative. The ASU is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim reporting periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact of the new guidance on our consolidated financial statements.