ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The discussion in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” contains trend analysis, estimates and other forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, as amended, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act, as amended. These forward-looking statements include, without limitation, statements containing the words “anticipates,” “believes,” “continues,” “could,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “may,” “plans,” “seeks,” “should,” “will,” and other words of similar import or the negative of those terms or expressions. Such forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties, estimates and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements, or industry results, to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Actual results could differ materially from those set forth in such forward-looking statements as a result of, but not limited to, the “Risk Factors” described in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should read the following discussion and analysis along with the “Selected Financial Data” and the Consolidated Financial Statements and notes attached to those statements included elsewhere in this report.
In addition, the section of this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage genomic medicine company committed to translating ground-breaking science into medicines that transform the lives of patients with serious diseases. We plan to deliver on this mission through (i) development of our clinical and preclinical product candidates, (ii) our novel science and (iii) our in-house manufacturing capabilities.
Our current clinical-stage product candidates are:
•Giroctocogene fitelparvovec, also known as SB-525, our lead product candidate, is a gene therapy for the treatment of hemophilia A and is currently being evaluated in the registrational Phase 3 AFFINE (efficAcy and saFety Factor vIii geNe thErapy) clinical trial. We are developing giroctocogene fitelparvovec with our collaborator Pfizer Inc., or Pfizer;
•ST-920, our wholly-owned gene therapy product candidate for the treatment of Fabry disease, is currently being evaluated in our Phase 1/2 STAAR clinical study;
•BIVV003, our cell therapy product candidate for the treatment of sickle cell disease, or SCD, is currently being evaluated in our Phase 1/2 PRECIZN-1 clinical study. We are developing BIVV003 with our collaborator Sanofi S.A., or Sanofi; and
•ST-400, our cell therapy product candidate for the treatment of transfusion dependent beta thalassemia, is currently being evaluated in our Phase 1/2 Thales clinical study. We are developing ST-400 with our collaborator Sanofi.
In addition, we expect to initiate clinical studies for two additional product candidates in 2021:
•TX200, our wholly-owned Chimeric Antigen Receptor, or CAR, engineered regulatory T cell, or CAR-Treg, cell therapy product candidate for the treatment of HLA-A2 mismatched kidney transplant rejection; and
•KITE-037, our allogeneic anti-CD19 CAR-T cell therapy product candidate for the treatment of cancer. We are developing KITE-037 with our collaborator Kite Pharma Inc., or Kite, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Gilead Sciences, Inc.
Moreover, we are focusing our preclinical development in emerging areas for us including CAR-Treg cell therapies for autoimmune disorders and genome engineering for neurological diseases. Indications for our other preclinical programs include neurodevelopmental disorders, cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, or IBD, tauopathies such as Alzheimer’s and neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS, multiple sclerosis, or MS, and Huntington’s disease, some of which we are developing with our collaborators Biogen MA, Inc. and Biogen International GmbH, which we refer to together as Biogen, Kite, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Inc., or Novartis, Pfizer and Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, or Takeda.
Our multiple collaborations with biopharmaceutical companies bring us important financial and strategic benefits and reinforce the potential of our research and development efforts and our zinc finger protein, or ZFP, technology platform. They leverage our collaborators’ therapeutic and clinical expertise and commercial resources with the goal to bring our medicines more rapidly to patients. We believe these collaborations reflect of the value of our ZFP technology platform and will potentially expand the addressable markets of our product candidates. To date, we have received approximately $815.0 million in upfront licensing fees, milestone payments, and proceeds from sale of our common stock to collaborators and have the right to earn up to $7.0 billion in future milestone payments from our collaborations, in addition to potential product royalties.
For additional information regarding our business, see “Business” in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on
Form 10-K.
Recent Business Highlights
•In December 2020, we and Pfizer jointly announced updated follow-up data from the Phase 1/2 Alta study of giroctocogene fitelparvovec, an investigational gene therapy for the treatment of severe hemophilia A.
•In October 2020, we and Pfizer jointly announced that we dosed the first participant in the registrational Phase 3 AFFINE clinical trial of giroctocogene fitelparvovec.
•In August and September 2020, we dosed the first two patients in our Phase 1/2 STAAR study evaluating our ST-920 gene therapy product candidate to treat Fabry disease, a rare inherited metabolic disease. In February 2021, we dosed the first patient in the second cohort.
•In July 2020, we entered into a collaboration agreement with Novartis to develop and commercialize gene regulation therapies to treat three neurodevelopmental targets, including genes linked to autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability.
•In February 2020, we entered into a collaboration agreement with Biogen to develop gene regulation therapies for Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, neuromuscular and other neurological diseases.
•In 2020, we brought in-house AAV manufacturing capabilities online in our Brisbane, California headquarters.
Estimated Impacts of Evolving COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel coronavirus disease, or COVID-19, outbreak a global pandemic, and since such time, actions taken around the world to help mitigate the spread of COVID-19 have included varying restrictions on travel, quarantines in certain areas, and forced closures for certain types of public places and businesses, including in the three countries where we have most of our day-to-day operations, the United States, France and the United Kingdom. Our business has been directly impacted by pandemic restrictions aimed at reducing the spread of the disease, including multiple California executive orders, several semi-coordinated San Francisco Bay Area orders, several other state and additional local orders across the country and similar orders outside the United States, which, among other things, direct individuals to shelter at their places of residence, direct businesses and governmental agencies to cease non-essential operations at physical locations, prohibit certain non-essential gatherings, and order cessation of non-essential travel.
To comply with these orders, we implemented an operating plan to continue business operations during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including enhanced workplace safety protocols and modified working schedules in our laboratories. Employees who are able to fulfill their job duties working from home are required to work from home, and have been doing so since March 2020. These protocols and modifications have slowed our productivity and disrupted our business to a moderate degree and are likely to continue doing so through 2021. For example, we have experienced periodic short-term disruptions to our onsite laboratory and manufacturing operations while addressing positive cases of COVID-19 by onsite workers, and our laboratory and manufacturing operations could experience longer term disruptions in the future in the event of a significant outbreak of COVID-19 among our onsite workers. Moreover, from time to time, we have been required to reorganize and prioritize our research resources to mitigate moderate COVID-19 impacts arising from travel restrictions, laboratory density restrictions and laboratory supply constraints. If our research programs encounter longer-term disruptions, it could impact our ability to support our biopharmaceutical partners as contemplated in our collaboration agreements and could result in adjustments to our research timelines, although we do not believe that the short-term disruptions to date have resulted in any such impacts.
Additionally, our Phase 1/2 STAAR clinical study evaluating ST-920, our wholly-owned gene therapy product candidate for the treatment of Fabry disease, has experienced delays in its timeline due to COVID-19 impacts and the diversion of healthcare resources to fight the pandemic. For example, the clinical trial sites in the UK for this study have not been able to open due to the significant prevalence of COVID-19 in the UK. Additionally, we have experienced delays in recruiting, enrolling and dosing patients for this study at our US trial sites, due in some part to the understandable hesitation of patients to travel by plane to trial sites not within driving distance and to enter medical facilities during the pandemic and in other part to
trial sites prioritizing COVID-19 clinical care over research activities such as the STAAR study. Moreover, we have experienced some short-term delays in sourcing the necessary raw materials to manufacture supplies for the STAAR study due to COVID-19 impacts. We estimate that these challenges have set back our STAAR study timelines three to six months. While we currently still expect to share initial clinical study data by the end of 2021, this timeline could be revised if COVID-19 impacts to our enrollment and dosing of patients and to our sourcing of raw materials for this study intensify because of vaccination delays, new COVID-19 variants or unexpected events.
In addition, our STEADFAST clinical study evaluating TX200, our wholly-owned CAR-Treg cell therapy product candidate for the treatment of kidney transplant rejection, has experienced delays in its commencement timeline due to COVID-19 impacts related to manufacturing and technology transfer challenges with our CMOs. We estimate that these challenges have set back our commencement timeline by approximately three months. While we currently still expect to initiate this clinical study by the end of 2021, this timeline could be revised if COVID-19 impacts result in additional delays.
With respect to our partnered programs, the timelines for the studies and trials managed by our collaborators are also subject to potential delay in the future if these studies and trials experience similar challenges that we have experienced in our STAAR and STEADFAST studies.
Going forward, we will continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on our operations, research commitments and clinical trials and those of our collaborators, clinical trial sites and CMOs. The magnitude of these impacts will depend, in part, on the length and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic and related government orders and restrictions, and how the pandemic limits the ability of us and our business partners to operate business in the ordinary course. Disruptions to these operations, and possibly more severe disruptions in the future that could arise due to the extension of government orders or new government orders applicable in the places we operate or our industry generally or to us and our facilities specifically, could impede our ability to conduct research in a timely manner, comply with our research obligations to our collaborators and advance the development of our therapeutic programs. These delays and disruptions could result in adverse material impacts to our business, operating results and financial condition.
We do not anticipate any material negative impact on our financial condition in 2021 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe we are well positioned financially in the near term to execute on our wholly-owned and partnered research and clinical programs. We ended 2020 with $692.0 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and have raised an additional $15.7 million in cash through February 19, 2021 through sales of our common stock under our at-the-market offering program. Although we believe we are well capitalized currently, the effects of the evolving pandemic could result in disruption of global financial markets, impairing our ability to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. We do not currently anticipate any material impairments to the valuation of the financial assets or goodwill on our balance sheet as a result of COVID-19. We do not believe that the remote workplace arrangements we have implemented for our office-based employees have affected our financial reporting or control systems.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our business, operations and financial condition, either directly or indirectly, will depend on future developments that remain highly uncertain at the present time. These developments include the ultimate duration and severity of the pandemic, the impacts of new COVID-19 variants, travel restrictions, quarantines and social distancing requirements in the United States, France, United Kingdom and other countries, business closures or business disruptions and the effectiveness and timeliness of actions taken in the United States, France, United Kingdom and other countries to contain and treat the disease, including the effectiveness and timing of vaccination programs. Although certain government orders and restrictions have eased, and phased re-openings are underway, it is not certain when such restrictions and orders will be fully lifted, and recent resurgences in number and rates of infections and the surge of new variants of the virus may result in the return of prior orders and restrictions or new quarantine and shelter-in-place orders or other restrictions. As our understanding of events evolves and additional information becomes available, we may materially change our guidance relating to our revenues, expenses and timelines for manufacturing, clinical trials and research and development.
See also the section titled “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on risks and uncertainties related to the evolving COVID-19 pandemic.
Certain Components of Results of Operations
Our revenues have consisted primarily of revenues from upfront licensing fees, reimbursements for research services, milestones achievements and research grant funding. We expect revenues to continue to fluctuate from period to period and there can be no assurance that new collaborations or partner reimbursements will continue beyond their initial terms or that we are able to meet the milestones specified in these agreements.
We have incurred net losses since inception and expect to incur losses for at least the next several years as we continue our research and development activities. To date, we have funded our operations primarily through the issuance of equity securities and revenues from collaborations and research grants.
We expect to continue to devote substantial resources to research and development in the future and expect research and development expenses to increase in the next several years if we are successful in advancing our product candidates from research stage through clinical trials. Pursuant to the terms of our agreements with Biogen, Kite, Novartis, Pfizer and Sanofi, certain expenses related to research and development activities will be reimbursed to us. The reimbursement funds to be received from Biogen, Kite, Novartis, Pfizer and Sanofi will be recognized as revenue as the related costs are incurred and collection is reasonably assured.
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and personnel related expenses for executive, finance and administrative personnel, stock-based compensation expenses, professional fees, allocated facilities expenses, patent prosecution expenses and other general corporate expenses. As we continue to advance our product candidates into and through the clinic, we expect the growth of our business to require increased general and administrative expenses.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The accompanying discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related disclosures, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these Consolidated Financial Statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts in our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following policies to be the most critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations because they require us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain.
We believe our critical accounting policies and estimates relating to revenue recognition, including the estimated fair value of common shares issued as part of the transaction price and valuation of long-lives assets including goodwill and intangible assets are the more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
For a complete description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 1 - Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenues from research services generally as services are provided while revenues from non-refundable upfront fees are recognized over time either by measuring progress towards satisfaction of the relevant performance obligation using the input method (i.e., cumulative actual costs incurred relative to total estimated costs) or on a straight-line basis when a performance obligation is expected to be satisfied evenly over a period of time (when there is a stand-ready obligation).
The estimation of measure of progress is complex, involves significant judgment, and is affected by our estimates of the total costs required to complete the performance obligations including the total internal personnel costs and external costs to be incurred as well as, in certain cases, the estimated stand-ready obligation period. Changes in these estimates can have a material effect on our revenue recognition.
For a further description of our revenue recognition, see Note 4 - Major Customers, Partnerships and Strategic Alliances in the accompanying notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Valuation of Long-lived Assets including Goodwill and Intangible Assets
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration in a business combination to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. Any excess of purchase consideration over the fair value of net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired in-process research and development, or IPR&D, projects. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Allocation of purchase consideration to
identifiable assets and liabilities affects our amortization expense, as acquired finite-lived intangible assets are amortized over the useful lives, whereas any indefinite lived intangible assets, including goodwill, are not amortized. During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
We review goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances would more likely than not reduce the fair value these assets below their carrying values. As of December 31, 2020, no impairment of goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets was identified.
Long-lived assets, including property and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets, are reviewed for possible impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. The evaluation is performed at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. Recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate from the use and eventual disposition. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of property and equipment and intangible assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to fair value. We have not recorded any significant impairment charges during the years presented.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Revenues
Total revenues consisted of revenues from collaboration agreements and research grants. We anticipate revenues over the next several years will be derived primarily from our collaboration agreements with Biogen, Kite, Novartis, Pfizer and Sanofi as we continue to recognize upfront and milestone payments received under such agreements over time.
The increase of $15.8 million in revenues in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to the recognition of upfront license fees of $21.4 million and $4.1 million under our collaboration agreements with Biogen and Novartis entered into in 2020, respectively. In addition, an increase of $6.2 million in recognition of upfront license fee related to our C9ORF72 collaboration agreement with Pfizer due to advancement of the program.
These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $12.6 million in revenues related to our hemophilia A collaboration agreement with Pfizer due to a decrease in activities following the IND transfer in December 2019, and a decrease of $3.2 million in license revenue from our collaboration agreement with Sanofi primarily due to a change in estimate driven by a change in project scope and related project cost.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consisted primarily of compensation related expenses, including stock-based compensation, laboratory supplies, preclinical and clinical studies, manufacturing clinical supply, contracted research, allocated facilities and information technology expenses.
The increase of $34.7 million in research and development expenses in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by a $20.0 million increase in compensation expense as a result of increased headcount to support our programs, clinical trials and start-up of our internal manufacturing operations, a $14.2 million increase in allocated facility overhead costs as we ramped up our internal manufacturing operations, and a $2.1 million increase in preclinical, clinical, research and manufacturing supply expenses. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $1.7 million in travel and corporate costs due to COVID-19 travel restrictions. Stock-based compensation expense included in research and development expenses was $13.5 million and $10.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The table below shows research and development expenses related to our clinical and preclinical programs. As shown in the table below, preclinical and research programs contributed $50.7 million of the increase in our research and development expenses primarily due to advancement of our technical platform and our wholly-owned preclinical programs, and our CNS programs partnered with Biogen and Novartis in 2020, offset by a decrease of $16.0 million in our clinical programs in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily driven by a decrease in activities following the IND transfer for our giroctocogene fitelparvovec program in 2019.
The length of time required to complete our development programs and our development costs for those programs may be impacted by the scope and timing of enrollment in clinical trials for our product candidates, our decisions to pursue development programs in other therapeutic areas, and whether we pursue development of our product candidates with a partner or collaborator or independently. For example, our product candidates are being developed in multiple therapeutic areas, and we do not yet know-how many of those therapeutic areas we will continue to pursue. Furthermore, the scope and number of clinical trials required to obtain regulatory approval for each pursued therapeutic area is subject to the input of the applicable regulatory authorities, and we have not yet sought such input for all potential therapeutic areas that we may elect to pursue, and even after having given such input, applicable regulatory authorities may subsequently require additional clinical studies prior to granting regulatory approval based on new data generated by us or other companies, or for other reasons outside of our control. As a condition to any regulatory approval, we may also be subject to post-marketing development commitments, including additional clinical trial requirements. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration of or completion costs associated with our development programs.
In any event, our potential therapeutic products are subject to a lengthy and uncertain regulatory process that may not result in our receipt of any necessary regulatory approvals. Failure to receive the necessary regulatory approvals would prevent us from commercializing the product candidates affected. In addition, clinical trials of our product candidates may fail to demonstrate safety and efficacy, which could prevent or significantly delay regulatory approval. A discussion of the risks and uncertainties with respect to our research and development activities, including completing the development of our product candidates, and the consequences to our business, financial position and growth prospects can be found in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
General and Administrative Expenses
The increase of $5.4 million in general and administrative expenses in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to an increase of $7.3 million in headcount driven compensation costs, and an increase of $6.3 million in professional fees associated
with our 2020 business activities. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $7.4 million in allocated facility overhead costs, and a decrease of $1.1 million in travel related expenses due to COVID-19 travel restrictions. Stock-based compensation expense included in general and administrative expenses was $12.2 million and $9.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Interest and other income, net
The decrease of $1.0 million in interest and other income, net in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to a decrease of $5.1 million in interest income reflecting the decline in market interest rates. This decrease was partially offset by an increase of $3.1 million in foreign exchange gains as a result of favorable foreign exchange rates and an increase of $1.1 million in other income.
Income tax expense
Provision for income taxes was $0.3 million, zero, and zero for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The income tax expense for 2020 was primarily due to an increase in the long-term liability associated with uncertain tax positions, foreign income taxes and state income taxes. This expense was partially offset by a foreign deferred tax benefit.
As of December 31, 2020, we had net operating loss carryforwards for federal and state income tax purposes of approximately $622.6 million and $261.7 million, respectively. The federal net operating loss generated before 2018 will begin to expire in 2024 and will keep expiring through 2037, if not utilized. Federal net operating losses generated in 2018 will carry forward indefinitely. If not utilized, the state net operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire in 2029. We also have federal and state research tax credit carryforwards of $21.9 million and $18.3 million, respectively. The federal research credits will begin to expire in 2021, while the state research credits have no expiration date. Utilization of our net operating loss carryforwards and research tax credit carryforwards may be subject to substantial annual limitations due to the ownership change limitations provided by the Internal Revenue Code and similar state provisions. The annual limitation could result in the expiration of the net operating loss carryforwards and research tax credit carryforwards before use. Due to the carryforwards related to the net operating losses and research and development tax credits, we do not expect to pay any U.S. federal taxes related to income in the near future.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Since inception, we have incurred significant net losses, and we have funded our operations primarily through the issuance of equity securities, payments from corporate collaborators and strategic partners and research grants.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaling $692.0 million compared to $384.3 million as of December 31, 2019 with the increase primarily attributable to our collaboration with and sale of our common stock to Biogen, which became effective and closed in April 2020, and our collaboration with Novartis, which became effective in July 2020 and included an upfront fee. Our most significant use of capital was for employee compensation and external research and development expenses, such as manufacturing, clinical trials and preclinical activity related to our therapeutic programs. Our cash and investment balances are held in a variety of interest-bearing instruments, including commercial paper, money market funds, corporate debt securities, certificates of deposit, asset-backed securities, and U.S. government-sponsored entity debt securities. Cash in excess of immediate requirements is invested in accordance with our investment policy with a view toward capital preservation and liquidity.
Since the beginning of 2017, we have received significant amounts of capital as upfront payments under our collaboration agreements. In addition, our collaboration agreements provide for the payment of development, regulatory, and commercial milestones. For example, in May 2020, we received an upfront license fee of $125.0 million from Biogen upon the effectiveness of our collaboration and license agreement for the research, development and commercialization of gene regulation therapies for the treatment of neurological diseases. And in August 2020, we received an upfront license fee of $75.0 million from Novartis upon the effectiveness of our collaboration and license agreement for the development and commercialization of gene regulation therapies for the treatment of neurodevelopment disorders. For more information, see “Business - Collaborations” in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In August 2020, we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement with Jefferies LLC, or Jefferies, providing for the sale of up to $150.0 million of our common stock from time to time in ‘at-the-market’ offerings under our existing shelf registration statement. As of February 19, 2021, we have sold 1,034,762 shares of our common stock under the sales agreement for net proceeds of approximately $15.7 million.
While we expect our rate of cash usage to increase in the future, in particular to support our product development endeavors, we currently believe that our available cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, when combined with
additional capital raises and expected revenues from collaborations, strategic partnerships and research grants, will be adequate to fund our currently planned operations through at least the next 12 months from the date the financial statements are issued. During this period of uncertainty and volatility related to the evolving COVID-19 pandemic, we will continue to monitor our liquidity.
Cash Flows
Operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $169.9 million in 2020 compared to net cash used in operating activities of $144.4 million in 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to favorable changes in working capital of $325.6 million driven by an increase in deferred revenues of $252.2 million, reflecting the cash received under the Biogen and Novartis collaboration agreements, and a decrease in accounts receivable of $63.9 million. This increase was partially offset by an increase in our net loss of $25.7 million.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $271.6 million in 2020, and $59.8 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to a net increase of $217.3 million in the purchase of marketable securities, partially offset by a decrease of $6.0 million in purchases of property and equipment.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $153.1 million in 2020, and $142.0 million in 2019. The increase was primarily attributed to the $145.4 million estimated fair value of the Biogen Shares issued in April 2020, net of $2.9 million of issuance costs, partially offset by $136.3 million received in 2019 related to our April 2019 underwritten public offering.
Operating Capital and Capital Expenditure Requirements
We anticipate continuing to incur operating losses for at least the next several years. While we expect our rate of cash usage to increase in the future, in particular to support our product development endeavors, we currently believe that our available cash resources, when combined with additional capital raises and expected revenues from collaborations, strategic partners and research grants, will be adequate to fund our currently planned operations through at least the next 12 months from the date the financial statements are issued. Although we believe we are well capitalized currently, the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic could result in significant disruption of global financial markets, impairing our ability to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. Future capital requirements beyond the next 12 months will be substantial and we will need to raise substantial additional capital to fund the development, manufacturing and potential commercialization of our product candidates through equity or debt financing. In addition, as we focus our efforts on proprietary human therapeutics, we will need to seek FDA approvals of our product candidates, a process that could cost in excess of hundreds of millions of dollars per product. We regularly consider fund-raising opportunities and may decide, from time to time, to raise capital based on various factors, including market conditions and our plans of operation. Additional capital may not be available on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If adequate funds are not available, or if the terms of potential funding sources are unfavorable, our business and our ability to advance our product candidate pipeline would be harmed. Furthermore, any sales of additional equity securities, including sales pursuant to our at-the-market financing offering programs, may result in dilution to our stockholders, and any debt financing may include covenants that restrict our business.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many forward-looking factors, including the following:
•the initiation, progress, timing and completion of clinical trials for our product candidates and potential product candidates;
•the outcome, timing and cost of regulatory approvals;
•the success of our collaboration agreements;
•delays that may be caused by changing regulatory requirements;
•the number of product candidates that we pursue;
•the costs involved in filing and prosecuting patent applications and enforcing and defending patent claims;
•the timing and terms of future in-licensing and out-licensing transactions;
•the cost and timing of establishing sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution capabilities;
•the cost of procuring clinical and commercial supplies of our product candidates;
•the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products or technologies, including the costs associated with such acquisitions and investments; and
•the costs of potential disputes and litigation.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we had contractual obligations and commercial commitments as follows (in thousands):
Operating leases consist of base rents for facilities we occupy in Brisbane, California; Richmond, California; and Valbonne, France.
License obligations includes an ongoing license maintenance fee associated with cancellable in-licensed patent agreements.
Manufacturing obligations include the following non-cancelable material contractual commitments under manufacturing-related supplier arrangements as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):