ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on June 5, 2020 and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. Simultaneously with the consummation of our initial public offering, we consummated the private sale of an aggregate of 5,933,334 warrants, each exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share at $11.50 per share, to our Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of approximately $8.9 million. We intend to consummate an initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering that closed on September 24, 2020 and the Private Placement, and from additional issuances of, if any, our equity and our debt, or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
At December 31, 2020, we held cash of $1,121,103, current liabilities of $292,647 and deferred underwriting compensation of $12,075,000. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete an initial business combination will be successful.
Agreements for Business Combination
On February 12, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement with Merger Sub, Sharecare and the Stockholder Representative. If the Merger Agreement is adopted by the Company’s stockholders, and the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement are consummated, Merger Sub will merge with and into Sharecare, with the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub ceasing and Sharecare surviving the merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. In addition, in connection with and following the consummation of the Business Combination, the Company will be renamed “Sharecare, Inc.” and is referred to herein as “New Sharecare” as of the time following such change of name.
Sharecare, Inc. is a leading digital healthcare company that helps members consolidate and manage various components of their health in one place, regardless of where they are on their health journey.
The aggregate value of the consideration paid in respect of Sharecare is approximately $3.79 billion. Sharecare stockholders (other than holders of Sharecare Series D Preferred Stock) will receive consideration in the form of cash and shares of common stock of New Sharecare. A Sharecare stockholder will be deemed to have made a proper election to receive cash (A) if such Sharecare stockholder holds a number of shares of Sharecare common stock that represents 7.75% or more of such holder’s Aggregate Equity, with respect to a number of shares of Sharecare common stock equal to 7.75% of such holder’s Aggregate Equity, and (B) if such Sharecare common stock holds a number of shares of Sharecare common stock that represents less than 7.75% of such holder’s Aggregate Equity, with respect to all of such holder’s Sharecare common stock, an amount in cash for such cash electing share, without interest, equal to the Per Share Merger Consideration Value, subject to proration if the aggregate cash consideration to satisfy all deemed cash elections exceeds the Cash Consideration. The Cash Consideration is anticipated to be equal to the lesser of (i) (A) the proceeds available from the Trust Account established in connection with the Company’s initial public offering, after giving effect to any and all redemptions of public shares and the payment of transaction expenses and indebtedness, plus (B) the funds received by the Company in the Private Placement, plus (C) the amount of cash and cash equivalents of Sharecare (less, if the Strategic Financing is consummated prior to the Closing, the amount of proceeds of the Strategic Financing) determined in accordance with GAAP as of 11:59 p.m. Eastern Time on the day prior to the Closing Date, minus (D) the Transaction Bonuses, minus (E) $401.0 million; and (ii) solely to the extent reasonably necessary, based on the written advice of the Company’s nationally recognized tax counsel, to qualify either (A) the Business Combination as a reorganization under Section 368(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or (B) the Business Combination and the contributions by the equity investors of cash to the Company in exchange for the Company’s common stock through the Equity Financing pursuant to, and in accordance with the terms of the Merger Agreement and the Subscription Agreements, together as an integrated transaction described under Section 351 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, such amount designated by Sharecare to the Company not less than three days prior to the Closing (provided that under no circumstances shall the Cash Consideration be less than $0). Cash Consideration is calculated in this manner in order to ensure that, after satisfying the Company’s redemption obligations, paying transaction expenses and indebtedness, $401.0 million in cash is first retained on the balance sheet of New Sharecare before any cash is used to fund cash consideration to Sharecare stockholders. Although Sharecare currently has sufficient liquidity to fund its future operations, the Balance Sheet Threshold was mutually agreed upon between the Company and Sharecare based upon, among other things, considerations such as the amount of cash liquidity reasonably necessary to fund growth initiatives, support marketing efforts, provide additional working capital and for general corporate purposes. If the Balance Sheet Threshold is not satisfied, all consideration to Sharecare stockholders will be in the form of shares of common stock of New Sharecare. If the Cash Consideration exceeds the aggregate amount of cash which the Sharecare stockholders elect to receive, the amount of such excess shall remain at Sharecare. Holders of the Sharecare Series D Preferred Stock will receive shares of New Sharecare Series A Preferred Stock as consideration.
It is estimated that Cash Consideration will be approximately $275 million if there are no redemptions and $0 if maximum redemptions occur while still permitting the Company to satisfy its closing conditions. See “Sources and Uses of Funds for the Business Combination” on page 30 for more information. At the effective time of the Business Combination, the stock consideration to be issued to the then current holders of stock in Sharecare will be in the form of common stock of New Sharecare.
At the effective time, each Sharecare option that is outstanding and unexercised immediately prior to the effective time, whether or not then vested or exercisable, will be assumed by New Sharecare and shall be converted into a closing New Sharecare option with the original option terms provided that the number of shares of underlying such New Sharecare option will be determined by multiplying the number of shares of Sharecare common stock subject to such option immediately prior to the effective time, by the Exchange Ratio, which product shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number of shares, and the per share exercise price of such New Sharecare option will be determined by dividing the per share exercise price immediately prior to the effective time by the Exchange Ratio, which quotient shall be rounded down to the nearest whole cent.
At the effective time, each holder of Sharecare options entitled to receive closing New Sharecare options will also receive an additional number of contingent options equal to the product of (i) the number of Sharecare options held by such holder, and (ii) Earnout Ratio, which product will be rounded down to the nearest whole number of shares. Each contingent option will have the same per share exercise price as each closing New Sharecare option and will be subject to the original option terms. Each contingent option will become vested and exercisable on the later of the date set forth in the original option terms and, with respect to one half of the contingent options, the achievement of certain earnout conditions and, with respect to the remaining half of the contingent option, the achievement of the remaining earnout conditions, provided that the holder of the contingent option remains employed by New Sharecare or its subsidiary through such date. Any contingent options that have not vested and become exercisable on the fifth anniversary of the Closing Date shall automatically be cancelled and terminate on the following day and the holder thereof will have no rights with respect to such contingent options thereafter. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, if a contingent option is forfeited because a holder of the contingent option does not remain employed by, or in the service of, New Sharecare or its subsidiary through an applicable vesting date, the shares of New Sharecare common stock underlying such contingent option shall revert back to the earnout escrow account for release, if applicable, to the stockholder earnout group.
Subject to certain exceptions, at the effective time, each Sharecare warrant that is issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time and not expired or terminated pursuant to its terms, and held by a Specified Warrantholder, by virtue of the Business Combination and without any action on the part of New Sharecare, Sharecare or the holder of any such Sharecare warrant, will be converted into the right to receive a number of shares of New Sharecare common stock equal to (i) the Per Share Merger Consideration, multiplied by (ii) the number of shares of Sharecare capital stock issuable upon the exercise of such Sharecare warrant on a net exercise basis, less applicable taxes required to be withheld with respect to such payment. For the avoidance of doubt, any Sharecare warrant which has a per share exercise price that is greater than or equal to the Per Share Merger Consideration Value shall be cancelled at the effective time for no consideration or payment. As of the effective time, all Sharecare warrants shall no longer be outstanding and each former holder of a Sharecare warrant shall cease to have any rights with respect to such warrant. (except as described in the following sentence). Notwithstanding the foregoing, as of the effective time, by virtue of the Business Combination and without any action on the part of New Sharecare, Sharecare or the parties thereto, New Sharecare shall assume (i) certain contractual arrangements with Sharecare customers and other parties that provide for the issuance of Sharecare warrants upon achievement of certain milestones and (ii) certain unvested warrants to purchase Sharecare capital stock and other Sharecare warrants held by holders that are not Specified Warrantholders.
The Business Combination also calls for additional agreements, including, among others, the Subscription Agreements, Registration Rights Agreement, Sponsor Agreement, Non-Redemption Agreements, Sharecare Support Agreements and Acquiror Support Agreement as described elsewhere in the preliminary proxy statement/prospectus that we filed with the SEC on February 16, 2021.
Results of Operations
For the period from June 5, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we incurred a loss from operations of $224,785. Through December 31, 2020, our efforts have been limited to organizational activities, activities relating to the initial public offering, activities relating to identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates and activities relating to general corporate matters. We have not generated any revenue, other than interest income earned on the proceeds held in the Trust Account. As of December 31, 2020, $345,082,119 was held in the Trust Account (including $12,075,000 of deferred underwriting discounts and commissions and approximately $8.9 million from the Private Placement) and we had cash outside of trust of $1,121,103 and $292,647 in accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Except for the withdrawal of interest to pay taxes, if any, the Charter provides that none of the funds held in trust will be released from the Trust Account until the earlier of (i) the completion of an initial business combination; (ii) the redemption of any of the shares of Class A common stock included in the units sold in the initial public offering (the “Units”) properly submitted in connection with a stockholder vote to amend the Charter to modify the substance or timing of the Company’s obligation to redeem 100% of the common stock included in the Units being sold in the initial public offering if the Company does not complete an initial business combination by September 24, 2022 or with respect to any other material provisions relating to stockholders’ rights or pre-initial business combination activity or (iii) the redemption of 100% of the shares of Class A common stock included in the Units sold in the initial public offering if the Company is unable to complete a Business Combination by September 24, 2022. Through December 31, 2020, we have not withdrawn any funds from interest earned on the trust proceeds. Other than the deferred underwriting discounts and commissions, no amounts are payable to the underwriters of the initial public offering in the event of a business combination.
We have also agreed to reimburse an affiliate of the Sponsor for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our management team, in an amount not to exceed $15,000 per month in the event that such space and/or services are utilized and we do not pay a third party directly for such services. Upon completion of our initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. The administrative services fee commenced on September 25, 2020. For the period from June 5, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, the Company incurred $48,000 under this agreement. As of December 31, 2020, $12,000 is included in prepaid expenses in the accompanying balance sheet.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the period from June 5, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we incurred an aggregate of $306,904 for merger expenses, legal, accounting, and filing fees relating to our SEC reporting obligations and general corporate matters, and miscellaneous operating expenses.
We believe that we do have sufficient liquidity to meet our current obligations and allow us to operate through September 24, 2022, assuming that an initial business combination is not consummated during that time. Over this time period, we currently anticipate incurring expenses for the following purposes:
● due diligence and investigation of prospective target businesses;
● legal and accounting fees relating to our SEC reporting obligations and general corporate matters;
● structuring and negotiating an initial business combination, including the making of a down payment or the payment of exclusivity or similar fees and expenses; an
● other miscellaneous expenses.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2020, we had cash outside of the trust in the amount of $1,121,103 and $292,647 in accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial agreements involving assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an administrative agreement to reimburse the Sponsor for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our management team by the Sponsor, members of the Sponsor, and our management team or their affiliates in an amount not to exceed $15,000 per month in the event such space and/or services are utilized and we do not pay a third party directly for such services, from the date of closing of the Public Offering. Upon completion of a business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. The Company has identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
Offering Costs
We comply with the requirements of ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5 A, “Expenses of Offering.” We incurred offering costs in connection with our initial public offering of approximately $19,498,140, consisting principally of underwriter discounts of $18,975,000 (including approximately $12,075,000 of which payment is deferred) and approximately $523,140 of professional, printing, filing, regulatory and other costs were charged to stockholders’ equity upon completion of the initial public offering.
Investments Held in Trust
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in gain on marketable securities, dividends and interest held statements of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the 34,500,000 shares of Class A Common Stock included in the Units sold as part of the Public Offering contain a redemption feature as described in the prospectus for the Public Offering. In accordance with FASB ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity,” redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require the security to be classified outside of permanent equity. The Charter provides a minimum net tangible asset threshold of $5,000,001. The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and will adjust the carrying value of the security at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable shares will be affected by charges against additional paid-in capital.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the periods. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Public Offering (including the over-allotment) and Private Placement Warrants to purchase approximately 11,500,000 and 5,933,334 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock, respectively, in the calculation of diluted income per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method.
The Company’s statements of operations include a presentation of net income (loss) per share for common shares subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of net income (loss) per share. Net income (loss) per common share for basic and diluted Class A common stock for the period from June 5, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account of $82,119, net of franchise taxes of $82,119, and income taxes of nil by the weighted average number of Class A common stock since issuance. Net loss per common share for basic and diluted for Class B common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss, which excludes income attributable to Class A common stock, by the weighted average number of Class B common stock outstanding for the periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.