Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” below, “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Report includes “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act that are not historical facts, and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on July 30, 2019 formed for the purpose of effecting an initial businesses combination. While we may pursue an initial business combination target in any business, industry or geographical location, we are focusing our search on targets operating in the Consumer, Retail, Food and Beverage, Fashion and Luxury, Specialty Industrial, Technology or Healthcare sectors that are headquartered in Western Europe or North America, with an emphasis on family-owned businesses, portfolio companies of private equity or venture capital funds, or corporate spin-offs, that have North America as one of its reference markets, and a clearly defined North American high growth strategy. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the initial public offering, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
The issuance of additional ordinary shares in an initial business combination:
• may significantly reduce the equity interest of our shareholders;
• may subordinate the rights of holders of ordinary shares if we issue preference shares with rights senior to those afforded to our ordinary shares;
• will likely cause a change in control if a substantial number of our ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and most likely will also result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors; and
• may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our securities.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities, it could result in:
• default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after a business combination are insufficient to pay our debt obligations;
• acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we have made all principal and interest payments when due if the debt security contains covenants that required the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves and we breach any such covenant without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
• our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand; and
• our inability to obtain additional financing, if necessary, if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain additional financing while such security is outstanding.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below, and identifying a target company for an initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing an initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $51,592, which consists of general and administrative costs of $795,613, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $744,021.
For the period from July 30, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, we had a net income of $241,659, which consists of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $414,479 offset by general and administrative costs of $172,820.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On October 22, 2019, we consummated the initial public offering of 13,800,000 units, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 1,800,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $138,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 4,110,000 private warrants to the sponsor and EarlyBirdCapital, at a price of $1.00 per private warrant, generating gross proceeds of $4,110,000.
Following the initial public offering, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the private warrants, a total of $138,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $3,187,305 in transaction costs, including $2,760,000 of underwriting fees and $427,305 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $587,232. Net loss of $51,592 was reduced by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $744,021. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $587,232 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from July 30, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $231,770. Net income of $241,659 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $414,479, formation costs paid by Sponsor of $5,000 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $63,950 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $139,158,500. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account to complete our initial business combination. To the extent that our share capital is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $624,830 held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the private warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender.
On December 14, 2020, we entered into the Note with our sponsor, pursuant to which, our sponsor agreed to loan us up to an aggregate principal amount of $500,000. The Note is non-interest bearing and payable upon the date on which an initial business combination is consummated. If we do not consummate an initial business combination, we may use a portion of any funds held outside the trust account to repay the Note; however, no proceeds from the trust account may be used for such repayment. Up to $500,000 of the Note may be converted into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of our sponsor. The warrants would be identical to the private warrants. As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance under the Note amounted to an aggregate of $500,000.
Going Concern
We have until July 22, 2021 (or up to October 22, 2021 if a definitive agreement with respect to a proposed initial business combination has been executed by July 22, 2021) to consummate an initial business combination. It is uncertain that we will have sufficient liquidity to fund the working capital needs of the Company until the liquidation date. Additionally, it is uncertain that we will be able to consummate an initial business combination by this time. The Company may not have sufficient liquidity to fund the working capital needs of the Company until one year from the issuance of the financial statements included in this Report. If an initial business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should an initial business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after July 22, 2021 (or up to October 22, 2021 if a definitive agreement with respect to a proposed initial business combination has been executed by July 22, 2021).
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
We have an agreement to pay an affiliate of our Chief Financial Officer a monthly fee of $3,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support to the Company. We began incurring these fees on October 17, 2019 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of an initial business combination and the Company’s liquidation.
We engaged EarlyBirdCapital as an advisor in connection with an initial business combination to assist us in locating target businesses, holding meetings with our shareholders to discuss a potential initial business combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing securities, assist us in obtaining shareholder approval for an initial business combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with an initial business combination. We will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee equal to 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering, or $4,830,000, for such services only upon the consummation of an initial business combination. Of such amount, up to approximately 25% may be paid (subject to our discretion) to third parties who are investment banks or financial advisory firms not participating in initial public offering that assist us in consummating its initial business combination. The election to make such payments to third parties will be solely at the discretion of our management team, and such third parties will be selected by the management team in their sole and absolute discretion.
Additionally, we will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee equal to 1.0% of the total consideration payable in the proposed initial business combination if it introduces us to the target business with which we complete an initial business combination; provided that the foregoing fee will not be paid prior to the date that is 90 days from the effective date of the initial public offering, unless FINRA determines that such payment would not be deemed underwriters’ compensation in connection with the initial public offering pursuant to FINRA Rule 5110(c)(3)(B)(ii).
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per ordinary share, basic and diluted for redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the trust account, by the weighted average number of redeemable ordinary shares outstanding since original issuance outstanding for the period. Net loss per ordinary share, basic and diluted for non-redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net income (loss), less income attributable to redeemable ordinary shares, by the weighted average number of non-redeemable ordinary shares outstanding for the period.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.