ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Results Of Operations
Comparison of Results of Operations for our fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $24,000,852 including (i) product sales of $22,541,806 (ii) consulting and licensing fees of $1,425,778, and (iii) other operating revenues of $33,268, compared to revenues of $12,400,955 including (i) product sales of $7,819,808, (ii) consulting and licensing fees of $4,550,106, of which includes $1,782,457 in revenue awarded in litigation, and (iii) other operating revenues of $31,041 during the year ended December 31, 2019 representing an increase of $11,599,987 or 93.54%. This increase was due to increased sale of our products as well as growth through acquisition.
Cost of Services
Cost of services for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $17,226,486, compared to cost of services of $7,616,221 during the year ended December 31, 2019 representing an increase of $9,610,265 or 126.18%. This increase was due to increased sales of our products as well as growth through acquisition.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $29,677,305, compared to operating expenses of $21,866,651 during the year ended December 31, 2019 representing an increase of $7,810,653 or 35.72%. This increase was due to increased selling, general and administrative expenses, professional service fees, salaries, benefits and related employment costs and non-cash, stock-based compensation.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $2,587,069, compared to other expense, net of $476,756 during the year ended December 31, 2019 representing an increase of $3,063,826 or 642.64%. The increase in other income, net was due to a gain on forfeiture of contingent consideration, an unrealized gain on the change in fair value of certain derivative liabilities, offset in part by unrealized loss on investment and increased interest expense.
Net Income (Loss)
As a result, we generated a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $19,416,761 or approximately $0.47 per share, compared to net loss of $16,975,742 or $0.50 per share during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $1,231,235.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $9,799,690 during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used in operating activities of $7,553,965 during the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $2,245,725.
Net cash used in investing activities was $33,219,140 during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $1,116,756 during the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a decrease of $32,102,384. $6,779,307 of cash was used for the acquisition of Mesa Organics and $25,180,421 of cash was used for the acquisition of the Star Buds assets.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $31,901,882 during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $20,202,560 during the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $7,202,437. The Company received $29,351,759 to fund the acquisition of the Star Buds assets, $13,901,759 of which was deferred cash. During the year ended December 31, 2018, the Company received proceeds of $19,600,000 from the private sale of our Common Stock and $602,500 from the exercise of Common Stock purchase warrants.
Upon successfully consummating our acquisition of the Star Buds banners, which we achieved in March 2021, and merging those operations into our own operations, we believe we will generate positive cash flow from our operations. If we are successful in achieving this objective, we do not believe we will need to raise additional capital for the ongoing operations, as we anticipate that the revenue generated from the fully integrated acquisitions will be sufficient to allow us run those businesses. However, if we do not experience a positive impact on our operations from these acquisitions, or if unforeseen developments occur that negatively impact our cash flow, we may need to raise additional capital to fund ongoing operations.
We will likely need to raise additional capital to fund our growth acquisition strategy. We may explore capital raising transactions in the form of debt, equity or both. At this time, we are unable to state how much additional capital we may need. As of the date of this Report, we have no commitment from any investor or investment-banking firm to provide us with any further funding. Further, no assurance can be given that any future financing will be available or, if available, that it will be on terms that are satisfactory to the Company. Even if the Company can obtain additional financing, it may contain undue restrictions on our operations, in the case of debt financing or cause substantial dilution for our stockholders, in case of equity financing. Failure to obtain this additional financing may have a material negative impact on our ability growth the company at the pace we anticipate.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The Company believes that of its significant accounting policies (see Note 2 of Notes to Financial Statements), the ones that may involve a higher degree of uncertainty, judgment and complexity are revenue recognition, stock based compensation, derivative instruments, income taxes, goodwill and commitments and contingencies are the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Revenue Recognition and Related Allowances
Our revenue recognition policy is significant because the amount and timing of revenue is a key component of our results of operations. Certain criteria are required to be met in order to recognize revenue. If these criteria are not met, then the associated revenue is deferred until is the criteria are met. When consideration is received in advance of the delivery of goods or services, a contract liability is recorded. Revenue contracts are identified when accepted from customers and represent a single performance obligation to sell our products to a customer.
We have three main revenue streams: (i) product sales; (ii) licensing and consulting fees; and (iii) other operating revenues from revenues from seminars, reimbursements and other miscellaneous sources.
Product sales are recorded at the time that control of the products is transferred to customers. In evaluating the timing of the transfer of control of products to customers, we consider several indicators, including significant risks and rewards of products, our right to payment, and the legal title of the products. Based on the assessment of control indicators, sales are generally recognized when products are delivered to customers.
Revenue from licensing and consulting services is recognized when our obligations to our client are fulfilled which is determined when milestones in the contract are achieved. Revenue from seminar fees is related to one-day seminars and is recognized as earned upon the completion of the seminar. We also recognize expense reimbursement from clients as revenue for expenses incurred during certain jobs.
Stock Based Compensation
We account for share-based payments pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 718, Stock Compensation and, accordingly, we record compensation expense for share-based awards based upon an assessment of the grant date fair value for stock and restricted stock awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Stock compensation expense for stock options is recognized over the vesting period of the award or expensed immediately under ASC 718 and Emerging Issues Task Force (“EITF”) 96-18 when stock or options are awarded for previous or current service without further recourse.
Share based expense paid through direct stock grants is expensed as occurred. Since our stock has become publicly traded, the value is determined based on the number of shares issued and the trading value of the stock on the date of the transaction.
On June 20, 2018, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2018-07 which simplifies the accounting for share-based payments granted to nonemployees for goods and services. Under the ASU, most of the guidance on such payments to nonemployees would be aligned with the requirements for share-based payments granted to employees. Previously, share-based payment arrangements to nonemployees were accounted for under ASC 718, while nonemployee share-based payments issued for goods and services were accounted for under ASC 505-50. Before the amendment, the major difference for us (but not limited to) was the determination of measurement date which generally is the date on which the measurement of equity classified share-based payments becomes fixed. Equity classified share-based payments for employees was fixed at the time of grant. Equity-classified nonemployee share-based payment awards are no longer measured at the earlier of the date which a commitment for performance by the counterparty is reached or the date at which the counterparty’s performance is complete. They are now measured at the grant date of the award which is the same as share-based payments for employees. We adopted the requirements of the new rule as of January 1, 2019, the effective date of the new guidance.
Income Taxes
ASC 740, Income Taxes requires the use of the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under the asset and liability method of ASC 740, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the future economic benefit arising from other assets acquired that could not be individually identified and separately recognized. The goodwill arising from our acquisitions is attributable to the value of the potential expanded market opportunity with new customers. Intangible assets have either an identifiable or indefinite useful life. Intangible assets with identifiable useful lives are amortized on a straight-line basis over their economic or legal life, whichever is shorter. We amortizable intangible assets consist of licensing agreements, product licenses and registrations, and intellectual property or trade secrets. Their estimated useful lives range from 10 to 15 years.
Goodwill and indefinite-lived assets are not amortized but are subject to annual impairment testing unless circumstances dictate more frequent assessments. We perform an annual impairment assessment for goodwill during the fourth quarter of each year and more frequently whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of the asset may be less than the carrying amount. Goodwill impairment testing is a two-step process performed at the reporting unit level. Step one compares the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount. The fair value of the reporting unit is determined by considering both the income approach and market approaches. The fair values calculated under the income approach and market approaches are weighted based on circumstances surrounding the reporting unit. Under the income approach, we determine fair value based on estimated future cash flows of the reporting unit, which are discounted to the present value using discount factors that consider the timing and risk of cash flows. For the discount rate, we rely on the capital asset pricing model approach, which includes an assessment of the risk-free interest rate, the rate of return from publicly traded stocks, our risk relative to the overall market, our size and industry and other risks specific to us. Other significant assumptions used in the income approach include the terminal value, growth rates, future capital expenditures and changes in future working capital requirements. The market approaches use key multiples from guideline businesses that are comparable and are traded on a public market. If the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, there is no impairment. If the reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, then the second step must be completed to measure the amount of impairment, if any. Step two calculates the implied fair value of goodwill by deducting the fair value of all tangible and intangible net assets of the reporting unit from the fair value of the reporting unit as calculated in step one. In this step, the fair value of the reporting unit is allocated to all of the reporting unit’s assets and liabilities in a hypothetical purchase price allocation as if the reporting unit had been acquired on that date. If the carrying amount of goodwill exceeds the implied fair value of goodwill, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the excess.
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including revenue growth rates, strategic plans, and future market conditions, among others. There can be no assurance that our estimates and assumptions made for purposes of the goodwill impairment testing will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. Changes in assumptions and estimates could cause us to perform an impairment test prior to scheduled annual impairment tests.
We performed our annual fair value assessment at December 31, 2020, on our subsidiaries with material goodwill and intangible asset amounts on their respective balance sheets and determined that no impairment exists.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources and would be considered material to investors.