Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks uncertainties and assumptions. Certain risks, uncertainties and other factors, including but not limited to those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K, may cause actual results to differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements
Principal Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
Net Income. Net income is calculated by taking interest and noninterest income and subtracting our costs to do business, such as interest, salaries, taxes and other operational expenses. We evaluate our net income based on measures that include net interest margin, return on average assets and return on average equity.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income represents interest income, less interest expense. We generate interest income from interest, dividends and fees received on interest earning assets, including loans, interest earning deposits in other banks and investment securities we own. We incur interest expense from interest paid on interest bearing liabilities, including interest bearing deposits, borrowings and other forms of indebtedness. Net interest income typically is the most significant contributor to our net income. To evaluate net interest income, we measure and monitor: (i) yields on our loans, interest earning deposits in other banks and other interest earning assets; (ii) the costs of our deposits and other funding sources; (iii) our net interest spread; and (iv) our net interest margin. Net interest spread is the difference between rates earned on interest earning assets and rates paid on interest bearing liabilities. Net interest margin is a ratio calculated as net interest income divided by average interest earning assets for the same period. Because noninterest bearing sources of funds, such as noninterest bearing deposits and shareholders’ equity, also fund interest earning assets, net interest margin includes the benefit of these noninterest bearing sources.
Changes in market interest rates and interest we earn on interest earning assets or pay on interest bearing liabilities, as well as the volume and types of our interest earning assets, interest bearing and noninterest bearing liabilities and shareholders’ equity, usually have the largest impact on periodic changes in our net interest spread, net interest margin and net interest income. We measure net interest income before and after our provision for loan losses.
Provision for Loan Losses. Provision for loan losses is the amount of expense that, based on our management’s judgment, is required to maintain our allowance for loan losses at an adequate level to absorb probable losses inherent in our loan portfolio at the applicable balance sheet date and that, in our management’s judgment, is appropriate under relevant accounting guidance. Determination of the allowance for loan losses is complex and involves a high degree of judgment and subjectivity. For a description of the factors considered by our management in determining the allowance for loan losses see “-Financial Condition-Allowance for Loan Losses.”
Noninterest Income. Noninterest income consists of, among other things: (i) mortgage warehouse fee income; (ii) service fees related to off-balance sheet deposits; (iii) deposit related fees; (iv) gain on sale of securities (v) gain on sale of loans (vi) other gain and losses; and (vii) other noninterest income. Mortgage warehouse fee income are transaction fees collected as the funded loans are sold or settled. Service fees related to off-balance sheet deposits are fees earned for off-balance sheet deposit placements facilitated under agreements that allow us to sweep customer funds into deposit accounts at other insured depository institutions. In connection with such sweeps and placements, the Bank earns noninterest income based on the difference between the gross interest earned on such deposit placements and the net interest the Bank agreed to pay on such swept funds (if any). Deposit related fees include cash management fees, such as analyzed checking fees, account maintenance fees, insufficient funds fees, overdraft fees, stop payment fees, foreign exchange fee income, domestic and foreign wire transfer fees, SEN related fees and card processing fee income. Other gains and losses include gain on sale of branch and extinguishment of debt. In 2019, the Company and the Bank completed the sale of the Bank’s retail branch located in San Marcos, California and business loan portfolio. In 2020, the Company initiated and settled a $64.0 million FHLB five-year term advance. Due to an increase in FHLB advance rates after settlement, the Company repaid the advance and recorded a gain on extinguishment of debt of $0.9 million.
Noninterest Expense. Noninterest expense includes, among other things: (i) salaries and employee benefits; (ii) occupancy and equipment expense; (iii) communications and data processing fees; (iv) professional services fees; (v) federal deposit insurance; (vi) correspondent bank charges; and (vii) other general and administrative expenses.
Salaries and employee benefits include compensation, stock-based compensation, employee benefits and tax expenses for our personnel. Occupancy and equipment expense includes depreciation expense, lease expense on our leased properties and other occupancy-related expenses. Equipment expense includes expenses related to our furniture, fixtures, equipment and software. Communications expense includes costs for telephone and internet. Data processing fees include expenses paid to our
third-party data processing system provider and other data service providers. Professional fees include legal, accounting, consulting and other outsourcing arrangements. Federal deposit insurance expense relates to FDIC assessments based on the level of our deposits. Correspondent bank charges include wire transfer fees, transaction fees and service charges related to transactions settled with correspondent relationships. Other general and administrative expenses include expenses associated with travel, meals, advertising, promotions, sponsorships, training, supplies, postage, insurance, board of director expenses and other expenses related to being a public company. Noninterest expenses generally increase as we grow our business.
Financial Condition
The primary factors we use to evaluate and manage our financial condition include asset quality, capital and liquidity.
Asset Quality. We manage the diversification and quality of our assets based on factors that include the level, distribution, severity and trend of problem, classified, delinquent, nonaccrual, nonperforming and restructured assets, the adequacy of our allowance for loan losses, the diversification and quality of our loan and investment portfolios, the extent of counterparty risks, credit risk concentrations and other factors.
Capital. Financial institution regulators have established guidelines for minimum capital ratios for banks and bank holding companies. The Bank’s capital ratios at December 31, 2020 exceeded all current well capitalized regulatory requirements.
We manage capital based upon factors that include: (i) the level and quality of capital and our overall financial condition; (ii) the trend and volume of problem assets; (iii) the adequacy of reserves; (iv) the level and quality of earnings; (v) the risk exposures in our balance sheet; (vi) the levels of Tier 1 and total capital; (vii) the Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio, the total risk-based capital ratio, the Tier 1 leverage ratio, and the common equity Tier 1 capital ratio; (viii) the state of local and national economic conditions; and (ix) other factors including our asset growth rate, as well as certain liquidity ratios.
Liquidity. We manage liquidity based on factors that include the amount of core deposits as a percentage of total deposits, the level of diversification of our funding sources, the allocation and amount of our deposits among deposit types, the short-term funding sources used to fund assets, the amount of non-deposit funding used to fund assets, the availability of unused funding sources, off-balance sheet obligations, the availability of assets to be readily converted into cash without undue loss, the amount of cash, interest earning deposits in other banks and liquid securities we hold, the re-pricing characteristics and maturities of our assets when compared to the re-pricing characteristics of our liabilities and other factors.
We maintain high levels of liquidity for our customers who operate in the digital currency industry, as these deposits are subject to potentially dramatic fluctuations due to certain factors that may be outside of our control. As a result, the Bank deploys its customer deposits into interest earning deposits in other banks and securities, as well as into specialized lending opportunities.
Results of Operations
Net Income
The following table sets forth the principal components of net income for the periods indicated.
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $26.0 million, an increase of $1.2 million, or 4.8% ,from net income of $24.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $1.4 million, or 2.0%, in net interest income, an increase of $3.4 million, or 21.7%, in noninterest income and a decrease of $4.7 million, or
47.5%, in income tax expense, partially offset by a $7.1 million or 13.6% increase in noninterest expense, all as described below.
Net Interest Income and Net Interest Margin Analysis (Taxable Equivalent Basis)
We analyze our ability to maximize income generated from interest earning assets and control the interest expenses of our liabilities, measured as net interest income, through our net interest margin and net interest spread. Net interest income is the difference between the interest and fees earned on interest earning assets, such as loans, interest earning deposits in other banks and securities, and the interest expense incurred on interest bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings, which are used to fund those assets.
Changes in market interest rates and the interest rates we earn on interest earning assets or pay on interest bearing liabilities, as well as in the volume and types of interest earning assets, interest bearing and noninterest bearing liabilities and shareholders’ equity, are usually the largest drivers of periodic changes in net interest income, net interest margin and net interest spread. Fluctuations in market interest rates are driven by many factors, including governmental monetary policies, inflation, deflation, macroeconomic developments, changes in unemployment, the money supply, political and international conditions and conditions in domestic and foreign financial markets. Periodic changes in the volume and types of loans in our loan portfolio are affected by, among other factors, economic and competitive conditions in the Southern California region, developments affecting the real estate, technology, hospitality, tourism and financial services sectors within our target markets and throughout the Southern California region, the volume and availability of residential loan pools and non-qualified residential loans and mortgage banker relationships. Our ability to respond to changes in these factors by using effective asset-liability management techniques is critical to maintaining the stability of our net interest income and net interest margin as our primary sources of earnings.
The following tables show the average outstanding balance of each principal category of our assets, liabilities and shareholders’ equity, together with the average yields on our assets and the average costs of our liabilities for the periods indicated. Such yields and cost are calculated by dividing income or expense by the average daily balances of the associated assets or liabilities for the same period.
Tax-exempt income from securities is calculated on a taxable equivalent basis. Net interest income, net interest spread and net interest margin are presented on a taxable equivalent basis to consistently reflect income from taxable securities and tax-exempt securities based on the federal statutory tax rate of 21.0%.
AVERAGE BALANCE SHEET AND NET INTEREST ANALYSIS
________________________
(1)Interest income on tax-exempt securities is presented on a taxable equivalent basis using the federal statutory tax rate of 21.0% for all periods presented.
(2)Loans include nonaccrual loans and loans held-for-sale, net of deferred fees and before allowance for loan losses.
(3)Interest income includes amortization of deferred loan fees, net of deferred loan costs.
(4)Net interest spread is the difference between interest rates earned on interest earning assets and interest rates paid on interest bearing liabilities.
(5)Net interest margin is a ratio calculated as net interest income, on a taxable equivalent basis, divided by average interest earning assets for the same period.
Information regarding the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for the periods indicated for each major component of interest earning assets and interest bearing liabilities and distinguishes between the changes
attributable to changes in volume and changes attributable to changes in interest rates. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume that cannot be segregated have been proportionately allocated to both volume and rate.
ANALYSIS OF CHANGES IN NET INTEREST INCOME
______________________
(1)Interest income on tax-exempt securities is presented on a taxable equivalent basis using the federal statutory tax rate of 21.0% for all periods presented.
Net interest income on a taxable equivalent basis increased $2.8 million to $73.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $71.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, due to a decrease of $2.9 million in interest expense. Average total interest earning assets increased $411.5 million, or 20.1%, from $2.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $2.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase in the average balance of loans and securities. The average balance of loans increased $236.5 million, or 25.1%, due to higher balance mortgage warehouse loans driven by refinancing transactions. The average balance of securities increased $226.6 million, or 32.3%, from $702.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $928.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in securities was driven by the net purchases of $283.7 million in fixed-rate municipal bonds and fixed-rate commercial mortgage-backed securities. The average yield on total interest earning assets decreased from 3.96% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 3.29% for the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to lower yields on interest earning deposits in other banks and, to a lesser extent, loans and securities. The lower yields were due to declines in the federal funds rate and London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”), which were partially offset by the impact of interest rate floors which were put in place during 2019.
Average interest bearing liabilities decreased $109.7 million, or 26.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to a decrease in callable brokered certificates of deposit, offset slightly by an increase in FHLB borrowings. In March 2019, we implemented a hedging strategy that included purchases of interest rate floors and commercial mortgage-backed securities, primarily funded by callable brokered certificates of deposit. The callable brokered certificates of deposit were called in the second quarter of 2020 due to an increase in alternative funding and a decline in interest rates. The average rate on total interest bearing liabilities decreased to 2.42% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2.47% for 2019 primarily due to a decline in the FHLB borrowing rate partially offset by the impact of calling the remaining balance of the callable brokered certificates of deposit, which resulted in the recognition of $3.4 million of premium amortization in interest expense.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the net interest spread was 0.87% and the net interest margin was 3.00% compared to 1.49% and 3.47%, respectively, for 2019. The decrease in the net interest spread and net interest margin in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the impact of lower federal funds rates and LIBOR on our interest earning assets and premium expense associated with calling our brokered certificates of deposit, partially offset by the combined effects associated with the hedging strategy, which included the impacts of calling and reissuing a portion of the brokered callable certificates of deposit, along with the benefit derived from the interest rate floors.
Provision for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses is a charge to income to bring our allowance for loan losses to a level deemed appropriate by management. For a description of the factors considered by our management in determining the allowance for loan losses see “-Financial Condition-Allowance for Loan Losses” and “-Critical Accounting Policies-Allowance for Loan Losses.”
We recorded a provision for loan losses of $0.7 million compared to a reversal of $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in the provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due an increase in the overall loan balance. The net reversal for the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to improvements in qualitative factors related to the loan portfolio and the continued low charge-off rates. The allowance for loan losses to total gross loans held-for-investment was 0.92% at December 31, 2020 compared to 0.93% at December 31, 2019.
Noninterest Income
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, the major categories of noninterest income:
NONINTEREST INCOME
________________________
N/M-Not meaningful
Noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $19.2 million, an increase of $3.4 million, or 21.7%, compared to noninterest income of $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to a $6.0 million increase in deposit related fees and a $3.0 million increase in gain on sale of securities, offset by a $1.6 million decrease in service fees related to off-balance sheet deposits. In addition, noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2019 included a pre-tax gain on sale of $5.5 million for our San Marcos branch and business loan portfolio that was completed in March 2019. The $6.0 million increase in deposit related fees was primarily due to increases in cash management, foreign exchange, and SEN related fees associated with our digital currency initiative. Deposit related fees from digital currency customers for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $6.2 million, or 126.4%, to $11.1 million compared to $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold a total of $216.4 million of securities and realized a net gain on sale of $3.8 million, compared to a total of $42.0 million in sales of securities and net gain on sale of $0.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company initiated and settled a $64.0 million FHLB five-year term advance. Due to an increase in FHLB advance rates after settlement, the Company repaid the advance and recorded a gain of $0.9 million. Service fees related to off-balance sheet deposits decreased due to lower average balances in off-balance sheet deposit placements as a result of the decline in interest rates.
Noninterest Expense
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, the major categories of noninterest expense:
NONINTEREST EXPENSE
Noninterest expense increased $7.1 million, or 13.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to increases in salaries and employee benefits, occupancy and equipment, other general and administrative, communications and data processing and federal deposit insurance expense.
The increase of $2.6 million, or 7.7%, in salaries and employee benefits was due to increased cost per full-time equivalent employee, including a $0.6 million increase in employee related stock-based compensation expense. The Company’s average full-time equivalent employees remained stable from 208 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 210 for 2020. Occupancy and equipment increased $2.1 million, or 56.4%, due primarily to a $2.3 million impairment charge related to its leased office space and fixed assets no longer in use. Communications and data processing increased $0.8 million, or 17.3%, due primarily to continued investment to support our API-enabled SEN platform enhancements and the customer-facing foreign currency exchange platform that was launched in the fourth quarter of 2019. The increase of $0.8 million, or 182.4%, in federal deposit insurance payments was due to a rate increase driven by the growth in deposits. Other general and administrative expense increased $0.8 million, or 21.9%, due primarily to higher insurance expense.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense was $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily related to a decrease in the effective tax rate. Our effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 16.5% and 28.3%, respectively. The decrease in the Company’s effective tax rate in 2020 was primarily related to an increase in excess tax benefit from stock-based compensation and tax-exempt income earned on certain municipal bonds.
Financial Condition
As of December 31, 2020, our total assets increased to $5.6 billion compared to $2.1 billion as of December 31, 2019. Shareholders’ equity increased $63.3 million, or 27.4%, to $294.3 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $231.0 million at December 31, 2019. A summary of the individual components driving the changes in total assets, total liabilities and shareholders' equity is set forth below.
Interest Earning Deposits in Other Banks
Interest earning deposits in other banks increased from $132.0 million at December 31, 2019 to $2.9 billion at December 31, 2020. The majority of the Company’s interest earning deposits in other banks is cash held at the Federal Reserve Bank, which was earning 0.10% at December 31, 2020, compared to 1.55% at December 31, 2019. The increase in interest earning deposits was due to growth in deposits from digital currency related customers exceeding growth in total loans and securities. The majority of deposit growth occurred in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Securities
We use our securities portfolio to provide a source of liquidity, provide an appropriate return on funds invested, manage interest rate risk, meet collateral requirements and meet regulatory capital requirements.
Management classifies investment securities as either held-to-maturity or available-for-sale based on our intentions and the Company’s ability to hold such securities until maturity. In determining such classifications, securities that management has the positive intent and the Company has the ability to hold until maturity are classified as held to maturity and carried at amortized cost. All other securities are designated as available-for-sale and carried at estimated fair value with unrealized gains and losses included in shareholders’ equity on an after-tax basis. For the years presented, substantially all securities were classified as available-for-sale.
Our securities available-for-sale increased $41.2 million, or 4.6%, from $897.8 million at December 31, 2019 to $939.0 million at December 31, 2020. To supplement interest income earned on our loan portfolio, we invest in high quality mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations, municipal bonds and asset backed securities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company sold $216.4 million of fixed-rate commercial mortgage-backed securities and realized a gain on sale of $3.8 million. The securities sold were originally purchased as part of the hedging strategy in 2019. The proceeds from these sales were reinvested in $249.6 million of highly rated fixed-rate tax-exempt municipal bonds at higher tax-equivalent yields than the commercial mortgage-backed securities that were sold. All municipal bonds purchased are general obligation, revenue or essential purpose bonds that have call dates or maturities in less than 11 years. The municipal bonds that were purchased have similar average lives as the commercial mortgage-backed securities that were sold. Such fixed-rate investments help mitigate a decline in interest income in a declining rate environment and provide higher returns compared to lower yielding cash and cash alternatives. The Company also purchased $15.8 million of highly rated fixed-rate taxable municipal bonds and entered into a series of interest rate swaps, which are accounted for as fair value hedges, to convert the bonds from fixed to floating rate yields. In addition, the Company purchased $13.2 million of fixed-rate commercial mortgage-backed securities in March 2020.
The following tables summarize the contractual maturities and weighted-average yields of investment securities at December 31, 2020 and the amortized cost and carrying value of those securities as of the indicated dates. Expected maturities may differ from contractual maturities if borrowers have the right to call or prepay obligations with or without call or prepayment penalties. Residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities are classified below based on the final maturity date, however these are amortizing securities with expected average lives primarily less than ten years.
SECURITIES
Loan Portfolio
Our primary source of income is derived from interest earned on loans. Our loan portfolio consists primarily of loans secured by real estate and mortgage warehouse loans. Our loan customers primarily consist of small- to medium-sized businesses, professionals, real estate investors, small residential builders and individuals. Our owner-occupied and investment commercial real estate loans, multi-family loans and commercial and industrial loans provide us with higher risk-adjusted returns, relatively shorter maturities and more sensitivity to interest rate fluctuations, and are complemented by our relatively lower risk residential real estate loans to individuals. Our commercial real estate, multi-family real estate, and construction lending activities are primarily directed to our market area of Southern California. Our one-to-four family residential loans and warehouse loans are sourced throughout the United States. In January 2020, we began offering a new lending product called SEN Leverage, which allows Silvergate customers to obtain U.S. dollar loans collateralized by bitcoin held at select digital currency exchanges and other custodians that are also customers of the Bank. The outstanding balance of SEN Leverage loans was $77.2 million at December 31, 2020 and is included in the commercial and industrial loan segment.
The following table summarizes our loan portfolio by loan segment as of the dates indicated:
COMPOSITION OF LOAN PORTFOLIO
Loans held-for-sale are comprised entirely of mortgage warehouse loans at December 31, 2020, compared to $365.8 million of the total balance at December 31, 2019. Loans held-for-sale increased significantly from December 31, 2019 due to an increase in warehouse loans driven by refinancing transactions.
The repayment of loans is a source of additional liquidity for the Bank. The following table details maturities and sensitivity to interest rate changes for our loans held-for-investment at December 31, 2020:
LOAN MATURITY AND SENSITIVITY TO CHANGES IN INTEREST RATES
Nonperforming Assets
Loans are considered past due if the required principal and interest payments have not been received as of the date such payments were due. Loans are placed on nonaccrual status when, in management’s opinion, the borrower may be unable to meet payment obligations as they become due, as well as when required by regulatory provisions. Loans may be placed on nonaccrual status regardless of whether such loans are actually past due. In general, we place loans on nonaccrual status when
they become 90 days past due. We also place loans on nonaccrual status if they are less than 90 days past due if the collection of principal or interest is in doubt. When interest accrual is discontinued, all unpaid accrued interest is reversed from income. Interest income is subsequently recognized only to the extent cash payments received exceed principal due. Loans are returned to accrual status when all the principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are, in management’s opinion, reasonably assured. Any loan which the Bank deems to be uncollectible, in whole or in part, is charged off to the extent of the anticipated loss. Loans that are past due for 180 days or more are charged off unless the loan is well secured and in the process of collection.
We believe our disciplined lending approach and focused management of nonperforming assets has resulted in sound asset quality and timely resolution of problem assets. We have several procedures in place to assist us in maintaining the overall quality of our loan portfolio. We have established underwriting guidelines to be followed by our loan officers, and we also monitor our delinquency levels for any negative or adverse trends. There can be no assurance, however, that our loan portfolio will not become subject to increasing pressures from deteriorating borrower credit due to general economic conditions.
Nonperforming loans decreased to $5.0 million, or 0.66% of total loans, at December 31, 2020 compared to $5.9 million, or 0.88% of total loans, at December 31, 2019. The decrease in nonperforming loans during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to loan principal repayments on nonperforming commercial and industrial loans and payoffs on one-to-four family real estate loans.
Total nonperforming assets were $5.0 million and $6.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, or 0.09% and 0.28%, respectively, of total assets.
The following table presents information regarding nonperforming assets at the dates indicated:
NONPERFORMING ASSETS
________________________
(1)Total loans exclude loans held-for-sale at each of the dates presented.
COVID-19 Impact
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the COVID-19 virus as a pandemic. The effects of the outbreak are still evolving, and the ultimate severity and duration of the pandemic and the implications on global economic conditions remains uncertain. The following is a summary of the impact and potential effects of COVID-19 on the Company’s loan portfolio.
At December 31, 2020, our gross loans held-for-investment portfolio was $751.5 million, with its largest segments consisting of commercial real estate and one-to-four-family residential real estate loans. Although there is significant uncertainty in the current economic environment due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, our relatively low to moderate
loan-to-value ratios provide a lower probability of loss in the event of defaults in our loan portfolio. We will continue to monitor trends in our loan portfolio segments for any known or probable adverse conditions with an emphasis on our retail and hospitality loans within our commercial real estate loan portfolio.
Additional information at December 31, 2020 related to our loan segments, including the weighted average loan-to-values for our real estate portfolio, is set forth below. Weighted average loan-to-value ratios are based on current loan balances and appraised values obtained either at loan origination or based on a more current updated appraisal.
In April 2020, we implemented a short-term loan modification program for customers impacted financially by the COVID-19 pandemic to provide temporary relief to certain borrowers who meet the program’s qualifications. The program was offered to borrowers to modify their existing loans to temporarily defer principal and/or interest payments for a specified period of time, extend loan maturity dates and/or waive certain loan covenants. Deferred payments may be extended for continued hardship, on a case by case basis, for up to twelve months where COVID-19 related issues continue to persist. Due to the fluid nature of COVID-19, this program has been evolving in order to provide maximum relief to bank borrowers. The majority of short-term loan modifications for commercial real estate loan borrowers consist of deferred payments which may include principal, interest and escrow. Deferred interest is capitalized to the loan balance and deferred principal is added to the maturity or payoff date. For one-to-four family residential real estate loans, the majority of short-term modifications consist of deferring full monthly payments of principal, interest and escrow, with deferred payments due at maturity or payoff of the loan. Loans qualifying for these modifications will not be required to be reported as delinquent, nonaccrual, impaired or criticized solely as a result of a COVID-19 loan modification for the months of payment deferrals. Borrowers considered current are those that are less than 30 days past due on their modified contractual payments.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we modified a total of 55 loans representing $143.5 million in loan balances, or 19.1% of total gross loans held-for-investment as of December 31, 2020. The two sectors within our commercial real estate loan portfolio that are expected to be most heavily impacted by COVID-19, retail and hospitality, made up $91.3 million of these modifications. The majority of loans modified under these programs were maintained on accrual status during the deferral period. Section 4013 of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) addressed COVID-19 related modifications and specified that such modifications made on loans that were current as of December 31, 2019 are not TDRs. In accordance with interagency guidance issued in April 2020, short-term modifications made to a borrower affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and governmental shutdown orders, such as payment deferrals, fee waivers and extensions of repayment terms, do not need to be identified as TDRs if the loans were current at the time a modification plan was implemented. The Company elected to adopt the provisions of the CARES Act for modifications that meet the requirements described above. None of the modified loans met the criteria of a TDR under the CARES Act or the related interagency statement.
As of December 31, 2020, the remaining loans in deferral due to COVID-19 are as follows:
Loans Grading
From a credit risk standpoint, we grade watchlist and problem loans into one of five categories: pass, special mention, substandard, doubtful or loss. The classifications of loans reflect a judgment about the risks of default and loss associated with the loan. We review the ratings on credits regularly. Ratings are adjusted regularly to reflect the degree of risk and loss that our management believes to be appropriate for each credit. Our methodology is structured so that specific reserve allocations are increased in accordance with deterioration in credit quality (and a corresponding increase in risk and loss) or decreased in accordance with improvement in credit quality (and a corresponding decrease in risk and loss). The Bank uses the following definitions for risk ratings:
•Pass. Loans in all classes that are not adversely rated, are contractually current as to principal and interest, and are otherwise in compliance with the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Management believes that there is a low likelihood of loss related to those loans that are considered pass.
•Special Mention. A special mention loan has potential weaknesses deserving of management’s close attention. If uncorrected, such weaknesses may result in deterioration of the repayment prospects for the asset or in our credit position at some future date.
•Substandard. A substandard loan is inadequately protected by the current financial condition and paying capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. Loans so classified have a well-defined weakness or weaknesses that jeopardize the liquidation of the debt. They are characterized by the distinct possibility that we will sustain some loss if deficiencies are not corrected.
•Doubtful. A doubtful loan has all weaknesses inherent in one classified as substandard, with the added characteristic that weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of existing facts, conditions, and values, highly questionable and improbable.
•Loss. Credits rated as loss are charged-off. We have no expectation of the recovery of any payments in respect of credits rated as loss.
The following table presents the loan balances by segment as well as risk rating. No assets were classified as loss during the periods presented.
LOAN CLASSIFICATION
Loan Reviews and Problem Loan Management
Our credit administration staff conducts meetings at least four times a year to review asset quality and loan delinquencies. The Bank’s Loan Portfolio Management Procedure prescribes loan review frequency and scope through a risk-based approach that considers loan amount, type, risk rating and payment status. Individual loan reviews encompass a loan’s payment status and history, current and projected paying capacity of the borrower and/or guarantor(s), current condition and estimated value of any collateral, sufficiency of credit and collateral documentation, and compliance with Bank and regulatory lending standards. Loan reviewers assign an overall loan risk rating from one of the Bank’s loan rating categories and prepare a written report summarizing the review.
Once a loan is identified as a problem loan or a loan requiring a workout, the Bank makes an evaluation and develops a plan for handling the loan. In developing such a plan, management reviews all relevant information from the loan file and any loan review reports. We have a conversation with the borrower and update current and projected financial information (including borrower global cash flows when possible) and collateral valuation estimates. Following analysis of all available relevant information, management adopts an action plan from the following alternatives: (a) continuation of loan collection efforts on their existing terms, (b) a restructure of the loan’s terms, (c) a sale of the loan, (d) a charge off or partial charge off, (e) foreclosure on pledged collateral, or (f) acceptance of a deed in lieu of foreclosure.
Impaired Loans and TDRs. Impaired loans also include certain loans that have been modified as troubled debt restructurings, or TDRs. As of December 31, 2020, the Company held seven loans totaling $1.5 million that were TDRs, compared to nine loans totaling $1.8 million at December 31, 2019.
A loan is identified as a TDR when a borrower is experiencing financial difficulties and, for economic or legal reasons related to these difficulties, the Company grants a concession to the borrower in the restructuring that it would not otherwise consider. The Company has granted a concession when, as a result of the restructuring, it does not expect to collect all amounts due or within the time periods originally due under the original contract, including one or a combination of the following: a reduction of the stated interest rate of the loan; an extension of the maturity date at a stated rate of interest lower than the current market rate for new debt with similar risk; or a temporary forbearance with regard to the payment of principal or interest. All TDRs are reviewed for potential impairment. Generally, a nonaccrual loan that is restructured remains on nonaccrual status for a minimum period of six months to demonstrate that the borrower can perform under the restructured terms. If the borrower’s performance under the new terms is not reasonably assured, the loan remains classified as a nonaccrual loan. Loans classified as TDRs are reported as impaired loans.
Allowance for Loan Losses
We maintain an allowance for loan losses that represents management’s best estimate of the loan losses and risks inherent in our loan portfolio. The amount of the allowance for loan losses should not be interpreted as an indication that charge-offs in future periods will necessarily occur in those amounts, or at all. In determining the allowance for loan losses, we estimate losses on specific loans, or groups of loans, where the probable loss can be identified and reasonably determined. The balance of the allowance for loan losses is based on internally assigned risk classifications of loans, historical loan loss rates, changes in the nature of our loan portfolio, overall portfolio quality, industry concentrations, delinquency trends, current economic factors and the estimated impact of current economic conditions on certain historical loan loss rates. See “Critical Accounting Policies-Allowance for Loan Losses.”
In reviewing our loan portfolio, we consider risk elements attributable to particular loan types or categories in assessing the quality of individual loans. Some of the risk elements we consider include:
•For residential mortgage loans, the borrower’s ability to repay the loan, including a consideration of the debt-to-income ratio and employment and income stability, the loan-to-value ratio, and the age, condition and marketability of the collateral;
•For commercial and multi-family mortgage loans, the debt service coverage ratio, operating results of the owner in the case of owner-occupied properties, the loan-to-value ratio, the age and condition of the collateral and the volatility of income, property value and future operating results typical of properties of that type;
•For construction loans, the perceived feasibility of the project including the ability to sell improvements constructed for resale, the quality and nature of contracts for presale, if any, experience and ability of the builder, loan-to-cost ratio and loan-to-value ratio;
•For commercial and industrial loans, the debt service coverage ratio (income from the business exceeding operating expenses compared to loan repayment requirements), the operating results of the commercial or professional enterprise, the borrower’s business, professional and financial ability and expertise, the specific risks and volatility of income and operating results typical for businesses in that category and the value, nature and marketability of collateral; risks related to new product offerings such as loans secured by bitcoin and the volatility of this particular collateral type; and
•For mortgage warehouse loans held-for-investment, despite our negligible loss history, we provide a loss allowance factor subject to quarterly adjustment. Mortgage warehouse loans held-for-sale are not subject to any loan loss allowance and are recorded at lower of cost or fair market value.
The following table presents a summary of changes in the allowance for loan losses for the periods and dates indicated:
ANALYSIS OF THE ALLOWANCE FOR LOAN LOSSES
Our allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $6.9 million and $6.2 million, respectively, or 0.92% and 0.93% of loans for each respective period-end. The increase in the allowance was due to an overall increase in the loan balance. The decrease in the ratio of the allowance for loan losses to gross loans held-for-investment from December 31, 2019 was due to the change in mix of our loan segments.
We had $17,000 in charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2020 and no recoveries compared to charge-offs of $93,000 and no recoveries for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Although we believe that we have established our allowance for loan losses in accordance with GAAP and that the allowance for loan losses was adequate to provide for known and inherent losses in the portfolio at all times shown above, future provisions for loan losses will be subject to ongoing evaluations of the risks in our loan portfolio.
The following table shows the allocation of the allowance for loan losses among loan categories and certain other information as of the dates indicated. The total allowance is available to absorb losses from any loan category.
ALLOCATION OF THE ALLOWANCE FOR LOAN LOSSES
________________________
(1)Loan amount as a percentage of total gross loans.
Deposits
Deposits are the major source of funding for the Company. We offer a variety of deposit products including interest and noninterest bearing demand accounts, money market and savings accounts and certificates of deposit, all of which we market at competitive pricing. We generate deposits from our customers on a relationship basis and through the efforts of our commercial lending officers. Deposits increased $3.4 billion, or 189.2%, to $5.2 billion at December 31, 2020 compared to $1.8 billion at December 31, 2019. Noninterest bearing deposits totaled $5.1 billion (representing approximately 97.8% of total deposits) at December 31, 2020, compared to $1.3 billion (representing approximately 74.0% of total deposits) at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, deposits by foreign depositors amounted to $1.4 billion, or 27.6% of total deposits, compared to $481.5 million, or 26.5% of total deposits, at December 31, 2019. The increase in total deposits from the prior year was driven by an increase in deposits from digital currency related customers, with elevated client activity evidenced by the record volume of SEN transactions during the year. The increase in deposits was slightly offset by a $322.4 million decrease in our callable brokered certificates of deposit which were called during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table presents a breakdown of our digital currency customer base and the deposits held by such customers at the dates noted below:
________________________
(1)Total deposits may not foot due to rounding.
Our cost of total deposits and our cost of funds was 0.27% and 0.32%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 0.43% and 0.54%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the weighted average cost of deposits compared to the prior period was driven by the higher average balance of noninterest bearing deposits and lower rates on interest bearing deposits and borrowings partially offset by the acceleration of the $3.4 million premium amortization expense recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 from calling the brokered certificates of deposits, as discussed in “-Results of Operations-Net Interest Income and Net Interest Margin Analysis” above.
The following table presents the average balances and average rates paid on deposits for the periods indicated:
COMPOSITION OF DEPOSITS
The following table presents the maturities of our certificates of deposit as of December 31, 2020:
MATURITIES OF CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT
Borrowings
We primarily utilize short-term and long-term borrowings to supplement deposits to fund our lending and investment activities, each of which is discussed below.
FHLB Advances. The FHLB allows us to borrow up to 35% of the Bank’s assets on a blanket floating lien status collateralized by certain securities and loans. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $1.5 billion in real estate loans were pledged as collateral for our FHLB borrowings. We utilize these borrowings to meet liquidity needs and to fund certain fixed rate loans in our portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding FHLB advances and had $893.0 million in available borrowing capacity from the FHLB.
The following table sets forth certain information on our FHLB borrowings during the periods presented:
FHLB ADVANCES
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. The FRB has an available borrower in custody arrangement that allows us to borrow on a collateralized basis. The Company’s borrowing capacity under the Federal Reserve’s discount window program was $4.8 million as of December 31, 2020. Certain commercial loans are pledged under this arrangement. We maintain this
borrowing arrangement to meet liquidity needs pursuant to our contingency funding plan. No advances were outstanding under this facility as of December 31, 2020.
The Company has also issued subordinated debentures and has access to borrow federal funds or lines of credit with correspondent banks. At December 31, 2020, these borrowings amounted to $15.8 million.
Subordinated Debentures. A trust formed by the Company issued $12.5 million of floating rate trust preferred securities in July 2001 as part of a pooled offering of such securities. The Company issued subordinated debentures to the trust in exchange for its proceeds from the offering. The debentures and related accrued interest represent substantially all the assets of the trust. The subordinated debentures bear interest at six-month LIBOR plus 375 basis points, which adjusts every six months in January and July of each year. Interest is payable semiannually. At December 31, 2020, the interest rate for the Company’s next scheduled payment was 4.06%, based on six-month LIBOR of 0.31%. On any January 25 or July 25 the Company may redeem the 2001 subordinated debentures at 100% of principal amount plus accrued interest. The 2001 subordinated debentures mature on July 25, 2031.
A second trust formed by the Company issued $3.0 million of trust preferred securities in January 2005 as part of a pooled offering of such securities. The Company issued subordinated debentures to the trust in exchange for its proceeds from the offering. The debentures and related accrued interest represent substantially all the assets of the trust. The subordinated debentures bear interest at three-month LIBOR plus 185 basis points, which adjusts every three months. Interest is payable quarterly. At December 31, 2020, the interest rate for the Company’s next scheduled payment was 2.07%, based on three-month LIBOR of 0.22%. On the 15th day of any March, June, September, or December, the Company may redeem the 2005 subordinated debentures at 100% of principal amount plus accrued interest. The 2005 subordinated debentures mature on March 15, 2035.
The Company also retained a 3% minority interest in each of these trusts which is included in subordinated debentures. The balance of the equity in the trusts is comprised of mandatorily redeemable preferred securities. The subordinated debentures may be included in Tier I capital (with certain limitations applicable) under current regulatory guidelines and interpretations. The Company has the right to defer interest payments on the subordinated debentures from time to time for a period not to exceed five years.
Other Borrowings. At December 31, 2020, the Company had no outstanding balance of federal funds purchased and had available lines of credit of $68.0 million with other correspondent banks.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Liquidity is defined as the Bank’s capacity to meet its cash and collateral obligations at a reasonable cost. Maintaining an adequate level of liquidity depends on the Bank’s ability to meet both expected and unexpected cash flows and collateral needs efficiently without adversely affecting either daily operations or the financial condition of the Bank. Liquidity risk is the risk that we will be unable to meet our obligations as they become due because of an inability to liquidate assets or obtain adequate funding. The Bank’s obligations, and the funding sources used to meet them, depend significantly on our business mix, balance sheet structure and the cash flow profiles of our on- and off-balance sheet obligations. In managing our cash flows, management regularly confronts situations that can give rise to increased liquidity risk. These include funding mismatches, market constraints on the ability to convert assets into cash or in accessing sources of funds (i.e., market liquidity) and contingent liquidity events. Changes in economic conditions or exposure to credit, market, operation, legal and reputational risks also could affect the Bank’s liquidity risk profile and are considered in the assessment of liquidity and asset/liability management.
We maintain high levels of liquidity for our customers who operate in the digital currency industry, as these deposits are subject to potentially dramatic fluctuations due to certain factors that may be outside of our control. As a result, our investment portfolio is comprised primarily of mortgage-backed securities backed by government-sponsored entities, collateralized mortgage obligations, municipal bonds and asset-backed securities.
Management has established a comprehensive management process for identifying, measuring, monitoring and controlling liquidity risk. Because of its critical importance to the viability of the Bank, liquidity risk management is fully integrated into our risk management processes. Critical elements of our liquidity risk management include: effective corporate governance consisting of oversight by the board of directors and active involvement by management; appropriate strategies, policies, procedures, and limits used to manage and mitigate liquidity risk; comprehensive liquidity risk measurement and monitoring systems (including assessments of the current and prospective cash flows or sources and uses of funds) that are commensurate with the complexity and business activities of the Bank; active management of intraday liquidity and collateral; an appropriately diverse mix of existing and potential future funding sources; adequate levels of highly liquid marketable securities free of legal, regulatory or operational impediments, that can be used to meet liquidity needs in stressful situations; comprehensive contingency funding plans that sufficiently address potential adverse liquidity events and emergency cash flow
requirements; and internal controls and internal audit processes sufficient to determine the adequacy of the institution’s liquidity risk management process.
The movement of funds on our balance sheet among different SEN deposit customers does not reduce the Bank’s deposits and thus does not result in liquidity issues or require any borrowing by the Company or the Bank. In addition, to the extent that SEN participants fully withdraw funds from the Bank, no material liquidity issues or borrowing needs would arise since the majority of SEN participants deposits are held in liquid assets, such as available-for-sale securities and cash, or used to fund short-term mortgage warehouse loans.
We expect funds to be available from basic banking activity sources, including the core deposit base, the repayment and maturity of loans and investment security cash flows. Other potential funding sources include borrowings from the FHLB, the FRB, other lines of credit and brokered certificates of deposit. As of December 31, 2020, we had $893.0 million of available borrowing capacity from the FHLB, $4.8 million of available borrowing capacity from the FRB and available lines of credit of $68.0 million with other correspondent banks. Cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 were $3.0 billion. Accordingly, our liquidity resources were at sufficient levels to fund loans and meet other cash needs as necessary.
Capital Resources
Shareholders’ equity increased $63.3 million to $294.3 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $231.0 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in shareholders’ equity was primarily due to net income for the year ended December 31, 2020, which amounted to $26.0 million, and an increase in accumulated other comprehensive income of $39.6 million. The increase in accumulated other comprehensive income was primarily due to unrealized gains on derivatives purchased in connection with our hedging strategy and unrealized gains on our available-for-sale securities portfolio.
The Bank is subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, the Bank must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of its assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. The capital amounts and classifications are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings, and other factors.
Quantitative measures established by regulation to ensure capital adequacy require the Bank to maintain minimum ratios of common equity Tier 1, Tier 1, and total capital as a percentage of assets and off-balance sheet exposures, adjusted for risk weights ranging from 0% to 1,250%. The Bank is also required to maintain capital at a minimum level based on quarterly average assets, which is known as the leverage ratio.
As of December 31, 2020, the Bank was in compliance with all applicable regulatory capital requirements to which it was subject, and was classified as “well capitalized” for purposes of the prompt corrective action regulations. As we deploy our capital and continue to grow our operations, our regulatory capital levels may decrease depending on our level of earnings. However, we intend to monitor and control our growth to remain in compliance with all regulatory capital standards applicable to us.
The following table presents the regulatory capital ratios for the Company and the Bank as of the dates indicated:
Contractual Obligations
We have contractual obligations to make future payments on debt and lease agreements. While our liquidity monitoring and management consider both present and future demands for and sources of liquidity, the following table of contractual commitments focuses only on future obligations and summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
Off-Balance Sheet Items
In the normal course of business, we enter into various transactions, which, in accordance with GAAP, are not included in our consolidated statements of financial condition. We enter into these transactions to meet the financing needs of our customers. These transactions include commitments to extend credit and issue letters of credit, which involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk and interest rate risk exceeding the amounts recognized in our consolidated statements of financial condition. Our exposure to credit loss is represented by the contractual amounts of these commitments. The same credit policies and procedures are used in making these commitments as for on-balance sheet instruments. We are not aware of any accounting loss to be incurred by funding these commitments; however, we maintain an allowance for off-balance sheet credit risk which is recorded in other liabilities on the consolidated statements of financial condition.
Our commitments associated with outstanding letters of credit and commitments to extend credit expiring by period as of the date indicated are summarized below. Since commitments associated with letters of credit and commitments to extend credit may expire unused, the amounts shown do not necessarily reflect the actual future cash funding requirements.
CREDIT EXTENSION COMMITMENTS
Unfunded lines of credit represent unused credit facilities to our current borrowers that represent no change in credit risk that exist in our portfolio. Lines of credit generally have variable interest rates. Letters of credit are conditional commitments issued by us to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party. In the event of nonperformance by the customer in accordance with the terms of the agreement with the third party, we would be required to fund the commitment. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make is represented by the contractual amount of the commitment. If the commitment is funded, we would be entitled to seek recovery from the client from the underlying collateral, which can include commercial real estate, physical plant and property, inventory, receivables, cash and/or marketable securities. Our policies generally require that letter of credit arrangements contain security and debt covenants like those contained in loan agreements and our credit risk associated with issuing letters of credit is essentially the same as the risk involved in extending loan facilities to our customers.
We minimize our exposure to loss under letters of credit and credit commitments by subjecting them to the same credit approval and monitoring procedures as we do for on-balance sheet instruments. The effect on our revenue, expenses, cash flows and liquidity of the unused portions of these letters of credit commitments cannot be precisely predicted because there is no guarantee that the lines of credit will be used.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend funds to a customer, if there is no violation of any condition established in the contract, for a specific purpose. Commitments generally have variable interest rates, fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since many of the commitments are expected to expire without being fully drawn, the total commitment amounts disclosed above do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. We evaluate each customer’s creditworthiness on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained, if considered necessary by us, upon extension of credit is based on management’s credit evaluation of the customer.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under current circumstances, results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities that are not readily available from other sources. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Accounting policies, as described in detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, are an integral part of our financial statements. A thorough understanding of these accounting policies is essential when reviewing our reported results of operations and our financial position. We believe that the critical accounting policies and estimates discussed below require us to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain. Changes in these estimates, which are likely to occur from period to period, or use of different
estimates that we could have reasonably used in the current period, would have a material impact on our financial position, results of operations or liquidity.
See “Note 1-Nature of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is a valuation allowance for probable incurred credit losses. Loans that are deemed to be uncollectible are charged off and deducted from the allowance for loan losses. The provision for loan losses and recoveries on loans previously charged off are credited to the allowance for loan losses. The allowance consists of specific and general components. The specific component relates to loans that are individually classified as impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Company will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Loans for which the terms have been modified resulting in a concession, and for which the borrower is experiencing financial difficulties, are considered TDRs and classified as impaired.
The general component covers loans that are collectively evaluated for impairment and loans that are not individually identified for impairment evaluation. The general component is based on historical loss experience adjusted for current factors and includes actual loss history experienced for the preceding rolling twelve year period or less, if twelve years of data is not available. This actual loss experience is supplemented with other economic factors based on the risks present for each portfolio segment. These economic factors include consideration of the following: levels and trends in delinquencies and impaired loans (including TDRs); levels and trends in charge-offs and recoveries, trends in volumes and terms of loans; migration of loans to the classification of special mention, substandard, or doubtful; effects of any change in risk selection and underwriting standards; other changes in lending policies and procedures; national and local economic trends and conditions; and effects of changes in credit concentrations.
Management estimates the allowance balance required using past loan loss experience, current economic conditions, the nature and volume of the portfolio, information about specific borrower situations, estimated collateral values and other factors. Allocations of the allowance may be made for specific loans, but the entire allowance is available for any loan that, in management’s judgment, should be charged off. Amounts are charged off when available information confirms that specific loans, or portions thereof, are uncollectible. This methodology for determining charge-offs is consistently applied to each group of loans. Management groups loans into different categories based on loan type to determine the appropriate allowance for each loan group.
A loan is considered impaired when full payment under the loan terms is not expected. Impairment is evaluated on an individual loan basis for all loans that meet the criteria for specifically evaluated impairment. If a loan is impaired, a portion of the allowance is allocated so that the loan is reported, net of the present value of estimated future cash flows using the loan’s original effective rate or at the fair value of collateral less estimated costs to sell if repayment is expected solely from the collateral. Factors considered in determining impairment include payment status, collateral value and the probability of collecting all amounts when due. Large groups of smaller-balance homogeneous loans such as residential real estate loans are collectively evaluated for impairment and, accordingly, they are not separately identified for impairment disclosures. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls are generally not classified as impaired. Management considered the significance of payment delays on a case by case basis, taking into consideration all the circumstances of the loan and borrower, including the length of delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower’s prior payment record, and the amount of the shortfall in relation to principal and interest owed.
Fair Value Measurement. The Company measures and presents fair values in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 820, Fair Value Measurement, that defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value, and requires disclosures about fair value measurements. This standard establishes a fair value hierarchy about the assumptions used to measure fair value and clarifies assumptions about risk and the effect of a restriction on the sale or use of an asset.
Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. This standard’s fair value hierarchy requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. The standard describes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1-Quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active markets that the entity has the ability to access as of the measurement date.
Level 2-Significant observable inputs other than Level 1 prices, such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities; quoted prices in markets that are not active; or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data.
Level 3-Significant unobservable inputs that reflect a Company’s own assumptions about the assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or liability.
Income Taxes. Income tax expense is the total of the current year income tax due or refundable and the change in deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax amounts attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, computed using enacted tax rates. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance, if needed, reduces deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.