Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many important factors, including those set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, or implied, by these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a medical device company focused on the development of implantable devices used in the surgical treatment of the sacropelvic anatomy. We have pioneered a proprietary minimally invasive surgical implant system, which we call iFuse, to fuse the sacroiliac joint to treat sacroiliac joint dysfunction, which often causes severe lower back pain. Since we introduced iFuse in 2009, as of December 31, 2020, more than 53,000 procedures have been performed by over 2,300 surgeons, in the U.S. and 35 other countries.
We introduced our second-generation implant, the iFuse-3D, in 2017. This patented titanium implant combines the triangular cross-section of the iFuse implant with the proprietary 3D-printed porous surface and fenestrated design.
In April 2019, we received clearance from the United States Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, to promote the use of our iFuse Implant System for fusion of the sacroiliac joint in conjunction with multi-level spinal fusion procedures to provide further stabilization and immobilization of the sacroiliac joint. For this indication, surgeons typically use the posterior approach, through the sacrum and into the iliac bones, which we call the Bedrock technique. We received CE marking and began marketing our iFuse Implant System for this indication and surgical technique in Europe in December 2019.
In March 2020, we received FDA 510(k) clearance for an expanded indication for the iFuse Implant System to support our trauma program.
We market our products primarily with a direct sales force as well as a number of distributors in the U.S., and with a combination of a direct sales force and distributors in other countries.
In October 2018, we completed our initial public offering (“IPO”) resulting in net proceeds of $113.4 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. In January and February 2020, we received a total of $63.0 million of net proceeds, after deducting the underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses, from our first follow-on public offering of our common stock. In October 2020, we received a total of $71.6 million of net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses, from our second follow-on offering of our common stock.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting economic downturn are affecting business conditions in our industry. The overall demand for our products decreased at certain points during the year as a result of the pandemic, which impacted our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020. Many state and local governments in the U.S. and foreign governments issued orders that temporarily precluded elective procedures in order to conserve scarce health system resources in view of the pandemic. The decrease in hospital admission rates and elective surgeries decreased the demand for elective procedures using our iFuse implants. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced case growth trends consistent with those experienced in the fourth quarter of 2019. Beginning at the end of February 2020, we began to see an impact on case volumes in Northern Italy due to the spread of the virus in the Lombardy region, the location of our operation in Gallarate, Italy. Overall, the disruption was not significant through the middle of March 2020, as Italy represents a small portion of our worldwide sales. Beginning in mid-March 2020 through April 2020, we saw a substantial worldwide reduction in global case volumes due to deferral of elective surgeries as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic in the U.S. and across Europe. In May 2020, case volumes began to recover as hospitals and medical centers across the U.S. and Europe resumed performance of elective surgical procedures. In November and December 2020, we again began to see the deferral of elective surgeries by hospitals, surgeons, and patients in the U.S. and across Europe.
We have taken what we believe are all necessary precautions to safeguard our employees, patients, customers, and other stakeholders from the COVID-19 pandemic. We are following the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s guidance and state and local restrictions. We modified operations and clinical support starting in March 2020, maintaining streamlined assembly, distribution and related processes in order to continue providing products to our customers. Specific protocols were designed and implemented to minimize contact time among employees working on site. We restricted non-essential travel to protect the health and safety of our employees, patients, and customers. Where healthcare operations were impacted, we supported healthcare providers via telephone and online technologies. We also continued to focus on increasing surgeon activity by utilizing a virtual education series for surgeons and mid-level practitioners to continue our training activities.
Starting in May 2020, we began to return to more normalized operations and clinical support as local restrictions were reduced, but tightened them again with the resurgence of COVID-19 in November 2020. The majority of our employees who are not related to manufacturing and order fulfillment are currently on a telecommunication work arrangement and have generally been able to successfully work remotely.
Beginning in March 2020, we curtailed certain operating expense due to limited visibility on the extent and duration of the impact from COVID-19. We took preemptive steps to manage spending, including implementing hiring restrictions, eliminating discretionary spending, reducing executive salaries, reducing capital expenditures, reducing non-essential marketing expenses, and delaying clinical research projects. We returned to more normalized spending levels in the fourth quarter with returning revenue growth, refinancing of our debt, and raising of additional equity.
The timing, extent and continuation of any further increase in procedures, and any corresponding increase in sales of our products, and whether there could be a future decrease in the current level of procedures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise, remain uncertain and are subject to a variety of factors, including:
•Further increases in COVID-19 cases in various locations that would result in more hospitalizations and a corresponding decrease in elective procedures in such impacted locations.
•Surgeons and hospitals postponing elective procedures as a result of reduced availability of physicians or space to treat patients, different treatment prioritizations, increased cost pressures and burdens on the overall healthcare infrastructure.
•Patients electing to defer or avoid elective procedures due to concerns about being exposed to COVID-19 in hospital settings, loss of employer-sponsored health insurance related to the high levels of unemployment in the U.S. or other reasons.
•Hospitals reserving more space for potential COVID-19 patients, especially as the number of COVID-19 cases spikes, limiting the space allocated to inpatient and outpatient elective procedures.
•Additional restrictions on access to customers, hospitals, labs and other medical facilities for sales activities, physician training and case support if they have been deemed to be “non-essential” personnel by those facilities or applicable local regulations.
The existence and further duration of the COVID-19 pandemic may also further exacerbate certain risks as described in “Item 1A - Risk Factors”. Recently, the U.S. and many other countries have experienced increasing trends of COVID-19 infections and hospitalizations.
The COVID-19 pandemic is continuing globally, and we are unable to predict how the COVID-19 pandemic will impact procedure volumes or product sales in the future, or the extent, duration or recurrence of the COVID-19 pandemic in any location. We are, therefore, unable to predict the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and such could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, financial condition and capital resources.
Factors Affecting Results of Operations and Key Performance Indicators
We monitor certain key performance indicators that we believe provide us and our investors indications of conditions that may affect results of our operations. Our revenue growth rate and commercial progress is impacted by, among other things, our key performance indicators, including our ability to leverage our sales force, increase surgeon activity and training, engage key opinion leaders, and leverage broad coverage.
Leverage our sales force
We have made significant investments in our sales force since our initial public offering in 2018. We have built a valuable sales team, and we believe they are the key to the recovery that follows the pandemic. As such, we have made it a top priority to support and retain our sales force through this challenging period. We limited new sales force hiring in the second and third quarter of 2020 due to uncertainty from the COVID-19 pandemic and focused on sales force productivity during this period, but resumed hiring of salespeople in the fourth quarter of 2020 based upon our favorable financial position and opportunity for future revenue growth.
As of December 31, 2020, our U.S. sales force consisted of 64 territory sales managers and 58 clinical support specialists directly employed by us and 41 third-party distributors, compared to 56 territory sales managers and 51 clinical support specialists directly employed by us and 37 third-party distributors as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, our international sales force consisted of 20 sales representatives directly employed by us and 31 exclusive third-party distributors, compared to 19 sales representatives directly employed by us and 27 exclusive third-party distributors as of December 31, 2019.
Increase surgeon activity and training
Our medical affairs team works closely with our sales team to increase surgeon activity and training. Surgeon activity includes both the number of surgeons performing iFuse procedures as well as the number of procedures performed per surgeon.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, in the U.S., more than 1,600 surgeon and 1,400 surgeons, respectively, have been trained on iFuse and have treated at least one patient. Outside the U.S., as of December 31, 2020, more than 600 surgeons have been trained on iFuse and have treated at least one patient. We grew our active surgeon base to 588 surgeons as of December 31, 2020, compared to 539 active surgeons as of December 31, 2019. We define an active surgeon to be a surgeon who has performed at least one case in the last three months. We will continue to pursue the remainder of the approximately 7,500 target surgeons in the U.S., as well as international surgeons, for training in the future.
The COVID-19 outbreak challenged our traditional method of hands-on cadaveric and dry-lab training. Therefore, in addition to utilizing a virtual education series for surgeons and mid-level practitioners for training activities, we began using the SI-BONE SImulator; a portable, radiation-free, haptics and computer-based simulator for training purposes. Starting in July 2020, we deployed four SImulators in the U.S. and one in Europe. The SImulators were used in approximately 45% of new surgeon training courses in the second half of 2020. We have placed an order for 20 additional SImulators to increase the percentage and number of surgeons trained and retrained using the SImulator in the U.S. and Europe.
Engage key opinion leaders
Our Bedrock technique is used in the treatment of adult spinal deformity. We introduced this technique in June 2019 for use in the fusion of the sacroiliac joints in conjunction with a multi-segment spinal fusion, or long construct, procedure. The Bedrock technique utilizes our proprietary iFuse Implants, with one implant placed across each sacroiliac joint (for a total of two implants per case) using a posterior approach, through the sacrum, across the sacroiliac joint, and into the ilium. The Bedrock technique differs from our traditional iFuse procedure, whereby three iFuse implants are placed across one sacroiliac joint via a lateral transarticular approach through the ilium and into the sacrum. The Bedrock technique is performed to increase stability at the base of a long construct. Biomechanical testing has shown that iFuse Implants placed in this position reduce sacroiliac joint motion by approximately 30% in conjunction with a long construct. We received CE mark clearance for the promotion of the Bedrock technique in Europe and we launched the promotion of this technique in select European markets.
We conduct training courses in several academic centers in the U.S. and engage key opinion leaders to support our development efforts. Interest in the Bedrock technique among deformity surgeons, including many key opinion leaders, has provided our sales representatives with access to important academic medical centers in the U.S. This enables our representatives to train a broader group of spine surgeons, including residents and fellows at these centers, on both the Bedrock technique and minimally invasive sacroiliac fusion. In 2020, we have conducted training courses at over 50 academic centers in the U.S., where more than 200 surgical residents and fellows have been trained.
Leverage broad coverage
We made significant progress in both the number of covered lives and the Medicare physician fee for surgeons performing minimally invasive sacroiliac fusion in the U.S. As of December 31, 2020, U.S. payors that account for 311.6 million U.S. covered lives reimburse for iFuse, with private payors accounting for 195.8 million of these covered lives. As of December 31, 2019, U.S. payors covering 282.7 million lives reimbursed for iFuse, of which 147.9 million were covered by private payors. As of December 31, 2020, 37 U.S. payors have issued positive coverage policies exclusive to iFuse for sacroiliac joint fusion because of the clinical evidence, compared to 32 exclusive coverage policies as of December 31, 2019. Further, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, an additional 21 and 20, respectively, private payors cover iFuse and other products for sacroiliac joint fusion. The 2020 covered lives include Humana, the fifth largest commercial health plan in the U.S. with over 12 million members, which adopted an exclusive coverage policy in December and Aetna, the third largest commercial health plan in the U.S. with over 22 million members, which adopted a coverage policy in May 2020. Currently, covered lives counts do not include Anthem, which covers minimally invasive sacroiliac fusion procedures in the event of pelvic girdle trauma only. We track the number of U.S. covered lives, or individuals whose healthcare is paid for by a private commercial or governmental payor that routinely reimburses for minimally invasive sacroiliac fusion, as a proxy for availability of the procedure within the U.S. healthcare payment system. We believe that the full impact of each coverage decision grows over time as surgeons gain confidence that they will receive reimbursement for the majority of their diagnosed patients.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate most of our revenue from sales of iFuse. Revenue from sales of iFuse fluctuate based on volume of cases (procedures performed), discounts, mix of international and U.S. sales, and the number of implants used for a particular patient. Similar to other orthopedic companies, our case volume can vary from quarter to quarter due to a variety of factors including reimbursement, sales force changes, physician activities, and seasonality. In addition, our revenue is impacted by changes in average selling price as we respond to the competitive landscape and price differences at different medical facilities, such as hospitals and ASCs. Further, revenue results can differ based upon the mix of business between U.S. and international sales and mix of our products either delivered at the point of implantation at the hospital or other medical facilities or delivered through distributors or to hospitals where the products were ordered in advance of the procedure. Our revenue from international sales is impacted by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates between the U.S. dollar (our reporting currency) and the local currency.
The COVID-19 pandemic reduced our expected number of cases. As the pandemic continued in the U.S. and Europe, it had a significant impact on our case volumes beginning mid-March 2020. The largest impact was felt in April 2020, where revenue declined by 84% from the prior year. Given the situation, a considerable number of cases were deferred from mid-March through the end of April 2020. Starting in May 2020, case volumes began to recover as hospitals and medical centers across the U.S. and Europe resumed performance of elective surgery procedures. In the third quarter of 2020, we saw a more normalized revenue growth resulting in a 26% increase compared to the prior year. In November and December 2020, we again began to see the deferral of elective surgeries by hospitals, surgeons, and patients in the U.S. and across Europe. We continue to monitor the potential impact of COVID-19 to our product sales in the U.S. and international markets.
Cost of Goods Sold, Gross Profit, and Gross Margin
We utilize third-party manufacturers for production of iFuse implants and instrument sets. Cost of goods sold consists primarily of costs of the components of iFuse implants and instruments, instrument set depreciation, scrap and inventory obsolescence, as well as distribution-related expenses such as logistics and shipping costs. Our cost of goods sold has historically increased as case levels increase.
Our gross profit and gross margin are affected by factors impacting revenue and cost of goods sold. In addition, our gross margins are typically higher on products we sell directly as compared to products we sell through third-party distributors. As a result, changes in the mix of direct versus distributor sales can directly influence our gross margins.
Our operations ran at suboptimal capacity as a result of decreased iFuse demand from worldwide restrictions on elective procedures during the second quarter of 2020. Accordingly, in the second quarter of 2020, certain labor and overhead costs were expensed as incurred which impacted our gross profit and gross margin. We saw a more normalized operations capacity during the second half of 2020 as case volumes began to recover. We may experience similar issues in future quarters due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of sales and marketing, research and development, and general and administrative expenses. Personnel costs are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, sales commissions and other cash and stock-based compensation related expenses. We anticipate operating expenses will continue to increase to support our employees. During the second quarter, we took steps to reduce variable expenses that were ineffective and slowed down hiring due to the impact to our revenue from COVID-19. We continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation, but as operations returned to more normalized levels, we made additional investments to execute our strategic plans and operational initiatives.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of salaries, stock-based compensation expense, and other compensation related costs, for personnel employed in sales, marketing, medical affairs, reimbursement and professional education departments. In addition, our sales and marketing expenses include commissions and bonuses, generally based on a percentage of sales, to our senior sales management, direct territory sales managers, territory associate representatives and third-party distributors.
Our sales and marketing spending reflected normal business activities into mid-March 2020. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we focused on protecting key investments in our field force while curtailing most other areas of sales and marketing spend during the second and third quarter of 2020. For example, we guaranteed certain levels of incentive compensation to members of our field sales organization in order to retain these employees and partially mitigate the impact of the pandemic to their compensation. In contrast, we reduced certain other spending during the COVID-19 pandemic, such as travel and related expenses, regional surgeon training, trade shows, and discretionary marketing. As revenue growth returned to the levels that we were experiencing prior to the pandemic, we increased our sales and marketing expense accordingly in the third and fourth quarters of 2020. We plan to increase investments in our sales force and surgeon training to capture future revenue growth opportunities.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses primarily consist of engineering, product development, clinical and regulatory expenses (including clinical study expenses), consulting services, outside prototyping services, outside research activities, materials, depreciation, and other costs associated with development of our products. Research and development expenses also include related personnel compensation and stock-based compensation expense. We expense research and development costs as they are incurred.
Research and development expenses for engineering projects fluctuate with project timing. Based upon our broader set of product development initiatives and the stage of the underlying projects, we expect to continue to make investments in research and development. Clinical study expenses declined during mid-March through April due to hospital postponement of trials as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, most hospitals allowed the resumption of clinical trials starting in May 2020. As such, we anticipate that research and development expenses will continue to increase in the future.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of salaries, stock-based compensation expense, and other costs for finance, accounting, legal, compliance, and administrative matters. We took measures during most of the year to control discretionary items classified as general and administrative expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic, but expect our general and administrative expenses to return to normal levels as the acuity of the COVID-19 pandemic recedes. General and administrative activities that sustain our business and support our operations as a public company, include but are not limited to: expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and those of the Nasdaq Global Market on which our securities are traded; additional insurance expenses; investor relations activities; and other administrative and professional services.
Interest Income
Interest income is primarily related to our investments of excess cash in money market funds and marketable securities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense is primarily related to borrowings, amortization of debt issuance costs and accretion of a final fee on our Solar Term Loan. Following the refinancing of our term loan, interest expense also includes the loss on debt extinguishment.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of net foreign exchange gains and losses on foreign transactions.
Results of Operations
We manage and operate as one reportable segment. The table below summarizes our results of operations for the periods presented (percentages are amounts as a percentage of revenue), which we derived from the accompanying consolidated financial statements:
We derive the majority of our revenue from sales to customers in the U.S. Revenue by geography is based on billing address of the customer. The table below summarizes our revenue by geography:
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue, Cost of Goods Sold, Gross Profit, and Gross Margin:
Revenue. The increase in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 comprised a $6.3 million increase in our U.S. revenue, partly offset by a decrease of $0.2 million in our international revenue. The increase in U.S. revenue was attributable to an increase in case volumes, partly offset by lower average selling prices resulting from procedures performed at different medical facilities and cases using fewer implants in certain procedures. The increasing growth trend of our U.S. case count prior to the impact of COVID-19 was partly offset by the decline in U.S. case volumes specifically during mid-March through April 2020 due to COVID-19. Prior to the impact of COVID-19, we experienced case growth trends consistent with those experienced in the fourth quarter of 2019. The case growth we experienced prior to the impact of COVID-19 we attribute to higher sales force productivity, higher numbers of sales personnel, and increased active surgeons due to improving U.S. reimbursement coverage. The decrease in our international revenue we believe was primarily due to the effects of COVID-19.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin. Gross profit increased $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily driven by higher revenue, partly offset by higher cost of goods sold. Gross margin decreased to 88% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 90% the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to certain period costs of $0.2 million charged directly to cost of operations and increases in inventory write-downs of $0.8 million. Certain period costs were expensed as incurred during the second quarter of 2020 because our operations ran at suboptimal capacity due to lower case volumes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Gross margin was also impacted by higher employee related costs and inventory management to support the growth of the business.
Operating Expenses:
Sales and Marketing Expenses. The increase in sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to an increase of $9.7 million in employee related costs and stock-based compensation expense driven by increased headcount. The increase was partly offset by decreases in travel and other sales and marketing related expenses of $4.2 million due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Research and Development Expenses. The increase in research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to increases in employee related costs and stock-based compensation expense of $1.7 million driven by increased headcount, as well as increases in other research and development expenses of $0.5 million primarily due to clinical study and research and development activities.
General and Administrative Expenses. The decrease in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to $2.5 million of accrued litigation expense recorded in the third quarter of 2019, the reversal of excess accrued litigation expense of $0.6 million in the second quarter of 2020 following the final settlement of our TCPA class action lawsuit, and decreases in other general and administrative expenses of $0.6 million as a result of curtailment of discretionary spending in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. These decreases were partly offset by an increase of $2.3 million in employee related costs and stock-based compensation expense driven by increased headcount and $0.2 million public offering costs that were expensed associated with the follow-on offering in the first quarter of 2020.
Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net:
*not meaningful
Interest Income. The decrease in interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was mainly due to lower interest earned on our investments in marketable securities. Although the average investments balances were higher for the year ended December 31, 2020, interest rates earned were lower.
Interest Expense. The increase in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was mainly due to the loss on extinguishment of our Pharmakon Term Loan of $1.5 million, partly offset by lower interest associated with our Solar Term Loan. See "-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Term Loan."
Other Expense, Net. Other expense, net, increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to higher foreign currency exchange losses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities of $196.4 million compared to $93.1 million as of December 31, 2019. We have financed our operations through our public offerings, debt financing arrangements, and the sale of our products. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019 we had $39.5 million and $39.2 million outstanding debt, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $239.3 million. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred a net loss of $43.7 million and $38.4 million, respectively, and expect to incur additional losses in the future. We have not achieved positive cash flow from operations to date.
Based upon our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash and marketable securities will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through at least the next 12 months. However, the economic impact of the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, and our responses thereto (including such actions we have taken or may take in the future as disclosed elsewhere in this Report) pose risks and uncertainties in our future available capital resources. Further, we may face challenges and uncertainties and, as a result, our available capital resources may be consumed more rapidly than currently expected due to, but not limited to, the following as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise: (a) decreases in sales of our products and the uncertainty of future revenues from new products; (b) changes we may make to the business that affect ongoing operating expenses; (c) changes we may make in our business strategy; (d) regulatory developments affecting our existing products; (e) changes we may make in our research and development spending plans; and (f) other items affecting our forecasted level of expenditures and use of cash resources.
Term Loan
The outstanding debt as of December 31, 2020 is related to a term loan pursuant to the Loan and Security Agreement dated May 29, 2020, entered into by us with Solar Capital Partners (“Solar”). Pursuant to the Loan and Security Agreement, Solar provided an aggregate principal amount of $40.0 million term loan to us (the “Solar Term Loan”). Prior to Solar Term Loan, our outstanding debt was related to a $40.0 million Term Loan with Biopharma Credit Investments IV Sub LP (“Pharmakon”) entered in October 2017 (the “Pharmakon Term Loan”). In accordance with the Loan and Security Agreement with Solar, we paid in full and terminated the Pharmakon Term Loan, which we accounted for as debt extinguishment in accordance with the accounting standards. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there was no amount available that could be borrowed under the credit facilities.
The Pharmakon Term Loan included an interest-only period for 35 months through September 2020 and equal quarterly principal payments plus interest through December 2022. The Pharmakon Term Loan carried a fixed interest rate of 11.5% and allowed for early prepayment. The prepayment penalty was equal to the remaining interest due if prepaid within the first 30 months, a 2% penalty for months 31-48, and a 1% penalty for months 49-60.
The Solar Term Loan bears interest at a rate per annum equal to 9.40% plus London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”), payable monthly in arrears. LIBOR means the greater of (i) 0.33% or (ii) one-month LIBOR (or a comparable replacement rate to be determined by the collateral agent if the LIBOR is no longer available), which rate shall reset monthly. The Solar Term Loan matures in 60 months on June 1, 2025 (“Maturity Date”), with an interest-only period of 36 months through June 2023, and then repaid in equal monthly principal payments plus interest through maturity date. Pursuant to the Loan and Security Agreement, we may voluntarily prepay the Solar Term Loan, in full or in part, in increments of $10.0 million, for a prepayment premium in an amount equal to 3.00% of the principal if prepaid in year one, 1.25% of the principal if prepaid in year two, and 0.50% of the principal if prepaid in year three or later. The prepayment premium will be waived if we voluntarily prepay and refinance the outstanding balance with Solar. The Solar Term Loan is secured by substantially all of our assets. We are also obligated to pay a final fee equal to $1.0 million or 2.5% of the aggregate principal amount of the Solar Term Loan. This final fee shall be due and payable on the earliest of (i) the maturity date, (ii) the acceleration of the loan balance, or (iii) the full prepayment, refinancing, substitution or replacement of Solar Term Loan. The final fee was included within the long-term borrowings and is accreted to interest expense using straight-line method over the life of the term loan.
In July 2017, the head of the United Kingdom Financial Conduct Authority announced the desire to phase out the use of LIBOR by the end of 2021. In addition, the U.S. Federal Reserve, in conjunction with the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, a steering committee composed of large U.S. financial institutions, is considering replacing U.S. dollar LIBOR with the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”), a new index calculated by short-term repurchase agreements, backed by Treasury securities. Although there have been a few issuances utilizing SOFR or the Sterling Over Night Index Average, an alternative reference rate that is based on transactions, it is unknown whether these alternative reference rates will attain market acceptance as replacements for LIBOR. There is currently no definitive information regarding the future utilization of LIBOR or of any particular replacement rate. As such, the potential effect of any replacement of the LIBOR could have on our business and financial condition cannot yet be determined.
Subject to other customary covenants set forth in the Loan and Security Agreement, we are required to maintain unrestricted cash and cash equivalents based on the trailing 12-month net products revenues tested on a monthly basis as follows: (a) $15.0 million if net product revenue is less than $75.0 million; or (b) $7.5 million if net product revenue is greater than or equal to $75.0 million, but less than $100.0 million (the “minimum liquidity requirement”). We are not subject to minimum liquidity requirement when trailing twelve-month net product revenues exceed $100.0 million. Upon the occurrence of an event of default of certain customary covenants, including the minimum liquidity requirement, as specified in the Loan and Security Agreement, subject to specified cure periods, all amounts owed by us would begin to bear interest at a rate that is 5.0% above the rate effective immediately before the event of default and may be declared immediately due and payable by Solar. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all debt covenants. Though there are uncertainties surrounding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic that may impact our future revenue, we believe that we have sufficient cash and cash equivalents to meet the minimum liquidity requirements in the foreseeable succeeding period.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Represents the principal obligations and the final fee at maturities of our Solar Term Loan.
(2)Represents the future interest obligations on our Solar Term Loan estimated using the fixed interest rate of 9.40% plus LIBOR held constant as of December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented below:
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $30.7 million resulted from cash outflows due to net loss of $43.7 million, adjusted for $15.6 million of non-cash items and cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities of $2.5 million. Net cash used in operation activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $31.6 million resulted from cash outflows due to net loss of $38.4 million, adjusted for $7.3 million of non-cash items and cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities of $0.5 million. The increase in net loss, net of non-cash items for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was mainly due to the higher operating expenses from the growth of the business, partly offset by higher revenue and decreases of certain expenses primarily due to the timing of accrual for litigation expense, and the result of actions taken to reduce discretionary spending in response to COVID-19. Cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities for year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily due to timing of prepayments of certain expenses, higher accounts receivable due to the timing of collections, higher inventory due to the timing of inventory build-up and cash outflows due to increases in operating liabilities due to timing of payments. Cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2019 were primarily due to increases in inventories and accounts receivable as a result of increased case volumes and growth of the business, partly offset by increased operating liabilities due to the timing of payments and accrual of litigation expense related to a legal proceeding.
Cash Provided by (Used In) Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $62.9 million compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $13.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of purchases of our marketable securities, net of maturities and sales, of $60.4 million, and by purchases of purchases of property and equipment of $2.6 million. Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of maturities of our marketable securities, net of purchases of $15.9 million, partially offset by purchases of property and equipment of $2.4 million.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $136.4 million compared to $3.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The difference was primarily due to the receipt of the proceeds, net of underwriting discounts, commissions and offering costs of $134.6 million from our follow-on public offerings in January and October 2020. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 also include proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our stock-based incentive compensation plans of $3.4 million, partly offset by debt payments associated with refinancing of our debt of $1.6 million. This compares to the cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 which consisted of issuance of shares of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan of $3.7 million, partially offset by payments of additional IPO related costs of $0.2 million.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments, and Use of Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated, and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates. For more comprehensive discussion of our significant accounting policies, refer to “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Account Policies” in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We adopted the new revenue standard in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”) effective January 1, 2019. The adoption of ASC 606 did not have a material effect on our revenue recognition. We derive our revenue from the sale of our products to medical groups and hospitals through our direct sales force and distributors throughout the U.S. and Europe. In accordance with ASC 606, we recognize revenue when control is transferred to the customer, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for the goods or services. To recognize revenue, we apply the following five step approach: (1) identify the contract with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue when a performance obligation is satisfied.
As it relates to majority of our revenue consisting of product sales where our sales representative delivers the product at the point of implantation at hospital or medical facilities, we recognize the revenue upon completion of the procedure and authorization by the customer, net of rebates and price discounts. We also generate a small portion of our revenue from sale of products through distributors and hospital or medical facilities where the product is ordered in advance of a procedure. The performance obligation is the delivery of the product and therefore, we recognize revenue upon shipment to the customers, net of rebates and price discounts. We account for rebates and price discounts as reduction to revenue, calculated based on the terms agreed to with the customer. Historically, there had been no significant price discounts. Sales prices are specified in either customer contract, agreed price list, or purchase order, which is executed prior to the transfer of control to the customer. For certain hospitals and medical facilities, we have agreements in place consists of either a master services agreement or an approved price list, which defines the terms and conditions of the arrangement, including the pricing information, payment terms and pertinent aspects of the relationship between the parties. We also have agreements in place with its distributors, which include standard terms that do not allow for payment contingent on resale of the product, obtaining financing, or other terms that could impact the distributor’s payment obligation. Our standard payment terms are generally net 30 to 90 days. We consider sales commissions and related expenses as incremental and recoverable costs of acquiring customer contracts. Our sales commissions paid to our sales representatives commensurate for each surgery performed. The period of benefit is concurrent when we recognize our revenue, as such, we also recognize sales commission as expense when incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
We estimate the grant date fair value of stock options and ESPP using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. The model requires us to make a number of assumptions including expected volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. A number of these assumptions are subjective, and their determination generally require judgment.
•Expected Term - The expected term represents the period that we expect the share-based awards to be outstanding. We use the simplified method to determine the expected term as permitted by the guidance since we have no sufficient historical exercise patterns to estimate the expected life. The simplified method is calculated as the average of the time to vesting and the contractual life of the options.
•Expected Volatility - Since we became public in October 2018 and have no sufficient trading history, we use stock price volatility using the average historical volatilities of publicly traded companies within our industry that we consider comparable to our business over a period approximately equal to the expected term of our stock options.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate - We base the risk-free interest rate on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issued in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of the option.
•Dividend Yield - We have not paid any dividends and we have no current plans to pay dividends on our common stock. As such, we use expected dividend yield of zero.
We recognize stock-based compensation expense over the requisite service period using the straight-line method, which is based on the value of the portion of stock-based payment awards that is ultimately expected to vest. As such, we reduce our stock-based compensation for the estimated forfeitures at the date of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. We use historical data to estimate pre-vesting forfeitures and record stock-based compensation expense only for those awards that we expect to vest. To the extent actual forfeitures differ from the estimates, we record the difference as a cumulative adjustment in the period that the estimates are revised.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Seasonality
Our business is affected by seasonal variations. For instance, we have historically experienced lower sales in the summer months and higher sales in the last quarter of the fiscal year. However, taken as a whole, seasonality does not have a material impact on our financial results.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
In April 2012, the JOBS Act was enacted. Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this exemption and, therefore, are not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for related discussions on recently adopted accounting standards and updates on recently issued accounting standards not yet effective, which information is incorporated by reference here.