Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
SIFCO is engaged in the production of forgings and machined and sub-assembled components primarily for the A&E markets. The processes and services include forging, heat-treating and machining. The Company operates under one business segment.
When planning and evaluating its business operations, the Company takes into consideration certain factors, including the following: (i) the projected build rate for commercial, business and military aircraft, as well as the engines that power such aircraft; (ii) the projected build rate for industrial steam and gas turbine engines; and (iii) the projected maintenance, repair and overhaul schedules for commercial, business and military aircraft, as well as the engines that power such aircraft.
The Company operates within a cost structure that includes a significant fixed component. Therefore, higher net sales volumes are expected to result in greater operating income because such higher volumes allow the business operations to better leverage the fixed component of their respective cost structures. Conversely, the opposite effect is expected to occur at lower net sales and related production volumes.
A. Results of Operations
Overview
The Company produces forged components for (i) turbine engines that power commercial, business and regional aircraft as well as military aircraft and armored military vehicles; (ii) airframe applications for a variety of aircraft; (iii) industrial gas and steam turbine engines for power generation units; and (iv) other commercial applications.
Fire Restoration
The insurance claim related to the fire on December 26, 2018 at the Orange location was finalized with the Company's insurance carrier. In the third quarter of fiscal 2021, the Company completed the restoration of the final two of the six presses damaged in the fire, and all six presses are currently in operation. Restoration of the building structure was completed as of September 30, 2021.
Having finalized the claim with its insurance carrier, cash proceeds of $4.5 million were received in fiscal 2021. A total of $3.0 million was recognized within the consolidated statements of operations. The Company has business interruption insurance coverage, of which $0.5 million of the amount received was reflected within the cost of goods sold line within the consolidated
statement of operations. See Note 11, Commitments and Contingencies, of the consolidated financial statements to see how the insurance claim impacted the consolidated statements of operations and balance sheets.
COVID-19
As previously noted, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the United States and other countries in which the Company operates. During fiscal 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic continued to impact the Company’s results of operations. Given the long lead times for certain of the Company's products, the Company has seen a greater impact related to the effects of COVID-19 on orders and deliveries in fiscal 2021 than in fiscal 2020. In response to the uncertain environment created by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company has, in prior periods, taken measures to reduce costs by furloughing and laying off certain of its employees from one of its plant locations that has experienced reduced sales of commercial aerospace products. Such employees have since returned to work. The Company continues to actively monitor and find ways to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on its operations and consider its ability to pivot its operations and the industries served.
Fiscal Year 2021 Compared with Fiscal Year 2020
Net Sales
Net sales comparative information for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, is as follows:
Net sales in fiscal 2021 decreased 12.3%, or $14.0 million to $99.6 million, compared with $113.6 million in fiscal 2020. Given the long lead times for certain of the Company's products, the Company has seen a greater impact related to the effects of COVID-19 on orders and deliveries in fiscal 2021 than in fiscal 2020. Fixed wing aircraft sales decreased $13.5 million compared with the same period last year due to timing of customer orders and a decrease in build rates in certain commercial programs as the rebound in air travel did not occur as quickly as anticipated, partially offset by increased sales for military programs. Rotorcraft sales decreased $4.3 million in fiscal 2021 compared to the same period in fiscal 2020 primarily due to revenue recognized over time for certain military applications. The energy components for power generation units increased $3.7 million compared with the same period last year due to customer order increases as the market saw some recovery.
Commercial net sales were 36.7% of total net sales and military net sales were 63.3% of total net sales in fiscal 2021, compared with 42.6% and 57.4%, respectively, in the comparable period in fiscal 2020. Commercial net sales (which includes energy components) decreased $11.7 million to $36.6 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $48.3 million in fiscal 2020 primarily due to the decrease in build rates in the commercial aerospace industry, partially offset by an increase in energy component sales for power generation due to increased customer orders. Military net sales decreased $2.2 million to $63.0 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $65.2 million in fiscal 2020 primarily due to timing of orders related to certain military programs.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold decreased by $5.2 million, or 5.6%, to $88.4 million, or 88.7% of net sales, during fiscal 2021, compared with $93.6 million or 82.4% of net sales in the comparable period of fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower volume from the commercial aerospace programs, cost controlling measures and the non-recurrence of the one-time pension withdrawal charge of $0.8 million incurred in the prior year. Prior year results included higher insurance recoveries by $2.5 million related to business interruption and mitigation expense as part of the fire settlement.
Gross Profit
Gross profit decreased by $8.8 million, or 43.9%, to $11.2 million during fiscal 2021, compared with $20.0 million in fiscal 2020. Gross margin percent of sales was 11.3% during fiscal 2021, compared with 17.6% in fiscal 2020, primarily due to lower volume, higher idle expense costs of $1.9 million and lower insurance recoveries of $0.5 million in fiscal 2021 compared with $2.0 million in the prior year.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $13.5 million, or 13.5% of net sales, during fiscal 2021, compared with $14.0 million, or 12.4% of net sales, in fiscal 2020. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses is due to the continued cost reduction efforts by management in response to COVID-19, such as lower wages related to a furlough at one location and fewer travel expenses, partially offset by higher legal and professional costs and commissions.
Amortization of Intangibles
Amortization of intangibles decreased $0.5 million to $1.0 million during fiscal 2021, compared with $1.5 million in the comparable period of fiscal 2020. Such decrease was primarily due to certain intangible assets that were fully amortized during fiscal 2020.
Other/General
The Company recorded operating loss of $1.1 million during fiscal 2021, compared with an operating income of $10.1 million in fiscal 2020.
Current period results include a gain on insurance recoveries of $2.4 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $5.9 million in fiscal 2020 as it relates to fire claim at the Orange location.
Interest expense decreased $0.3 million to $0.6 million in fiscal 2021, compared with $0.9 million in the same period in fiscal 2020. The decrease is primarily due to the reduction of interest rates and lower average borrowings. See Note 5, Debt, of the consolidated financial statements for further information.
The following table sets forth the weighted average interest rates and weighted average outstanding balances under the Company’s debt agreements in fiscal 2021 and 2020:
The Company believes that inflation did not materially affect its results of operations in either fiscal 2021 or 2020 and does not expect inflation to be a significant factor in fiscal 2022, due to the average duration of our projects. However, no assurances can be made that the Company will not experience inflationary pressures in the future.
Income Taxes
The Company’s effective tax rate in fiscal 2021 was 62.2% compared with (2.3%) in fiscal 2020. The increase in the effective tax rate in fiscal 2021 is primarily attributable to tax benefits from adjusting deferred taxes recorded in Italy applied against a year-to-date loss in fiscal 2021 and changes in jurisdictional mix of income in fiscal 2021 compared with the same period in fiscal 2020. The effective tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate due primarily to the valuation allowance against the Company’s U.S. deferred tax assets and income in foreign jurisdictions that are taxed at different rates than the U.S. statutory tax rate.
Net Income (Loss)
Net loss was $0.7 million during fiscal 2021, compared with net income of $9.2 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease in income in the current period was primarily due to lower volume, lower insurance recoveries and higher idle expense, partially offset by continued costs savings activities and the favorable tax benefit recorded in fiscal 2021.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Presented below is certain financial information based on our EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. References to “EBITDA” mean earnings (losses) from operations before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, and references to “Adjusted EBITDA” mean EBITDA plus, as applicable for each relevant period, certain adjustments as set forth in the reconciliations of net income to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA.
Neither EBITDA nor Adjusted EBITDA is a measurement of financial performance under generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The Company presents EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA because it believes that they are useful indicators for evaluating operating performance and liquidity, including the Company’s ability to incur and service debt and it uses EBITDA to evaluate prospective acquisitions. Although the Company uses EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the reasons noted above, the use of these non-GAAP financial measures as analytical tools has limitations. Therefore, reviewers of the Company’s financial information should not consider them in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of the Company's results of operations as reported in accordance with GAAP. Some of these limitations include:
•Neither EBITDA nor Adjusted EBITDA reflects the interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest payments, on indebtedness;
•Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and neither EBITDA nor Adjusted EBITDA reflects any cash requirements for such replacements;
•The omission of the substantial amortization expense associated with the Company’s intangible assets further limits the usefulness of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA; and
•Neither EBITDA nor Adjusted EBITDA includes the payment of taxes, which is a necessary element of operations.
Because of these limitations, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as measures of discretionary cash available to the Company to invest in the growth of its businesses. Management compensates for these limitations by not viewing EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA in isolation and specifically by using other GAAP measures, such as net income (loss), net sales, and operating profit (loss), to measure operating performance. The Company’s calculation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to the calculation of similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA:
(1)Represents the gain or loss from changes in the exchange rates between the functional currency and the foreign currency in which the transaction is denominated.
(2)Represents miscellaneous non-operating income or expense, such as pension costs, grant income or extinguishment of debt. Pension settlement costs was reclassed from this line to Pension settlement/curtailment benefit. See Footnote 6.
(3)Represents the difference between the proceeds from the sale of operating equipment and the carrying values shown on the Company’s books or asset impairment of long-lived assets.
(4)Represents the difference between the insurance proceeds received for the damaged property and the carrying values shown on the Company's books for the assets that were damaged in the fire at the Orange location.
(5)Represents the equity-based compensation expense recognized by the Company under its 2016 Long-Term Incentive Plan (as the amendment and restatement of, and successor to, the 2007 Long-Term Incentive Plan, and referred to as the "2016 Plan") due to granting of awards, awards not vesting and/or forfeitures.
(6)Represents expense incurred by its defined benefit pension plans related to settlement of pension obligations.
(7)Represents the change in the reserve for inventories for which cost is determined using the last in, first out ("LIFO") method.
Reference to the above activities can be found in the consolidated financial statements included in