Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. Refer to Part II, Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 (filed with the SEC on March 5, 2020) for additional discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018, as well as our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. In addition to historical information, the following discussion and other parts of this Annual Report contain forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a commercial-stage pharmaceutical company. Our lead product, TPOXX® (“oral TPOXX®”), is an FDA-approved oral formulation antiviral drug for the treatment of human smallpox disease caused by variola virus.
On July 13, 2018 the United States Food & Drug Administration (“FDA”) approved oral TPOXX® for the treatment of smallpox. Oral TPOXX® is a novel small-molecule drug that has been delivered to the U.S. Strategic National Stockpile (“Strategic Stockpile”) under the Project BioShield Act of 2004 (“Project BioShield”). Concurrent with the approval, the FDA granted the Company's request for a Priority Review Voucher (“PRV”). A PRV is a voucher that may be used to obtain an accelerated FDA review of a product candidate. On October 31, 2018, the Company sold its PRV for cash consideration of $80.0 million.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant societal and economic disruption. Such disruption, and the associated risks and costs, are expected to continue for an indeterminate period of time. Given the uncertain future course of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the uncertain scale and scope of its future impact, the Company is continually reviewing business and financial risks related to the pandemic and seeking coordination with its government partners with respect to the performance of current and future government contracts. Additionally, the Company is continually coordinating with service providers and vendors, in particular Contract Manufacturing Organizations ("CMOs") that constitute our supply chain, to review actions and risks caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
As of the filing date of this document, the Company has not identified or been notified by government customers of impediments to the continued full performance of their government contracts. Additionally, the Company’s supply chain for the manufacture of TPOXX® has remained operational on current projects without material COVID-19 related disruption, and in the ordinary course of operations, the supply chain has secured sufficient raw materials to support manufacture and product delivery activities on current projects. With regard to day-to-day operations, the COVID-19 pandemic has at times slowed the daily pace of execution of government contracts as well as new contract generation, as U.S. and foreign government staff overseeing health security preparedness has been involved directly or indirectly in governmental responses to the pandemic, which has diverted government staff time that would normally be directed toward contract matters involving SIGA. The Company expects to experience delays, or slower-than-usual pace, in connection with certain research and development activities, such as those that involve clinical trials. The Company does not currently expect any pandemic-related delays in research and development activities to have a material adverse impact on the financial condition or annual financial results of the Company, or its long-term performance, but cannot give assurances as to the full extent of the impact at this time.
Overall, the COVID-19 pandemic has not adversely affected the liquidity position of the Company, nor is it currently expected to have a material adverse effect on the financial condition of the Company. Given that the pandemic has diverted foreign government staff time normally directed toward contract matters involving SIGA, the COVID-19 pandemic could affect the timing of international contract awards for oral TPOXX®; otherwise, the pandemic is not currently expected to have a material adverse effect on the 2021 financial results of the Company. The pandemic has resulted in almost all of our employees working from home; however, the shift in location for employees has not had a material adverse impact on the day-to-day operations of the Company. If the general negative effect of the COVID-19 pandemic becomes more acute or is prolonged, there could be potential risks to our business and cash flows.
Lead Product-TPOXX®
19C BARDA Contract
On September 10, 2018, the Company entered into a contract with the U.S. Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority ("BARDA") pursuant to which SIGA agreed to deliver up to 1,488,000 courses of oral TPOXX® to the U.S. Strategic National Stockpile ("Strategic Stockpile"), and to manufacture and deliver to the Strategic Stockpile, or store as vendor-managed inventory, up to 212,000 courses of the intravenous (IV) formulation of TPOXX® (“IV TPOXX®”). Additionally, the contract includes funding from BARDA for advanced development of IV TPOXX®, post-marketing activities for oral and IV TPOXX®, and procurement activities. As of December 31, 2020, the contract with BARDA (as amended, modified, or supplemented from time to time, the "19C BARDA Contract") contemplates up to approximately $602.5 million of payments, of which approximately $51.7 million of payments are included within the base period of performance of five years, approximately $127.1 million of payments are related to exercised options and up to approximately $423.7 million of payments are currently specified as unexercised options. BARDA may choose in its sole discretion when, or whether, to exercise any of the unexercised options. The period of performance for options is up to ten years from the date of entry into the 19C BARDA Contract and such options could be exercised at any time during the contract term, including during the base period of performance.
The base period of performance specifies potential payments of approximately $51.7 million for the following activities: payments of approximately $11.1 million for the delivery of approximately 35,700 courses of oral TPOXX® to the Strategic Stockpile; payments of $8.0 million for the manufacture of 20,000 courses of final drug product of IV TPOXX® ("IV FDP"), of which $3.2 million of payments are related to the manufacture of bulk drug substance ("IV BDS") to be used in the manufacture of IV FDP; payments of approximately $32.0 million to fund advanced development of IV TPOXX®; and payments of approximately $0.6 million for supportive procurement activities. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had received or billed for $11.1 million for the successful delivery of approximately 35,700 courses of oral TPOXX® to the Strategic Stockpile, $3.2 million for the manufacture of IV BDS and $9.7 million for other base period activities. IV BDS is expected to be used for the manufacture of 20,000 courses of IV FDP. The $3.2 million received for the manufacture of IV BDS has been recorded as deferred revenue as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019; such amount is expected to be recognized as revenue when IV TPOXX® containing such IV BDS is delivered to the Strategic Stockpile or placed in vendor-managed inventory.
The options that have been exercised to date provide for payments up to approximately $127.1 million. There are exercised options for the following activities: payments up to $11.2 million for the procurement of raw materials to be used in the manufacture of at least 363,070 courses of oral TPOXX®, payments up to $101.3 million for the delivery of up to 363,070 courses of oral TPOXX®; and, payments of up to $14.6 million for funding of post-marketing activities for oral TPOXX®. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has received the following payments in connection with exercised options: $11.2 million was received for the procurement of raw materials and such amount was initially recorded as deferred revenue and was recognized as revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020, with deliveries of approximately 363,000 courses, in the aggregate, of oral TPOXX®; $101.3 million was received in connection with the June, September and October deliveries, in total, of approximately 363,000 courses of oral TPOXX®; and $5.4 million has been received or billed for in connection with post-marketing activities for oral TPOXX®.
Unexercised options specify potential payments up to approximately $423.7 million in total (if all such options are exercised). There are options for the following activities: payments of up to $337.7 million for the delivery of up to approximately 1,089,000 courses of oral TPOXX® to the Strategic Stockpile; payments of up to $76.8 million for the manufacture of up to 192,000 courses of IV FDP, of which up to $30.7 million of payments would be paid upon the manufacture of IV BDS to be used in the manufacture of IV FDP; payments of up to approximately $3.6 million to fund post-marketing activities for IV TPOXX®; and payments of up to approximately $5.6 million for supportive procurement activities.
The options related to IV TPOXX® are divided into two primary manufacturing steps. There are options related to the manufacture of bulk drug substance (“IV BDS Options”), and there are corresponding options (for the same number of IV courses) for the manufacture of final drug product (“IV FDP Options”). BARDA may choose to exercise any, all, or none of these options in its sole discretion. The 19C BARDA Contract includes: three separate IV BDS Options, each providing for the bulk drug substance equivalent of 64,000 courses of IV TPOXX®; and three separate IV FDP Options, each providing for 64,000 courses of final drug product of IV TPOXX®. BARDA has the sole discretion as to whether to simultaneously exercise IV BDS Options and IV FDP Options, or whether to exercise options at different points in time (or alternatively, to only exercise the IV BDS Option but not the IV FDP Option). If BARDA decides to only exercise IV BDS Options, then the Company would receive payments up to $30.7 million; alternatively, if BARDA decides to exercise both IV BDS Options and IV FDP Options, then the Company would receive payments up to $76.8 million. For each set of options relating to a specific group of courses (for instance, the IV BDS and IV FDP options that reference the same 64,000 courses), BARDA has the option to independently purchase IV BDS or IV FDP. The Company estimates that sales of the IV formulation under this contract (under current terms), assuming the IV FDP Options were exercised, would have a gross margin (sales less cost of sales, as a percentage of sales) that is less than 40%.
Under the terms of this contract, exercise of procurement options are at the sole discretion of BARDA. The request for proposal that preceded the award of the 19C BARDA Contract indicated that the expected purpose of the contract was to maintain the level of smallpox antiviral preparedness in the Strategic Stockpile. Based on prior product delivery activity, and current FDA-approved shelf life of oral TPOXX®, the Company estimates that approximately one million courses of smallpox antiviral treatment would need to be delivered to the U.S. Government between 2021 and 2023 in order to maintain stockpile levels of unexpired smallpox antiviral treatment during this period.
2011 BARDA Contract
On May 13, 2011, the Company signed a contract with BARDA pursuant to which BARDA agreed to buy from the Company 1.7 million courses of oral TPOXX®. Additionally, the Company agreed to contribute to BARDA 300,000 courses at no additional cost to BARDA.
The contract with BARDA (as amended, modified, or supplemented from time to time the "2011 BARDA Contract”) includes a base contract, as modified, (“2011 Base Contract”) as well as options. The 2011 Base Contract specifies approximately $508.4 million of payments (including exercised options), of which, as of December 31, 2020, $459.8 million has been received by the Company for the manufacture and delivery of 1.7 million courses of oral TPOXX® and $45.6 million has been received for certain reimbursements in connection with development and supportive activities. Approximately $3.0 million remains eligible to be received in the future for reimbursements of development and supportive activities.
For courses of oral TPOXX® that have been physically delivered to the Strategic Stockpile under the 2011 BARDA Contract, there are product replacement obligations, including: (i) a product replacement obligation in the event that the final version of oral TPOXX® approved by the FDA was different from any courses of oral TPOXX® that had been delivered to the Strategic Stockpile (the "FDA Approval Replacement Obligation"); (ii) a product replacement obligation, at no cost to BARDA, in the event that oral TPOXX® is recalled or deemed to be recalled for any reason; and (iii) a product replacement obligation in the event that oral TPOXX® does not meet any specified label claims. On July 13, 2018, the FDA approved oral TPOXX® for the treatment of smallpox and there is no difference between the approved product and courses in the Strategic Stockpile. As such, the possibility of the FDA Approval Replacement Obligation resulting in any future replacements of product within the Strategic Stockpile is remote.
The 2011 BARDA Contract includes options. On July 30, 2018, the 2011 BARDA Contract was modified and BARDA exercised its option relating to FDA approval of the aforementioned 84-month expiry for oral TPOXX® for which the Company was paid $50.0 million in August 2018. With the option exercise, the 2011 BARDA Contract was modified so that the 2011 Base Contract increased by $50.0 million. Remaining options, if all were exercised by BARDA, would result in aggregate payments to the Company of $72.7 million, including up to $58.3 million of funding for development and supportive activities such as work on a post-exposure prophylaxis ("PEP") indication for TPOXX® and/or $14.4 million of funding for production-related activities related to warm base manufacturing. BARDA may choose, in its sole discretion not to exercise any or all of the unexercised options. In 2015, BARDA exercised two options related to extending the indication of the drug to the geriatric and pediatric populations. The stated value of those exercises was immaterial.
The 2011 BARDA Contract expires in December 2024.
International Procurement Contracts
Contract with Public Health Agency of Canada
On January 13, 2021, the Public Health Agency of Canada ("PHAC") awarded a contract to Meridian Medical Technologies, Inc. (“Meridian," a Pfizer Company) (the “Contract”) for the purchase of up to approximately $33 million of oral TPOXX® (tecovirimat) within five years. The Contract specifies firm commitments for the purchase of approximately $3.4 million of oral TPOXX® to occur by March 31, 2021 and a cumulative purchase of approximately $17 million of oral TPOXX® by March 31, 2023; the remaining courses under the Contract are targeted for delivery after March 31, 2023 and are subject to option exercise by PHAC. To date, SIGA has not finalized any deliveries yet in connection with this contract. The contract award was coordinated between SIGA and Meridian under an international promotion agreement, as amended (the "International Promotion Agreement") that was entered into by the parties on June 3, 2019. As such, Meridian is the PHAC's counterparty under the Contract, and SIGA is responsible for manufacture and delivery of any oral TPOXX® purchased thereunder.
Canadian Military Contract
On April 3, 2020, the Company announced that the Canadian Department of National Defence (“CDND”) awarded a contract (the "Canadian Military Contract") to Meridian, pursuant to which the CDND will purchase up to approximately $14 million of oral TPOXX® over four years. In the second quarter 2020, CDND purchased $2.3 million of oral TPOXX®. The remaining purchases are at the option of the CDND, and are expected to occur after regulatory approval of oral TPOXX® in Canada. Meridian is the CDND's counterparty under the Canadian Military Contract, and SIGA is responsible for manufacture and delivery of any oral TPOXX® purchased thereunder.
International Promotion Agreement
Under the terms of the International Promotion Agreement, Meridian was granted exclusive rights to market, advertise, promote, offer for sale, or sell oral TPOXX® in a field of use specified in the International Promotion Agreement in all geographic regions except for the United States (the “Territory”), and Meridian has agreed not to commercialize any competing product, as defined in the International Promotion Agreement, in the specified field of use in the Territory. SIGA will retain ownership, intellectual property, distribution and supply rights and regulatory responsibilities in connection with TPOXX®, and, in the United States market, will also retain sales and marketing rights with respect to oral TPOXX®. SIGA’s consent shall be required for the entry into any sales arrangement pursuant to the International Promotion Agreement.
The fee Meridian retains pursuant to the International Promotion Agreement will be a specified percentage of the collected proceeds of sales of oral TPOXX® net of certain expenses, for years in which customer invoiced amounts net of such expenses are less than or equal to a specified threshold, and a higher specified percentage of such collected net proceeds for years in which such net invoiced amounts exceed the specified threshold. Taking into account Meridian’s fee and manufacturing costs of oral TPOXX®, it is currently estimated by the Company that international sales of oral TPOXX® will have a contribution margin (as expressed as a percentage of product sales, and before any consideration of expenses not directly related to manufacturing or Meridian activities) of between approximately 65% and 80%.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The methods, estimates and judgments we use in applying our accounting policies have a significant impact on the results we report in our consolidated financial statements, which we discuss under the heading “Results of Operations” following this section of our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Some of our accounting policies require us to make difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. Our most critical accounting estimates include revenue recognition over time, the valuation of warrants granted or issued by us, and income taxes (including realization of deferred tax assets).
Revenue Recognition
All of our revenue is derived from long-term contracts that can span multiple years. We account for revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). The unit of account in ASC 606 is a performance obligation. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. Our performance obligations are satisfied over time as work progresses or at a point in time. Revenue connected with performance obligations related to product delivery and supportive services are recognized at a point in time. Revenue connected with performance obligations related to research and development are recognized over time.
Revenue connected with the performance obligations related to the delivery of oral TPOXX® to the Strategic Stockpile ("Delivery Performance Obligation") under the 2011 BARDA Contract (Note 3) is recognized at a point in time. The Delivery Performance Obligation has been completed. With respect to this performance obligation, revenue was recognized when BARDA obtained control of the asset, which was upon delivery to and acceptance by the customer and at the point in time when the constraint on the consideration was resolved due to FDA approval of oral TPOXX®. The consideration, which was variable consideration, was constrained until the FDA approved oral TPOXX® for the treatment of smallpox on July 13, 2018. Prior to FDA approval, consideration had been constrained because the FDA Approval Replacement Obligation (as defined in Note 3) had not been quantified or specified. Following FDA approval, the possibility of having to replace product pursuant to the FDA Approval Replacement Obligation was essentially eliminated and deemed to be remote since there was no difference between the approved product and the courses of oral TPOXX® that had been delivered to the Strategic Stockpile.
Due to the nature of the work required to be performed on many of our performance obligations, the estimation of total revenue and costs to satisfy the obligations is complex, subject to many variables and requires significant judgment. The consideration associated with these types of performance obligations is considered variable. We estimate variable consideration as the most likely amount to which we expect to be entitled. We include estimated amounts in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur and when any uncertainty associated with variable consideration is resolved. Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on an assessment of our historical and anticipated performance, external factors, trends and all other information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available to us.
Contracts are often modified to account for additional services to be performed. We consider contract modifications to exist when the modification either creates new enforceable rights and obligations, or changes existing enforceable rights and obligations. If the effect of a contract modification on the transaction price changes our measure of progress for the performance obligation to which it relates, the impact will be recognized in the period of modification as an adjustment to revenue (either as an increase in or a reduction of revenue) on a cumulative catch-up basis.
We have a process in which management reviews the progress and execution of our performance obligations. As part of this process, management reviews information including, but not limited to, any outstanding key contract matters, progress towards completion and the related program schedule, identified risks and opportunities and the related changes in estimates of revenues and costs. The risks and opportunities include management’s judgment about the ability and cost to achieve the schedule, technical requirements and other contract requirements. Management must make assumptions and estimates regarding labor productivity, the complexity of the work to be performed, customer behavior and execution by our subcontractors, among other variables.
Based on this analysis, any quarterly adjustments to revenues, research and development expenses and cost of sales and supportive services are recognized as necessary in the period they become known. Changes in estimates of revenues, research and development expenses and cost of sales and supportive services are recognized quarterly on a cumulative catch-up basis, which recognizes in the current period the cumulative effect of the changes on current and prior periods based on a performance obligation’s percentage of completion. A significant change in one or more of these estimates could affect the profitability of one or more of our performance obligations.
Income Taxes
Our income tax expense and, deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect management’s best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid. We are subject to US federal income tax and state income tax in numerous jurisdictions. Significant judgments and estimates are required in the determination of our income tax expense.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and their reported amounts in the financial statements, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. Each reporting period, we assess the realizability of our deferred tax assets to determine if the deductible temporary differences will be utilized on a more-likely-than-not basis. In making this determination, we assess all available positive and negative evidence to determine if our existing deferred tax assets are realizable on a more-likely-than-not basis. Significant weight is given to positive and negative evidence that is objectively verifiable. We consider the reversal of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial operating results. The realization of a deferred tax asset is ultimately dependent on our generation of sufficient taxable income within the available net operating loss carryback and/or carryforward periods to utilize the deductible temporary differences. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we received FDA approval and recorded revenue related to the delivery of our oral TPOXX® product. We also recorded revenue related to the FDA holdback payment and the payment for 84-month expiry for oral TPOXX®. In addition, we entered into a new contract with BARDA for the sale of up to 1.7 million courses of TPOXX®. Based on these factors, we determined that sufficient positive evidence existed to conclude that substantially all of our deferred tax assets were realizable on a more-likely-than-not basis.
The amount of deferred tax assets considered realizable, however, could be adjusted if estimates of future taxable income during the net operating loss carryforward period change and/or if significant objective negative evidence is no longer present. Such changes could lead to a change in judgment related to the realization of the net deferred tax asset. Future changes in the estimated amount of deferred taxes expected to be realized will be reflected in our financial statements in the period the estimate is changed with a corresponding adjustment to operating results.
Income tax benefits are recognized for a tax position when, in management’s judgment, it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination by a taxing authority. For a tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, the tax benefit is measured as the largest amount that is judged to have a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority. As of December 31, 2020, we recorded an uncertain tax position attributable to a reduction related to state net operating loss carryforwards. In the event that we conclude that we are subject to interest and/or penalties arising from uncertain tax positions, we will present interest and penalties as a component of income taxes.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Under ASC 740, the effects of changes in tax rates and laws are recognized in the period which the new legislation is enacted. The CARES Act made various tax law changes, including among other things: (i) increasing the limitation under IRC Section 163(j) for 2019 and 2020 to permit additional expensing of interest; (ii) enacting a technical correction so that qualified improvement property can be immediately expensed under IRC Section 168(k); (iii) making modifications to the federal net operating loss rules including permitting federal net operating losses incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to be carried back to the five preceding taxable years in order to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes; and (iv) enhancing recoverability of AMT tax credit carryforwards.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, as part of its initiative to reduce complexity in accounting standards. The amendments in the ASU are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods therein. Early adoption of the standard is permitted, including adoption in interim or annual periods for which financial statements have not yet been issued. The Company is currently evaluating the effect, if any, that the ASU will have on its consolidated financial statements.
Warrant Liability
We account for warrants in accordance with the authoritative guidance which requires that free-standing derivative financial instruments with certain cash settlement features be classified as assets or liabilities at the time of the transaction, and recorded at their fair value. Fair value is estimated using a model-derived valuation. Determining the fair value for warrants includes the expected volatility of our stock. An increase or decrease in the expected volatility of our stock of 10% would result in an additional gain or loss of approximately $0.1 million. Any changes in the fair value of the warrants are reported in earnings or loss as long as they are classified as assets or liabilities.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For discussion regarding the impact of accounting standards that were recently issued but are not yet effective, on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations for the Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues from product sales and supportive services for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $115.5 million and $11.2 million, respectively. Such revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 include $112.6 million of revenue related to the delivery and acceptance of approximately 363,000 courses of oral TPOXX® to the Strategic Stockpile under the 19C BARDA Contract and $2.3 million of revenue related to courses of oral TPOXX® that were delivered and accepted by the CDND. Such revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 were associated with the delivery and acceptance of approximately 35,700 courses of oral TPOXX® to the Strategic Stockpile under the 19C BARDA Contract.
Revenues from research and development contracts and grants for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were $9.5 million and $15.6 million, respectively. The decrease of $6.1 million, or 39.0%, partially reflects the impact of a cumulative catch-up adjustment recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year December 31, 2019, the Company completed its negotiation with representatives of the U.S. Government for a change in the application of certain reimbursement rates in the contract. The change in the application of those reimbursement rates increased the overall transaction price of the IV Formulation R&D Contract but did not change the estimate of costs to complete under the input method calculation. As a result, the Company accounted for this as a change in the transaction price and recognized a cumulative catch-up adjustment to revenue of approximately $3.3 million representing the impact of the change in the application of those reimbursement rates from January 2016 through March 2019. Additionally, the net decrease in revenues from research and development activities reflects a $2.0 million revenue decrease in connection with a decrease in direct vendor-related costs for IV TPOXX® as well as an approximately $0.8 million revenue decrease associated with variability in connection with post-marketing regulatory activities for oral TPOXX®.
Cost of sales and supportive services for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $14.8 million and $1.8 million, respectively. Such costs in 2020 and 2019 were associated with the manufacture and delivery of approximately 366,000 and 35,700 courses of oral TPOXX®, respectively. The change in gross margin (cost of sales as a percentage of product sales) is primarily attributable to pricing differences between countries, as well as an update to the terms of production agreements.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $14.0 million and $13.3 million, respectively, reflecting an increase of $0.7 million, or 5.7%. The increase primarily reflects the commission expense associated with the sale of oral TPOXX® to the CDND in May 2020 as well as higher regulatory costs associated with our submission of a Marketing Authorisation Application (MAA) with the European Medicines Agency for oral TPOXX® and increased insurance costs, which were only partially offset by a decrease of $0.4 million in compensation expense.
Research and development expenses were $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of approximately $2.4 million, or 17.8% from the $13.3 million incurred during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in direct vendor-related expenses supporting the development of IV TPOXX® as well as a decrease in direct-related expenses supporting the performance of post-marketing regulatory activities for oral TPOXX®.
Patent expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $0.7 million and $0.7 million, respectively. These expenses reflect our ongoing efforts to protect our lead drug candidates in varied geographic territories.
In connection with the voluntary repayment of the Term Loan on March 13, 2020, we recognized a loss on the extinguishment of the Term Loan of approximately $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest expense on the term loan facility under the Loan Agreement (the "Term Loan") for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.0 million, a decrease of approximately $12.8 million from the $15.8 million incurred during the year ended December 31, 2019. The $3.0 million of interest for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes $0.9 million of accretion of unamortized costs and fees (prior to repayment of the Term Loan). The $15.8 million of interest for the year ended December 31, 2019 includes $4.5 million of accretion of unamortized costs and fees related to the Term Loan balance.
Changes in the fair value of the liability classified warrant to acquire common stock were recorded within the income statement. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a loss of approximately $3.5 million reflecting an increase in the fair value of the liability-classified warrant primarily due to an increase in our stock price. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a gain of approximately $5.1 million reflecting a decrease in fair value of the liability-classified warrant primarily due to the decrease in the price of our common stock.
Other income, net for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $0.5 million and $2.8 million, respectively. Other income primarily reflects interest income on the Company's cash balance held in restricted and unrestricted accounts. The decrease of approximately $2.3 million is driven by lower cash balances during the year as well as lower interest rates for 2020 when compared to 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a tax provision of $17.2 million on pre-tax income of $73.5 million. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 23.4%. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate of 21% primarily as a result of a non-taxable adjustment for the fair market value of the Warrant, non-deductible executive compensation under IRC Section 162(m), and state taxes.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a tax benefit of approximately $2.9 million on a pre-tax loss of $10.2 million. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was 28.9%. For the year ended December 31, 2019, our effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate of 21% primarily as a result of a non-taxable adjustment for the fair market value of the Warrant, partially offset by non-deductible executive compensation under IRC Section 162(m).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $117.9 million in cash and cash equivalents, compared with $65.2 million at December 31, 2019. Additionally, in comparison to $95.7 million of restricted cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2019, there was no restricted cash as of December 31, 2020 given that the Term Loan was repaid in March 2020. The restricted cash and cash equivalents were available to pay interest, fees and principal on the Term Loan. The Company voluntarily prepaid the Term Loan on March 13, 2020 in an approximate amount of $87.2 million, including accrued interest. As a result of repayment of the Term Loan, there are no restrictions on the use of our cash and cash equivalents.
Operating Activities
We prepare our consolidated statement of cash flows using the indirect method. Under this method, we reconcile net income (loss) to cash flows from operating activities by adjusting net (loss) income for those items that impact net income (loss) but may not result in actual cash receipts or payments during the period. These reconciling items include but are not limited to stock-based compensation and changes in the fair value of our warrant liability; gains and losses from various transactions and changes in the consolidated balance sheet for working capital from the beginning to the end of the period.
Net cash provided by (used in) operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $71.5 million and $(18.2) million, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the receipt of approximately $114.9 million for product delivery and acceptance of oral TPOXX® courses delivered to the SNS and CDND was partially offset by net cash usage primarily related to manufacturing of inventory and customary operating activities. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred $11.3 million of cash interest expense on the Term Loan and used approximately $10.6 million in support of ordinary course working capital (accounts receivable, accounts payable, prepaids, among other items). Additionally, cash was used for customary operating activities. These cash uses were partially offset by the receipt of approximately $11.1 million from BARDA for product delivery; $15.5 million from R&D contracts; and $2.8 million of interest income.
On December 31, 2020 and 2019, our accounts receivable balance was approximately $3.3 million (which includes approximately $1.3 million of unbilled receivables) and $4.2 million, respectively. Our accounts receivable balances primarily reflect work that is reimbursable by BARDA and was performed during December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, in connection with TPOXX®.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $15,501 and $29,094, respectively. In 2020 and 2019, net cash used related to capital expenditures.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $114.6 million and $1.2 million, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, $85.9 million was associated with our voluntary prepayment of the Term Loan and approximately $28.5 million was associated with the repurchase of approximately 4.6 million shares of common stock. For the year ended December 31, 2019, $1.2 million was attributable to the payment of tax obligations for employee common stock tendered.
Future Cash Requirements
As of December 31, 2020, we have outstanding purchase orders associated with manufacturing obligations in the aggregate amount of approximately $12.5 million.