Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-looking Statements
Certain statements in this report, including information incorporated by reference, are “forward-looking statements” defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (“PSLRA”). The PSLRA provides a safe harbor under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and the Exchange Act for forward-looking statements. These statements relate to our intentions, beliefs, projections, estimations or forecasts of future events or future financial performance and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause us or the industry’s actual results, levels of activity, or performance to be materially different from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. In some cases, you may identify forward-looking statements by use of words such as “may,” “will,” “could,” “would,” “should,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “target,” “project,” “intend,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “potential,” “pro forma,” “seek,” “likely,” or “continue.” or other comparable terminology. These statements are only predictions, and we can give no assurance that such expectations will prove to be correct. We undertake no obligation, other than what federal securities laws may require, to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, regardless of new information, future events, or other unknowns.
Factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those projected, forecasted, or estimated in our forward-looking statements are discussed in further detail in Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” of this Form 10-K. These risk factors may not be exhaustive. We operate in a constantly changing business environment, and new risk factors may emerge at any time. We can neither predict these new risk factors nor assess their impact, if any, on our businesses or the extent any new factor or combination of factors may cause actual results to differ materially from any forward-looking statements. Given these risks, uncertainties, and assumptions, the forward-looking events we discuss in this report might not occur.
Introduction
We classify our business into four reportable segments:
•Standard Commercial Lines;
•Standard Personal Lines;
•E&S Lines; and
•Investments.
For more details about these segments, refer to Note 1. "Organization" and Note 12. "Segment Information" in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” of this Form 10-K.
We write our Standard Commercial and Standard Personal Lines products and services through nine of our insurance subsidiaries, some of which participate in the federal government's National Flood Insurance Program's ("NFIP") Write Your Own Program ("WYO"). We write our E&S products through another subsidiary, Mesa Underwriters Specialty Insurance Company, which provides us with a nationally-authorized non-admitted platform for customers who generally cannot obtain coverage in the standard marketplace. Collectively, we refer to our ten insurance subsidiaries as the "Insurance Subsidiaries".
The following is Management's Discussion and Analysis ("MD&A") of the consolidated results of operations and financial condition, as well as known trends and uncertainties, that may have a material impact in future periods. The MD&A discusses and analyzes our results in 2020 compared to 2019. Investors should read the MD&A in conjunction with Item 8. "Financial Statements." of this Form 10-K. For discussion and analysis of our 2019 results compared to 2018, refer to Item 7. "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations." of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
In the MD&A, we will discuss and analyze the following:
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates;
•Financial Highlights of Results for Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018;
•Results of Operations and Related Information by Segment;
•Federal Income Taxes;
•Financial Condition, Liquidity, and Capital Resources;
•Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; and
•Contractual Obligations, Contingent Liabilities, and Commitments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have identified the policies and estimates critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. In preparing our consolidated financial statements ("Financial Statements"), we are required to make estimates and
assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our Financial Statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. We offer no assurances that actual results will be the same as those estimates, and it is possible they will differ materially. The policies and estimates we consider most critical to the preparation of the Financial Statements involved (i) reserves for loss and loss expense, (ii) investment valuations and the allowance for credit losses on available-for-sale ("AFS") fixed income securities, (iii) reinsurance, (iv) allowance for credit losses on premiums receivable, and (v) accrual for auditable premium.
Reserves for Loss and Loss Expense
Significant periods of time can elapse between the occurrence of an insured loss, the reporting of the claim to us, and the final settlement of the claim. To recognize liabilities for unpaid loss and loss expense, insurers establish reserves as balance sheet liabilities representing an estimate of amounts needed to pay reported and unreported net loss and loss expense. At December 31, 2020, we had recorded $4.3 billion of gross loss and loss expense reserves and $3.7 billion of net loss and loss expense reserves. At December 31, 2019, these gross and net reserves were $4.1 billion and $3.5 billion, respectively. The Insurance Subsidiaries' liability duration was approximately 3.7 years at December 31, 2020, up slightly from 3.6 years at December 31, 2019.
The following tables provide case and incurred but not reported (“IBNR”) reserves for loss and loss expenses, and reinsurance recoverable on unpaid loss and loss expense as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
1Includes general liability (95% of net reserves) and commercial auto liability coverages (5% of net reserves).
2Includes commercial property (92% of net reserves) and commercial auto property coverages (8% of net reserves).
1Includes general liability (94% of net reserves) and commercial auto liability coverages (6% of net reserves).
2Includes commercial property (85% of net reserves) and commercial auto property coverages (15% of net reserves).
How reserves are established
Reserves for loss and loss expense includes case reserves on reported claims and reserves known as incurred but not reported ("IBNR") reserves. Case reserves are estimated on each individual claim, and based on claim-specific facts and circumstances known at the time. The case reserves may be adjusted upward or downward as the specific facts and circumstances change. IBNR reserves are established at more aggregated levels and include provisions for (i) claims not yet reported, (ii) future development on reported claims, (iii) previously closed claims that will be reopened in the future, and (iv) anticipated salvage and subrogation recoveries. For additional information on our accounting policy for reserves for loss and loss expense, refer to Note. 2. “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” of this Form 10-K.
Our robust reserve process relies upon internal reserve reviews performed quarterly, based upon our own loss experience, with consideration given to various internal and external factors. In addition to our internal reserve reviews, we have an external consulting actuary perform an independent review of our reserves semi-annually. We do not rely on the external consulting actuary's report for recording our reserves; however, we do review and discuss our respective observations regarding trends, key assumptions and actuarial methodologies. While not required to be performed by an independent external actuary, our independent external actuary issues the annual statutory Statements of Actuarial Opinion for our Insurance Subsidiaries.
Range of reasonable reserve estimates
We have estimated a range of reasonably possible reserve estimates for net loss and loss expense of $3,250 million to $3,893 million at December 31, 2020. This range reflects low and high reasonable reserve estimates determined by judgmentally adjusting the methods, factors and assumptions selected within the internal reserve review. This approach produces a range of reasonable reserve estimates, as opposed to a distribution of all possible outcomes. Therefore, it is possible that the final outcomes may fall above or below these amounts. The range does not include a provision for potential increases or decreases associated with asbestos, environmental, and certain other continuous exposure claims, which by their nature are more variable and, therefore, traditional actuarial techniques cannot be effectively applied.
The range of reasonable reserve estimates as of December 31, 2020 has expanded relative to December 31, 2019. This is partially due to the growth in reserves commensurate with our growth in net premiums earned ("NPE"), but also recognizes the additional risks in the reserve portfolio presented by the unique legislative, judicial, economic and social environment resulting from COVID-19. Some of these uncertainties may not be resolved for an extended period of time.
Changes in Reserve Estimates (Loss Development)
Our quarterly reserve process may lead to changes in the recorded reserves for prior accident years, which is referred to as favorable or unfavorable prior year loss and loss expense development. In 2020, we experienced net favorable prior year loss development of $72.9 million, compared to $50.3 million in 2019 and $29.9 million in 2018. The following table summarizes prior year development by line of business:
A detailed discussion of recent reserve development by line of business follows.
Standard Market General Liability Line of Business
At December 31, 2020, our general liability line of business had recorded reserves, net of reinsurance, of $1.4 billion, which represented 38% of our total net reserves. In 2020, this line experienced favorable development of $35.0 million, attributable to lower loss severities in accident years 2017 and prior.
During 2019, this line experienced favorable development of $5.0 million, attributable to lower loss severities in accident years 2015 and 2016, partially offset by increases in the 2017 and 2018 accident year.
By its nature, this line presents a diverse set of exposures. General liability losses and loss trends are influenced by a variety of factors, including legislative enactments, judicial decisions, and economic and social inflation. Economic inflation directly impacts our claims severities, such as increasing costs of raw materials, medical procedures and labor costs. Social inflation may impact both the frequency and severity of claims by impacting (i) the propensity for a claimant to file a claim, (ii) the percentage of claimants who engage lawyers, and (iii) the nature of judicial verdicts and amount of the associated awards.
We have exposure to abuse or molestation claims through insurance policies that we (i) principally underwrite through our Community and Public Services ("CAPS") strategic business unit and (ii) issue to schools, religious institutions, day-care facilities, and other social services. Through 2017, our exposure to abuse or molestation risk had been increasing, reflective of the growth in our CAPS book. In 2018, we introduced more stringent underwriting eligibility guidelines and partnered with a third party to better assess exposure and introduce greater loss control measures. In 2019, we filed and approved significant rate increases for this exposure. These actions have limited our growth in this strategic business unit.
We also have exposure to abuse or molestation claims from recently enacted state laws that extend the statute of limitations or permit windows for abuse or molestation claims and lawsuits to be filed that statutes of limitations previously barred. Consequently, we may receive claims decades after the alleged acts occurred for policies issued by predecessor companies that will involve complex claims coverage determinations, potential litigation, and the need to collect from reinsurers under older reinsurance agreements.
To better understand our exposure to abuse or molestation, we have instituted enhanced claims coding to identify and classify abuse or molestation claims. Our claims and actuarial departments actively monitor these claims to identify changes in frequency or severity and any emerging or shifting trends. While these actions should help us better understand this rapidly evolving exposure, the ultimate impact of social, political, and legal trends remains highly uncertain, and - as a result - our loss and loss expense reserves remain highly uncertain.
The COVID-19 pandemic presents additional risk to this line in several forms. First, as businesses reopen, they may be susceptible to claims alleging customers contracting COVID-19 due to unsafe business practices. Hiring practices may also be called into question as businesses re-staff. In addition to COVID-19-specific claims, changes in claims reporting or settlement
practices may have been, and may continue to be, affected by several factors, including individual's propensity to bring a claim during the shut-down, court closures, and other behavioral and procedural changes.
Standard Market Workers Compensation Line of Business
At December 31, 2020, our workers compensation line of business recorded reserves, net of reinsurance, of $870 million, which represented 23% of our total net reserves. During 2020, this line experienced favorable development of $60.0 million, driven by accident years 2018 and prior. During 2019, this line experienced favorable development of $68.0 million, driven by accident years 2017 and prior. During both 2020 and 2019, this line experienced lower loss emergence than expected, due, in part, to: (i) lower medical inflation than originally anticipated; (ii) our proactive underwriting actions; and (iii) various significant claims initiatives that we have implemented. Because of the length of time that injured workers receive medical treatment, decreases in medical inflation can cause favorable loss development across an extended number of accident years.
While we believe the underwriting and claims operational changes improved our underwriting experience, there is also risk associated with change. Most notably, changes in operations may inherently change paid and reported development patterns. While our reserve analyses incorporate methods that adjust for these changes, there remains a greater risk of fluctuation in the estimated reserves.
In addition to the uncertainties associated with our actuarial assumptions and methodologies, the workers compensation line of business can be impacted by a variety of other issues, such as the following:
Unexpected changes in medical cost inflation - The industry is currently experiencing a period of lower claim cost inflation. Changes in our historical workers compensation medical costs, along with uncertainty regarding future medical inflation, creates the potential for additional variability in our reserves;
Changes in statutory workers compensation benefits - Benefit changes may be enacted that affect all outstanding claims, including claims that have occurred in the past. Depending upon the social and political climate, these changes may either increase or decrease associated claim costs;
Changes in utilization of the workers compensation system - These changes may be driven by economic, legislative, or other changes, such as increased use of pharmaceuticals, more complex medical procedures, changes in the life expectancy of permanently-injured workers, and availability of health insurance, among others.
COVID-19-related impacts - While we are not a major insurer of front-line workers (e.g. medical, hospital, etc.), we do have potential exposure to employees contracting COVID-19 in the course of their employment. These claims may be asserted under "presumption statutes" implemented by certain states, shifting the burden of proof from the claimant to the insurer. Furthermore, the significant impact to unemployment, coupled with injured workers delaying non-essential procedures, may extend the duration of non-COVID-19 claims.
Standard Market Commercial Automobile Line of Business
At December 31, 2020, our commercial automobile line of business had recorded reserves, net of reinsurance, of $645 million, which represented 17% of our total net reserves. In 2020, this line experienced unfavorable prior year development of $7.1 million, driven by higher loss severities in accident years 2016 through 2019 and higher than expected frequencies in accident year 2019. In 2019, this line experienced no material prior year reserve development. For both us and the industry, the commercial automobile line had experienced unfavorable trends in recent years. Increased frequencies were likely due to increased miles driven as a result of lower unemployment and lower gasoline prices, coupled with poor road quality, as well as an increase in distracted driving. The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020, along with governmental "stay-at-home" orders, dramatically reduced miles driven and road traffic, significantly reducing claims frequency. While miles driven has increased, activity remains modestly below expected levels. Conversely, both entering the pandemic and post-pandemic, we have seen rising severities on both bodily injury and property damage claims. The average value of our bodily injury paid loss settlements has increased, which may relate to a trend we have seen of more claimants using attorneys in the claims process. Increasing property damage severities may be tied to the increased repair costs for increasingly complex vehicles that incorporate more technology. These trends may be further exacerbated during the economic slow-down, where less vehicles were on the road, but driving at higher speeds.
Over the last several years, we have taken actions to improve the profitability of this line of business, including:
•Taking meaningful rate and underwriting actions on our renewal portfolio. We will continue to leverage our predictive modeling and analytical capabilities to provide more granular insights about where we should focus our actions.
•Aggressively managing new business pricing and hazard mix, co-underwriting selected higher hazard classes by the field and home office, providing better recognition of risk drivers, and improved pricing.
•Reducing premium leakage by improving the quality of our rating information. This includes validating application information using third-party data and obtaining more detailed driver information.
•Implementing new tools to score drivers to underwrite more effectively and align rate with exposure.
Standard Market Personal Automobile Line of Business
At December 31, 2020, our personal automobile line of business had recorded reserves, net of reinsurance, of $98 million, which represented 3% of our total net reserves. In 2020, this line experienced favorable prior year reserve development of $1.8 million, mainly attributable to lower loss severities in accident year 2019. In 2019, this line experienced unfavorable prior year reserve development of $4.4 million, mainly attributable to higher loss severities in accident year 2018.
Some of the same issues affecting the commercial automobile line are also affecting this line. Furthermore, the COVID-19-related impact of reduced frequency was more pronounced in this line, with similar potential for higher average severities. Aside from the COVID-19-related temporary impacts, the underlying trends of increased miles driven and vehicle repair costs, poor road quality, and distracted driving, are likely causes of increased frequencies and rising severities. We continue to recalibrate our predictive models and refine our underwriting and pricing approaches. While we believe these changes will ultimately lead to improved profitability and greater stability, the resulting changes to our exposure profile may impact paid and reported development patterns, thereby increasing the uncertainty in the reserves in the near-term.
E&S Casualty Lines of Business
At December 31, 2020, our E&S casualty lines of business had recorded reserves, net of reinsurance, of $405 million, which represented 11% of our total net reserves. Our E&S casualty lines results have improved over recent years. Our E&S casualty lines underwriting operations have exited several targeted classes of business that historically have produced volatile results, including commercial auto liability, liquor liability, and snow removal. While we continue to build historical loss experience in this segment, its history remains more limited than for our Standard Commercial Lines segment. Furthermore, the composition of the E&S book has changed over time, which may impact loss and loss expense development patterns. These factors increase the uncertainty in the reserve estimates for this line.
Recent E&S casualty claims actions have created further casualty improvements:
•In 2020, we created a dedicated E&S claims team within our corporate claims function to bring greater expertise and consistency to E&S claims handling.
•Claims have been segregated into “litigated” and “non-litigated” categories, separate teams with specialized skill sets handling each category.
•We implemented the following operational and expense improvement initiatives for outside adjusters and legal counsel:
◦Maximized use of staff counsel, increasing staff where necessary to support claims volume;
◦Heightened focus on legal budgeting and expense management; and
◦Implemented a panel counsel review process.
We believe that these actions identify severe claims earlier, create earlier claims resolutions, and improve outcomes. However, claims operation changes can impact claims reserving and settlement patterns. Reserve estimate uncertainty increases after claims operational changes because it takes time for the patterns to stabilize.
Other impacts creating additional loss and loss expense reserve uncertainty
Claims Initiative Impacts
Consistent with our strategic imperative to optimize operational efficiency, our Claims Department is continually identifying areas for improvement and efficiency to increase our value proposition to policyholders. These improvements may lead to changes in claims practices that affect average case reserve levels and claims settlement rates, which directly impact the data used to project ultimate loss and loss expense. While these changes may increase uncertainty in our estimates in the short term, we expect refined management of the claims process to be the longer-term benefit.
COVID-19 presented some unique dynamics within our Claims department. Particularly during the early part of the pandemic, with less new claims being reported, the claims department placed greater focus on the existing claims inventory, leading to a speed-up of claim closures. This speed-up stabilized over the course of the year, with closure rates returning closer to pre-pandemic levels.
Our internal reserve analyses incorporate certain actuarial projection methods that make adjustments for changes in case reserve adequacy and claims settlement rates. These methods adjust our historical loss experience to the current level of case adequacy
or settlement rate, which provides a more consistent basis for projecting future development patterns. These methods have their own associated assumptions and judgments and, like any projection method, are not definitive in and of themselves.
Economic Inflationary Impacts
United States ("U.S.") monetary policy and global economic conditions may bring additional uncertainty related to inflationary trend. Changes in inflation affect the ultimate settlement costs for many of our lines of business, with the greatest impact in the longer-tailed lines such as general liability and workers compensation. Therefore, uncertainty about future inflation or deflation creates the potential for additional reserve variability in these lines of business.
Sensitivity analysis: Potential impact on reserve uncertainty due to changes in key assumptions
Our process to establish reserves includes a variety of key assumptions, including without limitation:
•The selection of loss and loss expense development factors;
•The weight to be applied to each individual actuarial projection method;
•Projected future loss trends; and
•Expected claim frequencies, severities, and ultimate loss and loss expense ratios for the current accident year.
The importance of any single assumption depends on several considerations, such as the line of business and the accident year. If the actual experience emerges differently than the assumptions used in the process to establish reserves, changes in our reserve estimate are possible that may be material to the results of operations in future periods. Below are sensitivity tests that highlight potential impacts to loss and loss expense reserves for the major casualty lines of business under different scenarios. These tests consider each assumption and line of business individually, without any consideration of correlation between lines of business and accident years. Therefore, the results do not constitute an actuarial range. While the figures represent possible impacts from variations in certain key assumptions, there is no assurance that future loss and loss expense emergence will be consistent with either our current or alternative sets of assumptions.
While the sources of reserve variability are generated by different internal and external trends and operational changes, they ultimately manifest themselves as changes in the expected loss and loss expense development patterns. These patterns are a key assumption in the reserving process. In addition, the current accident year expected loss and loss expense ratios are also a key assumption. These ratios are developed through a rigorous process of projecting recent accident years' experience to an ultimate settlement basis, and then adjusting them to the current accident year's pricing and loss cost levels. Impact from changes in the underwriting portfolio and to claims handling practices are also quantified and reflected where appropriate. As with all estimates, the ultimate loss and loss expense ratios may differ from those currently estimated.
The sensitivities of loss and loss expense reserves to these key assumptions are illustrated below for the major casualty lines. The first table displays estimated impacts from changes in expected reported loss and loss expense development patterns for our major casualty lines of business. It shows reserve impacts by line of business if the actual calendar year incurred amounts are greater or less than current expectations by the selected percentages. While the selected percentages by line are judgmental, they are based on the reserve range analysis and the actual historical reserve development for the line of business. The second table displays the estimated impacts from changes to the expected loss and loss expense ratios for the current accident year. It shows reserve impacts by line of business if the expected loss and loss expense ratios for the current accident year are greater or less than current expectations by the selected percentages.
Note that there is some overlap between the impacts in the two tables. For example, increases in the calendar year development would ultimately impact our view of the current accident year's loss and loss expense ratios. However, these tables provide perspective on the sensitivity of each key assumption. While the changes represent outcomes based on reasonably likely changes to our underlying reserving assumptions, they do not represent a full range of possible outcomes. Our reserves could increase or decrease significantly more or significantly less than what the tables above reflect.
Asbestos and Environmental Reserves
Our general liability, excess liability, and homeowners reserves include exposure to asbestos and environmental claims. The emergence of these claims occurs over an extended period and is highly unpredictable. The total recorded net loss and loss expense reserves for these claims were $21.4 million as of December 31, 2020 and $21.6 million as of December 31, 2019.
“Environmental claims” are claims alleging bodily injury or property damage from pollution or other environmental contaminants other than asbestos. Our exposure to environmental liability is primarily due to (i) landfill exposures from policies written prior to the absolute pollution endorsement in the mid 1980s; and (ii) residential underground storage tank leaks, mainly in New Jersey. The landfill claims stem primarily from insured exposures in municipal government, and small non-manufacturing commercial risks. Some of these claims relate to specific landfill sites on the National Priorities List (“NPL”) by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (“USEPA”). We currently have reserves for six policyholders related to three NPL sites. The underground storage tank claims relate largely to our homeowners policies. In 2007, we introduced a fuel oil system exclusion on our New Jersey homeowners policies that greatly limited this exposure from that point forward.
“Asbestos claims” are claims for bodily injury alleged to have occurred from exposure to products containing asbestos. Our primary exposure arises from policies issued to various distributors of asbestos-containing products, such as electrical and plumbing materials. At December 31, 2020, asbestos claims constituted 23% of our $21.4 million net asbestos and environmental reserves, compared to 23% of our $21.6 million net asbestos and environmental reserves at December 31, 2019.
Our asbestos and environmental claims are handled in our centralized and specialized asbestos and environmental claim unit. That unit establishes case reserves on individual claims based upon the facts and circumstances known at a given point in time, which are supplemented by bulk IBNR reserves.
Estimating IBNR reserves for asbestos and environmental claims is difficult because these claims have delayed and inconsistent reporting patterns. In addition, there are significant uncertainties associated with estimating critical reserve assumptions, such as average clean-up costs, third-party costs, potentially responsible party shares, allocation of damages, litigation and coverage costs, and potential state and federal legislative changes. Prior to the introduction of the absolute pollution exclusion endorsement in the mid-1980's, we primarily wrote Standard Personal Lines, which has limited our exposure to asbestos and environmental claims.
Other Latent Exposures
We also have other latent and continuous trigger exposures in our ongoing portfolio. Examples include claims for construction defect and abuse or molestation, for which states have increased and expanded the statute of limitations. We manage our exposure to these liabilities through our underwriting and claims practices and, like asbestos and environmental claims, a dedicated claims unit handles these claims. The impact of social, political, and legal trends on these claims remains highly uncertain, so our loss and loss expense reserves on these claims remain highly uncertain. These exposures remain in our ongoing portfolio, and as such, are reserved in aggregate, with other exposures within the line of business reserves.
Investment Valuation and the Allowance for Credit Losses on AFS Fixed Income Securities
Investment Valuation
The fair value of our investment portfolio is defined under accounting guidance as the exit price or the amount that would be (i) received to sell an asset or (ii) paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. When determining an exit price we must, when available, rely on observable market data. The majority of securities in our equity portfolio have readily determinable fair values and are recorded at fair value with changes in unrealized gains or losses recognized through income. Our available-for-sale ("AFS") fixed income securities portfolio is recorded at fair value, and the related unrealized gains or losses are reflected in stockholders' equity, net of tax. For our AFS fixed income securities portfolios, fair value is a key factor in the measurement of (i) losses on securities for which we have the intent to sell, and (ii) changes in the allowance for credit losses.
We have categorized our investment portfolio, based on the priority of the inputs to the valuation technique, into a three-level fair value hierarchy. The fair value hierarchy gives the highest priority to quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities (Level 1), the next level of priority to observable data from similar securities that have traded in the marketplace, typically using matrix pricing (Level 2), and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3).
The fair value of approximately 98% of our investments measured at fair value are classified as either Level 1 or Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy. Fair value measurements in Level 1 represent quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. The fair value of our Level 2 securities are determined by external pricing services, for which we have evaluated the pricing methodology used and determined that the inputs used are observable. Less than 2.0% of our investments measured at fair value are classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy. Fair value measurements in Level 3 are based on unobservable market inputs because the related securities are not traded on a public market. For additional information regarding the valuation techniques used for our Level 3 securities, refer to item (d) of Note 2. "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" within Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." of this Form 10-K.
Allowance for Credit Losses on AFS Fixed Income Securities
When fixed income securities are in an unrealized loss position and we do not intend to sell the security, we record an allowance for credit losses for the portion of the unrealized loss due to an expected credit loss. We estimate expected credit losses on these securities by performing a discounted cash flow (“DCF”). The allowance for credit losses is the excess of amortized cost over the greater of (i) our estimate of the present value of expected future cash flows, or (ii) fair value. The allowance for credit losses cannot exceed the unrealized loss and therefore it may fluctuate with changes in the fair value of the security.
Factors considered in the determination of the allowance for credit losses require significant judgment and include, but are not limited to, our evaluation of the projected cash flow stream from the security. We also consider the need to record losses on securities for which we have the intent to sell that are in an unrealized loss position.
The various COVID-19-related governmental directives impacted the financial markets, which became volatile earlier in the year. This volatility increased gross unrealized losses on our AFS fixed income securities portfolio from $7.7 million at December 31, 2019, to $116.9 million at March 31, 2020. Since the end of the first quarter, the financial markets have improved and gross unrealized losses were reduced to $11.5 million at December 31, 2020. We analyzed these unrealized losses for credit loss in accordance with our existing accounting policy, which includes performing DCF analyses on each security at the lot level and analyzing these DCFs using various economic scenarios. In performing these DCF analyses, we calculate the present value of future cash flows using various models specific to the major security types in our portfolio. These models use security-specific information and forecasted macroeconomic data to determine possible expected credit loss scenarios based on projected changes in the economy. The forecasted economic data incorporated in the models is based on the Federal Reserve Board’s annual supervisory stress test review on certain large banks and financial institutions. We also have the ability to incorporate internally-developed forecast information into the models as we deem appropriate. In developing our best estimate of the allowance for credit losses, we consider our outlook as to the probability of the various scenarios occurring.
Based on these analyses, we recorded an allowance for credit losses of $4.0 million in 2020 on our AFS fixed income portfolio. After considering the allowance for credit losses, the remaining unrealized losses on this portfolio was $11.5 million. We believe that the volatility and increased unrealized loss balance was driven by fluctuating and widening credit spreads tied to financial market uncertainty about the various COVID-19-related governmental directives. If the assumptions used in our DCF analyses or our outlook as to the occurrence probability of our DCF model scenarios were to change, our allowance for credit losses and the resulting credit loss expense could be material to our results of operations.
For additional information regarding our allowance for credit losses on AFS fixed income securities, see item (c) of Note 2. "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" and item (i) of Note 5. "Investments" within Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." of this Form 10-K, respectively.
Reinsurance
Reinsurance recoverables on paid and unpaid loss and loss expense represent estimates of the portion of such liabilities that we will recover from reinsurers. Each reinsurance contract is analyzed to ensure that sufficient risk is transferred to properly record the transactions as reinsurance in the Financial Statements. Amounts recovered from reinsurers are recognized as assets contemporaneously and in a manner consistent with, the paid and unpaid losses associated with the reinsured policies. An allowance for credit losses on our reinsurance recoverable balance is recorded based on an evaluation of balances due from reinsurers and other available information. However, reinsurers often purchase and rely on their own retrocessional reinsurance programs to manage their capital position and improve their financial strength ratings. Details regarding retrocessional reinsurance programs are not always transparent, which can make it difficult to assess our reinsurers' exposure to counterparty credit risk. The credit quality of our reinsurers is also impacted by other factors, such as their reserve adequacy, investment portfolio, regulatory capital position, catastrophe aggregations, and risk management expertise. In addition, contractual language interpretations and willingness to pay valid claims can impact our allowance for estimated uncollectible reinsurance. Our allowance for estimated uncollectible reinsurance totaled $1.8 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease from $4.4 million at December 31, 2019, as we refined our methodology and implemented the new credit loss standard in 2020. We continually monitor developments that may impact recoverability from our reinsurers, for which we have contractual remedies if necessary. For further information regarding reinsurance, see the “Reinsurance” section below and Note 9. “Reinsurance” in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” of this Form 10-K.
Allowance for Credit Losses on Premiums Receivable
We estimate an allowance for credit losses on our outstanding premiums receivable balance at each reporting date. In determining this allowance, we use a method that considers the aging of the receivable based on the effective year of the related policy and our historical credit loss experience. We also contemplate expected macroeconomic conditions over the expected receivables collection period, which is short-term in nature because most balances are collected within two years of policy issuance. We increased our allowance for credit losses to $21.0 million during 2020 from $6.4 million at December 31, 2019, to reflect (i) the higher risk of non-payment due to the significant COVID-19-related decline in economic activity, (ii) the individualized payment flexibility we offered our customers, and (iii) our suspension of the effect of policy cancellations, late payment notices, and late or reinstatement fees. Our last suspensions expired in early August 2020. It could take over a year to realize this collections process, and we expect the actual reserve write-offs to materialize over the course of 2021.
Future COVID-19-related economic instability or governmental directives could ultimately impact our estimates and assumptions for credit losses on premiums receivable. Consequently, a change in our allowance estimate may be material to our results of operations in future periods. For additional details about this estimate, see Note 8. "Allowance for Credit Losses on Premiums Receivable" in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." of this Form 10-K.
Accrual for Auditable Premium
We estimate auditable premium, which we either bill or return on expired policies based on exposure levels (i.e. payroll or sales), when it is reasonably possible to do so based on historical trends adjusted for the uncertainty of future economic conditions. If we determine it is not reasonably possible to estimate this premium, we do not do so. In the first quarter of 2020, we recorded a $75 million return audit and mid-term endorsement premium accrual in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the anticipated decline in payroll and sales exposures on the workers compensation and general liability lines of business. During the remainder of the year, we applied premium adjustments for endorsements and audits against our accrual, resulting in a remaining $24.8 million accrual as of December 31, 2020. We currently anticipate the balance of the return audit premiums will occur through the middle of 2021. Since April 2020, through active engagement between our underwriters, distribution partners, and insureds, we have set exposure levels to reflect our best estimate of how the current environment may impact our policies. As a result, we have not accrued for additional or return premium on any policies since that time. Further economic instability and renewed or extended COVID-19-related governmental directives ultimately could impact our estimates and assumptions, and consequently, changes in this liability estimate may be material to the results of operations in future periods. For additional details about this estimate, see Note 9. "Reinsurance" in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." of this Form 10-K.
1Refer to the Glossary of Terms attached to this Form 10-K as Exhibit 99.1 for definitions of terms used in this financial review.
2Non-GAAP operating income is a measure that is comparable to net income available to common stockholders with the exclusion of after-tax net realized and unrealized gains and losses on investments, and after-tax debt retirement costs. Non-GAAP operating income is used as an important financial measure by us, analysts, and investors because the realization of investment gains and losses on sales of securities in any given period is largely discretionary as to timing. In addition, net realized and unrealized investment gains and losses on investments that are charged to earnings and the debt retirement costs could distort the analysis of trends.
Reconciliations of net income available to common stockholders, net income available to common stockholders per diluted common share, and ROE to non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP operating income per diluted common share, and non-GAAP operating ROE, respectively, are provided in the tables below:
The components of our ROE are as follows:
In 2020, we generated a 10.5% non-GAAP operating ROE, which fell slightly below our 11% target for the year and our 2019 return of 13.3%. Our 2020 non-GAAP operating ROE was negatively impacted by net unrealized after-tax gains on our fixed income securities portfolio, which increased our GAAP equity and decreased our non-GAAP operating ROE by approximately 120 basis points. Nevertheless, we consider this an impressive result in the context of COVID-19, significant catastrophe loss activity, and a prolonged low interest rate environment that has continued to put downward pressure on our investment portfolio returns. The following is a more detailed discussion of these items.
COVID-19
•A $75 million return audit and mid-term endorsement premium accrual recorded in the first quarter of 2020 to reflect our estimate of reduced exposures on our March 31 inforce policies due to the significant economic slowdown and the anticipated decline in payroll and sales exposures in the workers compensation and general liability lines of business. During the remainder of the year, we recorded $50.2 million of mid-term endorsement and negative audit premium adjustments against this $75 million accrual. As of December 31, 2020, we had a remaining accrual of $24.8 million. Net of reduced losses and commissions, the earned impact of the return audit and mid-term endorsement premium accrual lowered pre-tax underwriting results by $15.3 million, in 2020.
•A $19.7 million reduction in net premiums written ("NPW") recorded in the second quarter of 2020 to reflect a then voluntary credit to our personal and commercial automobile customers with in-force policies equivalent to 15% of their April and May premiums due to the unprecedented nature of the COVID-19-related governmental directives and the associated favorable claims frequency impact. During the second quarter of 2020, the premium credits were offset by an equal reduction in loss and loss expenses, as claims frequency on our personal and commercial automobile lines of business declined due to governmental directive-induced reduced miles driven. As the number of vehicles we insure has not significantly declined, frequencies are returning closer to normal levels as the COVID-19-related governmental directives terminate and there is uncertainty about potential impacts to severities.
•A $13.5 million, pre-tax, increase to our allowance for credit losses on premiums receivable reflecting an increase in credit risk due to billing accommodations that we offered our customers, sometimes in collaboration with or at the direction of our regulators. These accommodations included individualized payment flexibility and suspended the effect of policy cancellations, late payment notices, and late or reinstatement fees. The impact of offering billing accommodations while suspending cancellations increased earned but uncollected premiums. The majority of these state regulations have expired as of the end of 2020; however, our allowance for credit losses on premiums receivable of $21.0 million is expected to cover anticipated write-offs that will occur over the corresponding collections cycle, which could last more than a year.
•A $5.0 million, pre-tax, ultimate net loss estimate for losses related to a small portion of our property policies that provide a $25,000 sub-limited coverage for specified extra expenses to clean or disinfect a property when ordered by a Board of Health.
Overall, these four items (i) reduced pre-tax underwriting results by $33.8 million, or $0.44 per diluted common share, (ii) increased the combined ratio by 1.1 points, and (iii) decreased our ROE by 1.1 points.
Offsetting these COVID-19 specific items was a lower level of reported claim frequencies due to the reduced economic activity and other factors. These lower frequencies directly impacted our property lines loss experience. The impact of these lower than expected non-catastrophe property losses (including automobile physical damage losses) resulted in an approximate 1.2 point benefit to our combined ratio. We also reduced our 2020 commercial and personal auto casualty loss costs to partially reflect these lower frequencies for these shorter-tail lines of business, which benefited the combined ratio by 0.4 points. No other casualty lines were adjusted. These modest adjustments to our casualty loss estimates recognize the ongoing inherent uncertainty presented by COVID-19, including the potential for late reported claims and higher severities. We will continue to monitor these trends as we progress through 2021. After March 2020, due to the impact of COVID-19, we suspended business travel and entertainment in most of our regions. We also deferred some projects and new hires for a period of time. These items, which we expect to revert back to more normal levels later in 2021, benefited our 2020 expense ratio by approximately 0.7 points.
In total, we estimate the impact of the lower non-catastrophe property losses, the reduction in our loss ratio due to lower miles driven, and the benefit to the expense ratio all discussed above, collectively more than offset the negative impact from the COVID-19 specific accruals. We estimate the net benefit to our 2020 combined ratio was approximately 1.2 points.
Catastrophe Losses
We experienced a significant level of catastrophe losses in 2020, driven by industry-wide U.S. catastrophe loss activity that significantly exceeded the 5- and 10-year historical means of approximately 4 points. Catastrophes included hurricanes, with several making landfall, convective storms, hail storms, wildfires, and civil unrest. Our combined ratio in 2020 included 8.0 points of catastrophe losses, which was close to our highest level in over 20 years. The $215.4 million of catastrophe losses in 2020 compared to $81.0 million in 2019 reduced net income by $106.2 million, and ROE by 4.5 points.
Investment Portfolio Returns
After-tax investment income increased 2% in 2020 compared to 2019, driven by higher returns on alternative investments in our other investment portfolio. Returns on these holdings are recorded on a one-quarter lag, and the strong capital market performance in the second and third quarters of 2020 drove the higher returns. These returns, coupled with (i) operating cash flows that were 20% of 2020 NPW and (ii) proceeds from our preferred stock offering, increased invested assets by 12% during 2020. However, the increase in invested assets did not keep pace with the increase in common stockholders' equity. Accordingly, investment leverage declined, as reflected in invested assets per dollar of common stockholders' equity, which ended 2020 at $2.96, down from $3.05 at December 31, 2019. After-tax portfolio yields also were lower than a year ago, at 2.6% for 2020 compared to 2.9% for 2019, driven by a lower interest rate environment. The reduced investment leverage, coupled with lower portfolio yields, has resulted in a lower investment income contribution to ROE, which was 7.8% in 2020 compared to 9.1% in 2019.
Despite the significant economic impacts described above, we experienced favorable prior year casualty reserve development of $85 million in 2020 compared to $61 million in 2019, which is discussed in more detail in the "Insurance Operations" section of "Results of Operations and Related Information by Segment" below.
In 2020, we generated our seventh consecutive year of double-digit non-GAAP operating ROEs, with a 10.5% non-GAAP operating ROE. We also grew book value per common share 15% in 2020 compared to 2019, reflecting $4.09 per diluted common share of net income available to common stockholders and $2.25 per diluted common share of after-tax net unrealized gains on our fixed income securities portfolio that were partially offset by $0.94 per diluted common share of dividends paid to common stockholders.
On December 2, 2020, we issued $200 million of 4.60% non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock, which marks the first preferred stock offering in our 94-year history and is a demonstration of our investors' confidence in our value proposition and our continued success. In conjunction with this offering, our Board of Directors ("Board") authorized a $100 million share repurchase program. We intend to be disciplined and opportunistic with our buyback program, repurchasing shares when we believe returns are attractive over the long-term for our shareholders.
Outlook
For 2021, we established a non-GAAP operating ROE target of 11%, which is in line with our 2020 target. We based our 2021 target on our current estimated weighted average cost of capital, the current interest rate environment, and property and casualty insurance market conditions. Our ROE target sets a high bar for our financial performance, challenges us to perform at our best, and aligns our incentive compensation structure with shareholder interests. We enter 2021 in the strongest financial position in our Company's long history, and we are very well positioned to continue delivering growth and profitability.
Looking ahead to 2021, a number of areas require our continued focus to position us for ongoing success:
•Delivering on our strategy for continued disciplined growth, driven by greater share of wallet in our agents’ offices, the addition of new agents, and geographic expansion over the longer term. We continue to work to achieve our longer-term Standard Commercial Lines 3% market share target in our 27 primary operating states, which represents an additional $3 billion premium opportunity. Our strategy is to appoint distribution partners representing approximately a 25% market share and seeking an average 12% share of wallet, or percentage of these partners' books of business. In addition, we anticipate re-starting our geographic expansion strategy. The five states that we opened during 2017 and 2018, including a new Southwest region, are all performing ahead of expectations. Over the next two years, we plan to open three additional states subject to regulatory approval, Idaho, Vermont, and Alabama, , and we plan to open others in subsequent years. Our long-term goal is to have national capabilities, although we will follow a measured and disciplined approach to identifying and opening new markets.
•Continuing to achieve written renewal pure price increases that meet or exceed expected loss trend, while delivering
on our strategy for continued disciplined growth. While we continue to navigate a challenging economic environment, we are comfortable with the overall price adequacy of our book of business.
•Delivering a superior omnichannel customer experience by offering value-added technologies and services. We have significantly enhanced our customer experience capabilities over the last several years, and we provide our customers with various digital and self-service offerings. Investing in and building out technologies that improve the customer experience journey remains a core focus for us.
•Building a culture that fosters innovation and idea generation that is centered on the values of diversity, equity and inclusion, as we seek to develop a group of specially trained leaders to take our company into the future.
For 2021, our full-year guidance is as follows:
•A GAAP combined ratio, excluding catastrophe losses, of 91.0%. This assumes no prior-year casualty reserve development;
•Catastrophe losses of 4.0 points;
•After-tax net investment income of $182 million, which includes $16 million after-tax gains from our alternative investments;
•An overall effective tax rate of approximately 20.5%, which also includes an effective tax rate of 19.0% for net investment income and 21% for all other items; and
•Weighted average shares outstanding of 60.5 million on a diluted basis.
Results of Operations and Related Information by Segment
Insurance Operations
The following table provides quantitative information for analyzing the combined ratio:
Our NPW increased 3% in 2020 compared to 2019, reflecting (i) overall renewal pure price increases of 4.3%, (ii) increased retention, and (iii) new business of $579.7 million in 2020 compared to $548.7 million in 2019. The net appointment of 42 retail agents, excluding agency consolidations, also contributed to our new business growth. This solid growth in a challenging economic environment reflects the strong relationships we have with our best-in-class distribution partners, our sophisticated underwriting and pricing tools, and excellent customer servicing capabilities.
The rate of NPW growth in 2020 was negatively impacted by approximately 4 percentage points due to the following:
•Our $75 million estimate of audit and endorsement return premium related to lower payroll and sales exposures on the workers compensation and general liability lines of business resulting from the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
•A $19.7 million premium credit to our personal and commercial automobile policyholders. Because of the unprecedented nature of the COVID-19-related governmental directives and the associated expected short-term favorable claims frequency impact, we obtained regulatory approval during April to provide this premium credit to our personal and commercial automobile customers. The premium credit to customers with in-force policies was equivalent to 15% of their April and May premiums.
Loss and Loss Expenses
The increase in the loss and loss expense ratio in 2020, compared to 2019, was primarily the result of the following:
Details of the prior year casualty reserve development were as follows:
In addition to the prior year casualty reserve development, current year casualty loss costs were 1.7 points lower in 2020 compared to 2019, driven by decreases in frequencies reflecting reductions in miles driven due to the COVID-19-related governmental directives impacting our commercial and personal automobile lines of business.
For qualitative discussions regarding reserve development, refer to the insurance segment sections below.
Underwriting Expenses
Our underwriting expense ratio was 33.8% in 2020, which was flat compared to 2019. The expense ratio included 1.1 points of COVID-19 specific items, which included the $13.5 million addition to our allowance for credit losses on premiums receivable and lower net earned premiums from the audit premium accrual and premium credits. Excluding these COVID-19 specific items, our underlying expense ratio of 32.7% reflected our ongoing expense management initiatives, and about 70 basis points of temporary expense reductions mainly due to the lower travel, and entertainment expenses, and other expenses as a result of COVID-19.
Standard Commercial Lines Segment
NPW growth in this segment in 2020 compared to 2019 reflected (i) renewal pure price increases, (ii) new business growth, and (iii) increased retention as shown below:
Consistent with our overall insurance operations, NPW growth in 2020 was negatively impacted by approximately 4 percentage points due to the following:
•Our $75 million estimate of audit and endorsement return premium related to the impact of COVID-19 on our workers compensation and general liability lines of business.
•A $15.4 million premium credit to our commercial automobile customers related to reduced miles driven and loss frequency due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Consistent with the fluctuations in NPW, the increase in NPE in 2020 compared to 2019 reflected the items discussed above.
The 0.1-point increase in the loss and loss expense ratio in 2020 compared to 2019 was driven by the following:
In addition to the prior year casualty reserve development above, current year casualty loss costs were 1.2 points lower in 2020 compared to 2019, driven by decreased claim frequencies in our commercial automobile line of business reflecting reductions in miles driven due to the COVID-19-related governmental directives.
For quantitative information on the prior year development by line of business, see "Financial Highlights of Results for Years Ended December 2020, 2019, and 2018" above and for qualitative information about the significant drivers of this development, see the line of business discussions below.
The following is a discussion of our most significant Standard Commercial Lines of business:
NPW in 2020 benefited from higher retention and renewal pure price increases. These items were partially offset by a $41.0 million reduction in audit and mid-term endorsement premiums, primarily driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, discussed in the "Insurance Operations" section above.
The combined ratio decreased 4.5 points in 2020, driven principally by an increase in favorable prior year casualty reserve development compared to 2019, as outlined in the table below.
In 2020, the prior year reserve development was primarily attributable to favorable reserve development on loss severities in accident years 2017 and prior.
While this line experienced favorable prior year casualty reserve development in 2020, we remain cautious about the inherent uncertainty presented by COVID-19, including the potential for late reported claims and higher severities. Additionally, this line is exposed to other unfavorable trends, including social inflation and state laws enacted that extend the statute of limitations or open windows for previously time-barred actions. We will continue to monitor these trends in 2021.
The increases in NPW shown in the table above reflect 8.1% renewal pure price increases, higher retention, and an increase in new business as in-force vehicle counts increased 7%. The increase in 2020 was partially offset by a $15.4 million premium credit to our commercial automobile customers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The 7.4-point decrease in the combined ratio in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by the items in the tables below.
The 2020 prior year casualty reserve development was primarily attributable to unfavorable reserve development on loss severities in accident years 2016 through 2019 and higher than expected frequencies in accident year 2019.
The lower combined ratio in 2020 also reflected a 6.7-point reduction in the current year casualty loss costs. This reduction primarily relates to the impact of strong renewal pure price increases we have earned in this line of business over the last several years and underwriting actions we have taken to improve profitability. Current year loss costs also benefited from decreases in claim frequencies reflecting reduced miles driven related to the COVID-19-related governmental directive.
This line of business remains an area of focus for us and most of the industry. Profitability challenges continue to generate
combined ratios higher than our risk-adjusted targets and the inherent uncertainty COVID-19 presents includes the potential for late reported claims and higher severities. We will continue to (i) actively implement price increases consistent with levels experienced in 2020, and (ii) enhance our underwriting tools to improve the accuracy of our rating information to prevent premium leakage. We also have been actively managing our new and renewal business, and we expect our actions will positively impact profitability through business mix improvement.
In addition to the drivers in the table above, the 2020 NPW was impacted by a $28.7 million reduction in audit and mid-term endorsement premiums driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, which is discussed in the "Insurance Operations" section above.
The increase in the combined ratio in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by less favorable prior year casualty reserve development, as follows:
The favorable reserve development for both periods was due to continued favorable medical severity trends impacting accident years 2018 and prior. Due to the length of time that injured workers can receive medical treatment, decreases in medical inflation can cause favorable loss development across an extended number of accident years.
While reported profitability on this line remains strong due to favorable emergence on prior year reserves, current accident year
margins do not support the continued negative pricing levels being set by the National Council on Compensation
Insurance and independent state rating bureaus. A reduction or reversal in the trend of favorable frequencies and severities has
the potential to significantly increase this line's combined ratio, which we monitor closely.
NPW growth in this line in 2020 compared to 2019 was driven by (i) renewal pure price increases, (ii) new business growth, and (iii) increased retention.
Quantitative information regarding property losses is as follows:
Higher catastrophe losses in 2020 compared to 2019 were driven by the events mentioned in "Financial Highlights of Results for Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018" discussion above.
Standard Personal Lines Segment
NPW declined in 2020 compared to 2019, driven by new business that did not increase enough to compensate for the non-renewed policies reflected in our 83% retention ratio. Additionally, 2020 included a $4.3 million premium credit to our Standard Personal Lines customers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which reduced the year-over-year NPW growth rate by 1 percentage point.
The reduction in NPE in 2020 compared to 2019 reflects the decreases in NPW discussed above.
The loss and loss expense ratio increased 9.4 points in 2020 compared to 2019, the primary drivers of which were as follows:
In addition to the items above, current year casualty loss costs were 2.6 points lower in 2020 as compared to 2019 driven by our personal automobile line of business reflecting decreases in claim frequencies as a result of reductions in miles driven due to the COVID-19-related governmental directives.
E&S Lines Segment
NPW increased 4.0% in 2020 due to increases in direct new business and renewal pure price. After two consecutive years in which we exited underperforming classes of business, our focus has shifted to profitably growing segments of our E&S book that have demonstrated underwriting profitability, and identifying new profitable segments to grow.
Quantitative information is as follows:
The 2.0-point increase in the loss and loss expense ratio in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to an increase in property losses. This was partially offset by lower unfavorable prior year casualty reserve development and a decrease in current year loss costs of 3.7 points.
Quantitative information regarding our property losses and prior year casualty reserve development are as follows:
We had no prior year casualty reserve development in 2020, which was a slight improvement over 2019, when unfavorable prior year casualty reserve development was relatively minor.
The 2.0-point increase in the underwriting expense ratio in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by increases in the bad debt provision during 2020 of 1.5 points.
Reinsurance
We use reinsurance to protect our capital resources and insure against losses on property and casualty risks that we underwrite. We use two main reinsurance vehicles: (i) a reinsurance pooling agreement among our Insurance Subsidiaries through which each company agrees to share in premiums and losses based on certain specified percentages; and (ii) reinsurance contracts and arrangements with third parties that cover various policies that we issue to our customers.
Reinsurance Pooling Agreement
The primary purposes of the reinsurance pooling agreement among our Insurance Subsidiaries are to:
•Pool or share proportionately the underwriting profit and loss results of property and casualty insurance underwriting operations through reinsurance;
•Reduce administration expenses; and
•Permit all of the Insurance Subsidiaries to obtain a uniform rating from AM Best Company ("AM Best").
The following illustrates the pooling percentages by Insurance Subsidiary as of December 31, 2020:
Reinsurance Treaties and Arrangements
By entering into reinsurance treaties and arrangements, we can increase our underwriting capacity, accepting larger individual risks and aggregations of risks without directly increasing our capital or surplus. Our reinsurance program principally consists of traditional reinsurance. Under our reinsurance treaties, the reinsurer generally assumes a portion of the losses we cede to them in exchange for a portion of the premium. Amounts not reinsured below a specified dollar threshold are known as retention. Reinsurance does not legally discharge us from liability under the terms and limits of our policies, but it does make our reinsurer liable to us for the amount of liability we cede to them. Our reinsurers often rely on their own reinsurance programs, or retrocessions, to manage their large loss exposures. The size of the global reinsurance community is relatively small. If our reinsurers are unable to collect on their retrocessional programs, it may impair their ability to pay us for the amounts we cede to them.
Consequently, our reinsurers present us with direct and indirect counterparty credit risk. We attempt to mitigate this credit risk by (i) pursuing relationships with reinsurers rated “A-” or higher by AM Best and/or (ii) obtaining collateral to secure reinsurance obligations. Some of our reinsurance treaties permit us to terminate or commute them - or require the reinsurer to post collateral if the reinsurer's financial condition or rating deteriorates. We monitor our reinsurers' financial condition, and we review the quality of reinsurance recoverables and reserves for uncollectible reinsurance. For additional information regarding our reinsurance counterparty credit risk, see Note 9. "Reinsurance" in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." of this Form 10-K.
We have reinsurance contracts that separately cover our property and casualty insurance business that can be segregated into the following key categories:
•Property Reinsurance, which includes our (i) property excess of loss treaties purchased for protection against large individual property losses and (ii) property catastrophe treaties purchased to provide protection for the overall property portfolio against severe catastrophic events. We primarily use facultative reinsurance for large individual property risks greater than our property excess of loss treaty capacity.
•Casualty Reinsurance, which provides protection for both individual large casualty losses and catastrophic casualty losses involving multiple claimants or insureds. We also may use facultative reinsurance for large individual casualty risks in excess of our treaty capacity.
•Terrorism Reinsurance, which provides a federal reinsurance backstop, behind the protection built into our property and casualty reinsurance treaties, for terrorism losses covered under the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act (“TRIPRA”). For further information about TRIPRA, see Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” of this Form 10-K.
•Flood Reinsurance, for which all of the premiums and losses related to our participation in the WYO (for which we also receive a servicing fee) are 100% ceded to the federal government.
Property Reinsurance
We renewed the property catastrophe treaty, which covers both our standard market and E&S business, effective January 1, 2021. For the main property catastrophe excess of loss treaty program, we maintained our expiring retention. We also purchased an additional $50 million in limit at the top of our program, thereby extending the coverage to $785 million in excess of a $40 million retention. We also renewed the separate catastrophe treaty of $35 million in excess of $5 million that covers events outside our 2015 22-state footprint and supports (i) our standard lines geographic expansion into Arizona, New Hampshire, Colorado, Utah, and New Mexico and (ii) our growing E&S property book. Both treaties were renewed on substantially the same terms as the expiring treaties except (i) restrictions in coverage were imposed related to the systemic perils of communicable disease and (ii) first party cybersecurity coverage, an expected result consistent with current market conditions. Consequently, the property catastrophe program now excludes coverage for communicable disease, but it retains reduced reinsurance coverage for cybersecurity risks. Despite these new limitations, coverage for traditionally covered property perils was maintained. Overall catastrophe ceded premium for 2021 increased due to three factors: (i) increases in underlying property exposures in line with our growing overall portfolio; (ii) the new additional $50 million of coverage purchased at the top of our treaty to maintain stability in our net risk profile; and (iii) a reinsurance environment characterized by higher risk-adjusted pricing, more rigorous underwriting, and reduced capacity. These dynamics were fueled by such factors as the uncertainty surrounding the impact of COVID-19, lower interest rates, and elevated catastrophe loss activity. However, on a risk-adjusted basis, the expiring layers saw modest rate increases, in line with market conditions for loss-free accounts sharing our geographic footprint.
We seek to minimize credit risk within our reinsurance program by transacting with highly-rated reinsurance partners and, where feasible, purchasing collateralized reinsurance products, particularly for high-severity, low-probability events. The current reinsurance program includes $281 million in collateralized limit, primarily in the top layer of the catastrophe program.
We continue to assess our property catastrophe exposure aggregations, modeled results, and effects of premium growth on our property portfolio. We strive to balance our exposure to individual large events against the cost of reinsurance protections.
We model various catastrophic perils, and hurricane risk continues to be our portfolio's most significant natural catastrophe peril because of the geographic location of the risks we insure. The table below illustrates the impact of the five largest hurricane losses we have experienced in the last 30 years:
1This amount represents reported and unreported gross losses estimated as of December 31, 2020.
2Net loss does not include reinstatement premiums, taxes, or flood claims handling fees.
We review our exposure to hurricane risk by examining the results of a third-party vendor model and proprietary analysis. The third-party vendor model provides a long-term view that closely relates modeled event frequency to historical hurricane activity and is adjusted to reflect assumptions for certain non-modeled costs, such as the impact of loss expenses, residual market assessments, and automobile-related losses. We believe that modeled estimates provide a range of potential outcomes, and we review multiple estimates to understand our catastrophic risk.
1Gross losses include uncertainty associated with damage/loss estimation, demand and storm surge, and assumptions for certain un-modeled costs, such as the impact of loss expenses, residual market assessments, and automobile-related losses, which collectively increase our gross losses by approximately 13%.
2Net losses are after-tax losses net of catastrophe reinsurance including reinstatement premiums.
3GAAP Equity as of December 31, 2020.
Our current catastrophe reinsurance program exhausts at an approximately 1 in 220 year return period, or events with 0.5% probability, based on a multi-model view of hurricane risk. Our actual gross and net losses incurred from hurricanes making U.S.-landfall will vary, perhaps materially, from our estimated modeled losses.
The property excess of loss treaty, which covers both our standard market and E&S business, was renewed on July 1, 2020, with the top layer renewed on January 1, 2021. The major terms of these treaties are consistent with the prior year.
The following table summarizes of our property reinsurance treaties and arrangements covering our Insurance Subsidiaries:
PROPERTY REINSURANCE ON INSURANCE PRODUCTS
Treaty Name Reinsurance Coverage Terrorism Coverage
Property Catastrophe Excess of Loss
(covers all insurance operations) $785 million above $40 million retention treaty that responds on per occurrence basis in four layers: All nuclear, biological, chemical, and radioactive ("NBCR") losses are excluded regardless of whether or not they are certified under TRIPRA. Non-NBCR losses are covered to the same extent as non-terrorism losses. Please see Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” of this Form 10-K for discussion regarding TRIPRA.
- 82% of losses in excess of $40 million up to
$100 million;
- 97% of losses in excess of $100 million up to
$225 million;
- 97% of losses in excess of $225 million up to
$475 million; and
- 90% of losses in excess of $475 million up
to $825 million.
- The treaty provides one reinstatement in each of the first three layers and no reinstatement in the fourth layer. The annual aggregate limit is $1.1 billion, net of the Insurance Subsidiaries' co-participation.
In addition, our $35 million above $5 million retention treaty that responds on per occurrence basis covers 85% of losses outside of our standard lines original 22-state footprint and has an annual aggregate limit of $30 million, net of the Insurance Subsidiaries' co-participation. This layer was purchased primarily to protect the growth of our E&S property book but also provides coverage for our Standard Lines expansion states.
Property Excess of Loss
(covers all insurance operations) $58 million above $2 million retention covering 100% in three layers. Losses other than TRIPRA certified losses are subject to the following reinstatements and annual aggregate limits: All NBCR losses are excluded regardless of whether or not they are certified under TRIPRA. For non-NBCR losses, the treaty distinguishes between acts committed on behalf of foreign persons or foreign interests ("Foreign Terrorism") and those that are not. The treaty provides annual aggregate limits for Foreign Terrorism (other than NBCR) acts of $24 million for the first layer and $60 million for the second layer and for the third layer $40 million. Non-foreign terrorism losses (other than NBCR) are covered to the same extent as non-terrorism losses.
- $8 million in excess of $2 million layer
provides unlimited reinstatements;
- $30 million in excess of $10 million layer
provides three reinstatements, $120 million in
aggregate limits; and
- $20 million in excess of $40 million layer
provides three reinstatements, $80 million in aggregate
limits.
Flood 100% reinsurance by the federal government’s WYO. None
Casualty Reinsurance
We renewed the casualty excess of loss treaty, which covers both our standard market and E&S Lines business, on July 1, 2020, on substantially the same terms as the treaty expiring June 30, 2020.
The following table summarizes our casualty reinsurance treaties and arrangements covering our Insurance Subsidiaries:
CASUALTY REINSURANCE ON INSURANCE PRODUCTS
Treaty Name Reinsurance Coverage Terrorism Coverage
Casualty Excess of Loss
(covers all insurance operations) There are six layers covering 100% of $88 million in excess of $2 million. Losses other than terrorism losses are subject to the following: All NBCR losses are excluded. All other losses stemming from the acts of terrorism are subject to the following:
- $3 million in excess of $2 million layer
provides 28 reinstatements, $87 million annual aggregate
limit; - $3 million in excess of $2 million layer with
$15 million net annual terrorism aggregate limit;
- $7 million in excess of $5 million layer
provides six reinstatements, $49 million annual aggregate
limit; - $7 million in excess of $5 million layer with
$28 million net annual terrorism aggregate limit;
- $9 million in excess of $12 million layer
provides three reinstatements; $36 million annual
aggregate limit;
- $9 million in excess of $12 million layer with
$27 million net annual terrorism aggregate limit;
- $9 million in excess of $21 million layer
provides one reinstatement, $18 million annual aggregate
limit;
- $9 million in excess of $21 million layer with
$18 million net annual terrorism aggregate limit;
- $20 million in excess of $30 million layer
provides one reinstatement, $40 million annual aggregate
limit; and
- $20 million in excess of $30 million layer with
$40 million net annual terrorism aggregate limit; and
- $40 million in excess of $50 million layer
provides one reinstatement, $80 million annual aggregate
limit.
- $40 million in excess of $50 million layer with
$80 million net annual terrorism aggregate limit.
We have other reinsurance treaties, such as our (i) Surety and Fidelity Excess of Loss Reinsurance Treaty, (ii) National Workers Compensation Reinsurance Pool Quota Share, which covers business assumed from the involuntary workers compensation pool, (iii) Endurance Specialty Quota share and Loss Development Cover, which provides protection for losses on policies written prior to the acquisition and any development on reserves established by MUSIC as of the date of acquisition, (iv) Equipment Breakdown Coverage Reinsurance Treaty, (v) Multi-line Quota Share, which covers additional personal lines coverages, and (vi) Cyber Liability Quota Share.
We regularly evaluate our overall reinsurance program, and we try to develop effective ways to manage the transfer of risk. We base our analysis on a comprehensive process that includes periodic analysis of modeling results and review of our own loss experience, aggregation of exposures, exposure growth, diversification of risks, limits written, projected reinsurance costs, reinsurer financial strength, and projected impact on earnings, equity, and statutory surplus. We strive to balance reinsurer credit quality, price, terms, and our appetite to retain a certain level of risk.
Investments Segment
The primary objective of the investment portfolio is to maximize after-tax net investment income and the overall total return of the portfolio, while maintaining a high credit quality core fixed income securities portfolio and managing our duration risk profile. The effective duration of the fixed income securities portfolio, including short-term investments, was 3.8 years as of December 31, 2020, compared to the Insurance Subsidiaries' liability duration of 3.7 years. The effective duration is monitored and managed to maximize yield while managing interest rate risk at an acceptable level. We maintain a well-diversified portfolio across sectors, with credit quality and maturities that provide ample liquidity. Purchases and sales are made with the intent of maximizing investment returns in the current market environment while balancing capital preservation.
Our fixed income securities and short-term investment portfolios represented 92% of our invested assets at December 31, 2020, and 96% of our invested assets at December 31, 2019. These portfolios had a weighted average credit rating of “ AA- ” as of both dates, with investment grade holdings representing 96% of these portfolios at December 31, 2020 and 97% as of December 31, 2019.
We have been actively engaged in monitoring and managing the exposure to credit risk in our portfolio associated with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic conditions during 2020. We have also been managing the portfolio's exposure to floating rate securities, which reset principally to 90-day LIBOR. Given the reduction in the valuation of U.S. public equities and the significant widening of high yield credit spreads earlier in the year, we modestly increased our allocation to risk-seeking assets during 2020 as we identify attractive investment opportunities. Despite the strong performance of our portfolio, the average after-tax new money yield on fixed income purchases continued to decline as treasury rates remained low
and credit spreads continued to tighten throughout the year. Given the current environment, we continue to reinvest proceeds from the non-sale disposal activity primarily related to "AAA" rated agency-backed RMBS into other high quality, but non-AAA rated fixed income sectors, as we find the risk adjusted returns more attractive. Over the coming quarters, we expect the average credit rating will decrease to "A+" from "AA-" and remain there for the foreseeable future; however, we do not anticipate a material shift in the overall risk/return characteristics of our fixed income securities portfolio.
For further details on the composition, credit quality, and the various risks to which our portfolio is subject, see