ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements based upon current beliefs, plans, expectations, intentions and projections that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, such as statements regarding our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and projections. Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are an advanced materials company that develops and commercializes silicon nitride for medical and non-medical applications. The core strength of SINTX Technologies is the manufacturing, research, and development of silicon nitride ceramics for external partners. We believe that silicon nitride has a superb combination of properties that make it ideally suited for long-term human implantation. Other biomaterials are based on bone grafts, metal alloys, and polymers, all of which have well-known practical limitations and disadvantages. In contrast, silicon nitride has a legacy of success in the most demanding and extreme industrial environments. As a human implant material, silicon nitride offers bone ingrowth, resistance to bacterial and viral infection, ease of diagnostic imaging, resistance to corrosion, and superior strength and fracture resistance, among other advantages, all of which claims are validated in our large and growing inventory of peer-reviewed, published literature reports.
Additionally, we received positive results from an independent study that demonstrated the potential anti-viral properties of our silicon nitride. The results suggest that silicon nitride may be useful in the reduction of the spread of COVID-19. The study results demonstrated that our unique grade of silicon nitride inactivates the SARS-CoV-2 virus within a minute after exposure and has the potential to decrease the risk of viral disease spread on surfaces. Studies have shown that coronavirus spreads between humans when an infected person coughs or sneezes. Also, the virus can remain active on a variety of commonly touched surfaces for hours to days. We believe that by incorporating our unique composition of silicon nitride into products such as face masks, and personal protective equipment, it is possible to manufacture surfaces that inactivate viral particles, thereby limiting the spread of the disease. We envision incorporating our silicon nitride into high-contact surfaces such as medical equipment, screens, countertops, and doorknobs in locations where viral persistence is a concern, such as homes, casinos, and cruise ships. We believe this anti-viral discovery will open many new opportunities for us. In composites, coatings, and mixtures, silicon nitride has maintained its antibacterial and osteogenic properties, even at small fractions. We believe that incorporating our material into a variety of commonly touched surfaces may discourage viral spread, and contribute to global health by reducing the risk of disease. We believe that our versatile silicon nitride manufacturing expertise positions us favorably to introduce new and innovative devices in the medical and non-medical fields.
We also believe that we are the first and only company to commercialize silicon nitride medical implants. Prior to October 1, 2018, we designed, manufactured and commercialized silicon nitride products for our own behalf in the spine implant market. Over 35,000 of our spinal implants manufactured with silicon nitride have been implanted into patients, with an excellent safety record. On October 1, 2018, we sold our spine implant business to CTL Amedica and now manufacture spine implants made with silicon nitride for CTL. Prior to selling our spine implant business to CTL, we had received 510(k) regulatory clearance in the United States, a CE mark in Europe, ANVISA approval in Brazil, and ARTG and Prostheses approvals in Australia for a number of silicon nitride spine implant products designed for spinal fusion surgery. Spine implant products manufactured by us from silicon nitride are currently marketed and sold by CTL under the Valeo® brand to surgeons and hospitals in the United States and to selected markets in Europe and South America. These implants are designed for use in cervical (neck) and thoracolumbar (lower back) spine surgery. We are collaborating with CTL to establish commercial partners in other parts of the world and also working with other partners to obtain regulatory approval for silicon nitride implants in Japan.
The sale of our spine implant business to CTL enables us to now focus on our core competencies. These include research and development of silicon nitride and the design and manufacture of medical and nonmedical products manufactured from silicon nitride and other ceramic materials for our own account and in collaboration with other medical device manufacturers. We are targeting OEM - including CTL Medical - and private label partnerships in order to accelerate adoption of silicon nitride in future markets such as coating products with silicon nitride, hip and knee replacements, dental and maxillofacial implants, extremities, trauma, bearings, automotive and aerospace components, cutting tools, and a wide range of antipathogenic applications. Existing biomaterials, based on plastics, metals, and bone grafts have well-recognized limitations that we believe are addressed by silicon nitride.
We believe that silicon nitride addresses many of the biomaterial-related limitations in medical related fields such as hip and knee replacements, dental and maxillofacial implants, sports medicine, extremities, and trauma surgery. We further believe that the inherent material properties of silicon nitride, and the ability to formulate the material in a variety of compositions, combined with precise control of the surface properties of the material, opens up a number of commercial opportunities across orthopedic surgery, neurological surgery, maxillofacial surgery, other medical disciplines, as well as commodity items such as industrial fasteners, bushings, and valves to addressing more complex demands of hypersonic missile radomes, aerospace, air-conditioning systems, beverage dispensers, touch-screen glass, and agribusiness fungicides. During 2020, the Company shipped multiple small quantity orders of industrial products totaling $33 thousand.
Components of our Results of Operations
We manage our business within one reportable segment, which is consistent with how our management reviews our business, makes investment and resource allocation decisions and assesses operating performance.
Product Revenue
We derive our product revenue primarily from the manufacture and sale of spinal fusion products used in the treatment of spine disorders to CTL, with whom we entered into a 10-year exclusive sales agreement in October 2018. We are currently pursuing other sales opportunities for silicon nitride products outside the spinal fusion application and have shipped new orders for these products. We generally recognize revenue from sales where control transfers at a point in time as the title and risk of loss passes to the customer, which is at the time the product is shipped. In general, our customer does not have rights of return or exchange.
We believe our product revenue will increase as CTL increases sales of silicon nitride spinal fusion products, as we secure other opportunities to manufacture third party products with silicon nitride, and as we continue to introduce new products into the market.
Cost of Revenue
The expenses that are included in cost of revenue include all in-house manufacturing costs for the products we manufacture.
Gross Profit
Our gross profit measures our product revenue relative to our cost of revenue. We expect our gross profit percentage to decrease as we expand the penetration of our silicon nitride technology platform through OEM and private label partnerships, which offer additional avenues for the adoption of silicon nitride. Prior to the sale of our retail spine implant business, our revenues and gross profits were based on our retail sales. With the focus on OEM and private label partnerships, the margins are lower, thus causing the decrease in our gross profit percentage.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development costs consist of engineering, product development, clinical trials, test-part manufacturing, testing, developing and validating the manufacturing process, manufacturing, facility and regulatory-related costs. Research and development expenses also include employee compensation, employee and non-employee stock-based compensation, supplies and materials, consultant services, and travel and facilities expenses related to research and development activities.
We expect to incur additional research and development costs as we continue to develop new spinal fusion products, product candidates for total joint replacements, dental applications, and other products which may increase our total research and development expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation for certain members of our executive team and other personnel employed in finance, compliance, administrative, information technology, customer service, executive and human resource departments. General and administrative expenses also include other expenses not part of the other cost categories mentioned above, including facility expenses and professional fees for accounting and legal services.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Product Revenue
Total silicon nitride revenue was $0.6 million in 2020 as compared to $0.7 million in 2019, a decrease of $0.1 million or 14%. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in orders from CTL.
Costs of Revenue and Gross Profit
The Company’s cost of revenue decreased $0.1 million, or 14%, as compared to the same period in 2019. Gross profit was approximately the same as compared to the same period in 2019. Cost of revenue decreased as a result of decreased revenue due to due to a decrease in orders from CTL.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $1.4 million, or 42%, as compared to the same period in 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to an overall increase in R&D activity to support the Company’s strategic objective of developing new technologies and related products.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $0.2 million, or 8%, as compared to the same period in 2019. This increase is largely due to an increase in franchise tax from the prior year.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased $0.3 million, or 59%, as compared to the same period in 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to an overall increase in marketing activities to generate interest in and exposure to the Company’s potential new product lines.
Deemed Dividends
Deemed dividends related to a beneficial conversion feature and accretion of discount on convertible preferred stock was recorded at $9.6 million in 2020, compared to $2.7 million for 2019. A beneficial conversion amount was calculated in association with the 2020 issuance of certain convertible preferred stock and warrants that could convert to common stock at a discount below the trading price on the date of issuance. The accretion of a discount related to the actual conversion of the preferred stock into common stock. During 2020, 9,612 shares of the preferred stock were converted to common stock and 3,825 shares of the preferred stock were converted to common stock during 2019.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income decreased $0.3 million, or 18%, as compared to the same period in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to offering costs in the amount of $1.2 million, and a decrease in interest income of $0.1 million offset by the increase in the change in the fair value of the derivative liabilities in the amount of $0.8 million and the increase in the loss on the extinguishment of derivative liabilities of $0.2 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue to operate as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and settlement of liabilities in the normal course of business, and does not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result from uncertainty related to its ability to continue as a going concern within one year from the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company incurred a net loss of $7.0 million and $4.8 million, respectively, and used cash in operations of $9.1 million and $6.4 million, respectively. The Company had an accumulated deficit of $241.1 million and $234.1 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. To date, the Company’s operations have been principally financed from proceeds from the issuance of preferred and common stock and, to a lesser extent, cash generated from product sales. It is anticipated that the Company will continue to generate operating losses and use cash in operations. The Company’s continuation as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to increase sales, and/or raise additional funds through the capital markets. Whether and when the Company can attain profitability and positive cash flows from operations or obtain additional financing is uncertain.
The Company is actively generating additional scientific and clinical data to have it published in leading industry publications. The unique features of our silicon nitride material are not well known, and we believe the publication of such data would help sales efforts as the Company approaches new prospects. The Company is also making additional changes to the sales strategy, including a focus on revenue growth by expanding the use of silicon nitride in other areas outside of spinal fusion applications. For instance, results from an independent study demonstrated the potential anti-viral properties of our silicon nitride. We believe that we may be able to apply our silicon nitride powder to personal protection products, such as face masks, gowns and gloves, resulting in inactivation of viruses that come into contact with the items.
The Company has common stock that is publicly traded and has been able to successfully raise capital when needed since the date of the Company’s initial public offering in February 2014. On February 6, 2020, the Company closed on a rights offering to its stockholders of units, consisting of convertible preferred stock and warrants, for gross proceeds of $9.4 million, which excludes underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by the Company. Additionally, during the period of June 2020 through August 2020, the Company closed four registered direct offerings of shares of its common stock, priced at-the-market under Nasdaq rules, resulting in the issuance of a total of 11,015,000 shares of its common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $20.9 million, which excludes underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by the Company.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company entered into an ATM equity distribution agreement in which the Company may sell, from time to time, shares of common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $2.5 million. The Company sold 527,896 shares during the year ended December 31, 2019, raising approximately $1.7 million before considering issuance costs. During the year ending December 31, 2020, the Company sold 354,381 shares of common stock, raising approximately $0.8 million before considering issuance costs. As a result of the sales during the first half of 2020 there are no longer any funds available to the Company under the ATM.
On October 1, 2018, the Company sold the retail spine implant business to CTL Medical. The sale included a $6 million noninterest bearing note receivable payable over a 36-month term. The 36-month term of the note receivable requires 18 payments of $138,889 followed by 18 payments of $194,444, with maturing of the note receivable to occur October 1, 2021. The Company expects cash flows $1.9 million for the remaining ten months.
Management has concluded that together with its existing capital resources and payments on the note receivable from the sale of the spine implant business will be sufficient to fund operations for at least the next 12 months, or through March 2022.
Risks Related to COVID-19 Pandemic
The recent outbreak of COVID-19 originated in Wuhan, China, in December 2019 and has since spread to multiple countries, including the United States and several European countries. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic is affecting the United States and global economies and may affect the Company’s operations and those of third parties on which the Company relies. While the potential economic impact brought by, and the duration of, the COVID-19 pandemic is difficult to assess or predict, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global financial markets may reduce the Company’s ability to access capital, which could negatively impact the Company’s short-term and long-term liquidity. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. The Company does not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on its business, financing or other activities or on healthcare systems or the global economy as a whole. However, these effects could have a material impact on the Company’s liquidity, capital resources, operations and business and those of the third parties on which we rely.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes, for the periods indicated, cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $9.1 million in 2020, compared to $6.4 million used in 2019, an increase of $2.7 million. The increase in the net loss for operations, and related non-cash add backs to the net loss, was $2.5 million from 2020 when compared to 2019. The increase in cash used for operating activities operations during 2020 was primarily due to the $2.5 million mentioned above plus changes in the movement of working capital items during 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 as follows: a $0.6 million increase in cash used in accounts payable and accrued liabilities and a $0.1 increase in cash used in prepaids, offset by a $0.4 million decrease in cash payments on operating lease liability, and a $0.1 million decrease in cash used in account and other receivables.
Net Cash Provided By Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $1.8 million during 2020, compared to $1.4 million provided by investing activities during the same period in 2019, an increase of $0.4 million. The increase in cash provided in investing activities during 2020 was primarily due to an increase of $0.6 million for the proceeds from notes receivable, offset by the increase of $0.2 million for the purchase of property and equipment.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $30.9 million during 2020, compared to $1.4 million provided by financing activities during the same period in 2019, an increase of $29.5 million. This increase was primarily attributable an increase in proceeds from warrant derivative liabilities of $6.3 million, an increase in proceeds from issuance of common stock in the amount of $18.5 million, an increase in proceeds from issuance of preferred stock in the amount of $3.1 million, an increase in proceeds of $1.0 million from warrants exercised for cash, a $0.4 million increase from the issuance of debt, and a $0.2 decrease in capital raise costs.
Indebtedness
PPP Loan
On April 28, 2020, the Company received funding under a Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan (the “PPP Loan”) from First State Community Bank (the “Lender”). The principal amount of the PPP Loan is $0.391 million. The PPP Loan has a two-year term, maturing on April 28, 2022. The term may be extended to five-years if the Lender and we agree to do so. The interest rate on the PPP Loan is 1.0% per annum. Principal and interest are payable in 18 monthly installments, beginning on November 28, 2020, until maturity with respect to any portion of the PPP Loan which is not forgiven as described below. The PPP Loan may be partially or fully forgiven if the Company complies with the provisions of the CARES Act, including the use of PPP Loan proceeds for payroll costs, rent, utilities and other expenses, provided that such amounts are incurred during a 24-week period that commenced on April 28, 2020 and at least 60% of any forgiven amount has been used for covered payroll costs as defined by the CARES Act. Any forgiveness of the PPP Loan will be subject to approval by the SBA and the Lender and will require the Company to apply for such treatment in the future.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.
Related-Party Transactions
For a description of our related-party transactions, see Item 13 “Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions, Director Independence” contained in Part III of this 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Seasonality and Backlog
Our business is generally not seasonal in nature. We derive our product revenue primarily from the sale of spinal fusion products, used in the treatment of spine disorders, to CTL Medical, with whom we have an exclusive sales agreement in place with a remaining term of 8-years. CTL Medical’s sales generally consist of products that are in stock with them or maintained at hospitals or with their sales distributors. Accordingly, we do not have a backlog of sales orders.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
A summary of our significant accounting policies and estimates is discussed in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020. There have been no material changes to those policies for the year ended December 31, 2020, except as explained below in Accounting Pronouncements Adopted in 2019. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions regarding uncertainties that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities. Significant areas of uncertainty that require judgments, estimates and assumptions include the accounting for income taxes and other contingencies as well as valuation of derivative liabilities, asset impairment and collectability of accounts receivable. We use historical and other information that we consider to be relevant to make these judgments and estimates. However, actual results may differ from those estimates and assumptions that are used to prepare our consolidated financial statements.
New Accounting Pronouncement, Not Yet Adopted
The Company has reviewed all other recently issued, but not yet adopted, accounting standards, in order to determine their effects, if any, on its results of operations, financial position or cash flows. Based on that review, the Company believes that no other pronouncements will have a significant effect on its financial statements upon adoption.
Revenue Recognition
The Company derives its product revenue primarily from the sale of spinal fusion products, used in the treatment of spine disorders to CTL Medical, with whom the Company has a 10-year exclusive sales agreement in place, 8 years of which remain. The Company is currently pursuing other sales opportunities for silicon nitride outside the spinal fusion application. The sale of the Company’s products has a single performance obligation and revenue is recognized at the time the product is shipped to the customer. In general, the Company’s customers do not have any rights of return or exchange.
As of January 1, 2019, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606), and elected to use the modified retrospective method. Under the modified retrospective method, the Company has presented prior periods under legacy GAAP, with the cumulative effect of initial application adjusted through beginning retained earnings. The new standard did not have a material impact on the revenue recognition process of the Company and no cumulative effect was recognized upon initial application.
With the adoption of ASC 606 at the beginning of 2019, revenue is recognized when control of the goods or services promised under the contract is transferred to the customer either at a point in time (e.g., upon delivery) or over time (e.g., as performed under the contract). The Company accounts for a contract when it has approval and commitment from both parties, the rights and payment terms of the parties are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable. Contracts are reviewed to determine whether there is one or multiple performance obligations. A performance obligation is a promise to transfer a distinct good or service to a customer and represents the unit of accounting for revenue recognition. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the expected consideration, or the transaction price, is allocated to each performance obligation identified in the contract based on the relative standalone selling price of each performance obligation. Revenue is then recognized for the transaction price allocated to the performance obligation when control of the promised goods or services underlying the performance obligation is transferred. Contract consideration is not adjusted for the effects of a significant financing component when, at contract inception, the period between when control transfers and when the customer will pay for that good or service is one year or less. Contact modifications that provide for additional distinct goods or services at the standalone selling price are treated as separate contracts. The transaction price for our contracts reflects our estimate of returns, rebates and discounts, which historically have not been significant. Amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling are included in the transaction price and generally are not treated as separate performance obligations as these costs fulfill a promise to transfer the product to the customer. The Company does not employee salespeople to actively seek additional customers; there are no incremental costs for obtaining customers that need to be capitalized.
Account and Other Receivables and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Account and other receivables are carried at invoiced amount less an allowance for doubtful accounts. On a regular basis, the Company evaluates account and other receivables and estimates an allowance for doubtful accounts, as needed, based on various factors such as customers’ current credit conditions, length of time past due, and the general economy as a whole. Receivables are written off against the allowance when they are deemed uncollectible.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost for manufactured inventory determined under the standard costs, which approximate actual costs, determined on the first-in first-out (“FIFO”) method. Manufactured inventory consists of raw material, direct labor and manufacturing overhead cost components. The Company reviews the carrying value of inventory on a periodic basis for excess or obsolete items, and records any write-down as a cost of revenue, as necessary.
Long Lived Intangible Assets
The Company evaluates the carrying value of definite-lived intangibles when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Factors the Company considers important which could trigger an impairment review include, but are not limited to, significant under-performance relative to historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the manner of its use of acquired assets or its overall business strategy, and significant industry or economic trends. The Company amortizes definite-lived intangible assets on a straight-line basis over their useful lives. The Company recorded no impairment loss for definite-lived intangible assets during the year ended December 31, 2020. As explained above, the Company sold most intangible assets that had a carrying value to CTL Medical, retaining the carrying value of only one trademark asset.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment, including leasehold improvements, are stated at cost, less accumulated depreciation and amortization. Property and equipment are depreciated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which range from three to five years. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of their estimated useful lives or the related lease term, generally five years.
The Company reviews the carrying value of the Company’s property and equipment that are held and used in the Company’s operations for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is determined based upon expected undiscounted future net cash flows from the operations to which the assets relate, utilizing management’s best estimate, assumptions, and projections at the time. If the carrying value is determined to be unrecoverable from future operating cash flows, the asset is deemed impaired and an impairment charge would be recognized to the extent the carrying value exceeded the estimated fair value of the asset. The Company estimates the fair value of assets based on the estimated future discounted cash flows of the asset.
Income Taxes
The Company recognizes deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to the differences between the financial statement carrying value of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates in effect for the fiscal year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
The Company operates in various tax jurisdictions and is subject to audit by various tax authorities. The Company provides for tax contingencies whenever it is deemed probable that a tax asset has been impaired, or a tax liability has been incurred for events such as tax claims or changes in tax laws. Tax contingencies are based upon their technical merits relative tax law and the specific facts and circumstances as of each reporting period. Changes in facts and circumstances could result in material changes to the amounts recorded for such tax contingencies.
The Company recognizes uncertain income tax positions taken on income tax returns at the largest amount that is more-likely than-not to be sustained upon audit by the relevant taxing authority. An uncertain income tax position will not be recognized if it has less than a 50% likelihood of being sustained.
The Company’s policy for recording interest and penalties associated with uncertain tax positions is to record such items as a component of our income tax provision. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company did not record any material interest income, interest expense or penalties related to uncertain tax positions or the settlement of audits for prior periods.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company measures stock-based compensation expense related to employee stock-based awards based on the estimated fair value of the awards as determined on the date of grant and is recognized as expense over the remaining requisite service period. The Company utilizes the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to estimate the fair value of employee stock options. The Black-Scholes-Merton model requires the input of highly subjective and complex assumptions, including the estimated fair value of the Company’s common stock on the date of grant, the expected term of the stock option, and the expected volatility of the Company’s common stock over the period equal to the expected term of the grant. The Company estimates forfeitures at the date of grant and revises the estimates, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. The Company accounts for stock options to purchase shares of stock that are issued to non-employees based on the estimated fair value of such instruments using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model.
Derivative Liabilities
Derivative liabilities include the fair value of instruments such as common stock warrants, preferred stock warrants and convertible features of notes, that are initially recorded at fair value and are required to be re-measured to fair value at each reporting period. The change in fair value of the instruments is recognized as a component of other income (expense) in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations until the instruments settle, expire or are no longer classified as derivative liabilities. The Company estimates the fair value of these instruments using the Black-Scholes-Merton or Monte-Carlo valuation models depending on the complexity of the underlying instrument. The significant assumptions used in estimating the fair value include the exercise price, volatility of the stock underlying the instrument, risk-free interest rate, estimated fair value of the stock underlying the instrument and the estimated life of the instrument.