Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage company focused on developing gene therapies to radically transform the lives of patients with neurodegenerative diseases. We currently have three clinical-stage programs: (i) the AXO-AAV-GM1 program for the treatment of GM1 gangliosidosis in which five patients have been dosed in the late-infantile/juvenile (Type II) low-dose cohort of stage 1, and we have dosed two late-infantile/juvenile (Type II) patients in the higher dose cohort of the study and expect to continue to dose Type II patients and initiate the low-dose infantile (Type I) patients in calendar year 2021; (ii) the AXO-AAV-GM2 program for the treatment of GM2 gangliosidosis (including Tay-Sachs and Sandhoff diseases) for which we received clearance for the IND from the FDA in November 2020, and in which we dosed the first infantile patient in January 2021; and (iii) the AXO-Lenti-PD program for the treatment of Parkinson's disease, comprised of the ProSavin Phase 1/2 study in which 15 patients were previously dosed and the AXO-Lenti-PD SUNRISE-PD study in which we have dosed two patients in Cohort 1 of the dose-escalation study and four patients in Cohort 2.
We are dedicated to realizing the potential of gene therapies to offer transformative patient outcomes in areas of high unmet medical need and extending the reach of gene therapies to highly prevalent neurodegenerative disorders like Parkinson's disease. We have assembled a portfolio of gene therapies in partnership with leading scientific institutions and have built a team with extensive experience in the gene therapy space. Our team pursues new innovations in vector design and delivery to optimize our investigational gene therapy products for safety, potency, durability, and immunologic response. We will continue to build integrated internal development capabilities from product development through commercialization and focus on accelerating the pace of product development in the clinic. As part of our ongoing business strategy, we continue to explore potential opportunities to acquire or license new product candidates as well as opportunities for partnership or collaboration on our existing products in development. Our vision is to build the world's leading gene therapy company for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases by progressing our current programs and identifying, developing and commercializing other novel gene therapy treatments for neurodegenerative diseases.
See section "Our Key Agreements" within "Item 1 - Business" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding our license agreement with the University of Massachusetts Medical School (the "UMMS Agreement" and "UMMS", respectively) and our license agreement with Oxford Biomedica (UK) Ltd. (the "Oxford Agreement" and "Oxford", respectively).
The Domestication
We have substantially completed our previously disclosed corporate transformation to align corporate structure and governance with current and future business activity, including significantly reducing the number of our subsidiaries. On November 12, 2020, Axovant Gene Therapies Ltd. ("AGT") discontinued as a Bermuda exempted company pursuant to Section 132G of the Companies Act 1981 of Bermuda, and pursuant to Section 388 of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware (the “DGCL”), continued its existence under the DGCL as a corporation named Sio Gene Therapies Inc. ("Sio") organized in the State of Delaware (the "Domestication"). The Domestication effected a change in our jurisdiction of incorporation, and other changes of a legal nature, including changes in our organizational documents. Our consolidated business, operations, assets and liabilities did not change upon effectiveness of the Domestication. However, following the Domestication, the principal executive offices and registered offices of Sio are located at 130 West 42nd St, 26th Floor, New York, New York 10036, and the telephone number for Sio at its principal executive offices is 1-877-746-4891. The fiscal year end of Sio Gene Therapies Inc. following the Domestication remains at March 31. In addition, our directors and executive officers immediately after the Domestication were the same individuals who were directors and executive officers, respectively, immediately prior to the Domestication.
In the Domestication, each of our currently issued and outstanding common shares automatically converted by operation of law, on a one-for-one basis, into shares of Sio common stock. Consequently, upon the effectiveness of the Domestication, each holder of an AGT common share instead holds a share of Sio common stock representing the same proportional equity interest in Sio as that shareholder held in AGT and representing the same class of shares. The number of shares of Sio common stock outstanding immediately after the Domestication is the same as the number of common shares of AGT. outstanding immediately prior to the Domestication. In connection with the Domestication, we adopted a new certificate of incorporation, bylaws and form of common stock certificate, copies of which were filed as Exhibits 3.1, 3.2 and 4.1, respectively, to our Report on Form 8-K12G3 filed with the SEC on November 13, 2020.
COVID-19 Business Update
We are continuing to closely monitor the impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic on our business and are taking proactive efforts to minimize the risks to the health and safety of our patients, study investigators and employees, as well as to maintain business continuity. We believe that the measures we are implementing are appropriate, reflecting both regulatory and public health guidance, to maintain business continuity. We will continue to closely monitor and seek to comply with guidance from governmental authorities and adjust our activities as appropriate.
In the conduct of our business activities, we are also taking actions designed to protect the safety and well-being of patients, healthcare workers and employees. For patients already enrolled in our clinical trials, we are working closely with clinical trial investigators and site staff to continue treatment in compliance with trial protocols and to uphold trial integrity, while working to observe government and institutional guidelines designed to safeguard the health and safety of patients, clinical trial investigators and site staff. We are continuing to evaluate clinical trial site initiations and patient enrollment on a case-by-case and patient-by-patient basis in coordination with clinical trial investigators and site staff. Some clinical trial sites, both within the United States and the United Kingdom, continue to screen patients in our clinical trials, and new patients are being enrolled when appropriate. Our clinical trial progression, dosing, patient enrollment and related activities may be delayed, and reporting of some clinical data may be incomplete or delayed if patients enrolled in our clinical trials are unable to fully participate in all necessary measurement protocols, due to concerns among patients about participating in clinical trials during a pandemic, or remaining restrictions imposed by institutions or local, state or national governments, among other factors. Some patients may have difficulty following certain aspects of clinical trial protocols if quarantines impede patient movement or interrupt healthcare services. For example, patients in our clinical trials for AXO-AAV-GM1 and AXO-AAV-GM2 are infants, often with advanced disease, who may not be able to safely participate in clinical trials for these product candidates during the COVID-19 pandemic or if they have not received or are not eligible to receive COVID-19 vaccinations. Additionally, our clinical trial for AXO-Lenti-PD can involve elderly patients with advanced disease who may be unable to participate in clinical assessments at our research sites in the United Kingdom. For example, because of the COVID-19 pandemic and a patient refusal, two out of four patients in the second cohort of our Phase 2 clinical trial of AXO-Lenti-PD at our United Kingdom clinical trial sites were unable to participate in Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale ("UPDRS") assessments and the mandatory washout of background levodopa therapy at the six-month time point. However, all four of these subjects were able to complete all other efficacy assessments at the six-month timepoint, including the patient-recorded Hauser diaries. We are working with sites and investigators to ensure safe and ethical data collection at future time points through the pandemic in accordance with regulatory guidance. While the COVID-19 pandemic has not resulted in a significant delay to our clinical development timelines to-date, the global pandemic of COVID-19 continues to evolve, and could materially impact our clinical development and any future commercialization timelines.
Our business, including patient enrollment and CMC manufacturing efforts for our clinical trials, could continue to be adversely impacted by health epidemics wherever we have clinical trial sites or other business operations. In addition, health epidemics could cause significant disruption in the operations of third-party manufacturers, CROs and other third parties upon whom we rely. We are also dependent on an international supply chain for products to be used in our clinical trials and, if approved by the regulatory authorities, for commercialization. While the COVID-19 pandemic has not significantly adversely impacted our business operations, international supply chain, productivity or clinical development timelines to-date, the reintroduction of health directives and recommendations to reduce the spread of the disease, including shelter-in-place directives and executive orders directing that all non-essential businesses close their physical operations may continue to negatively impact productivity, disrupt our business or international supply chain and delay our clinical programs and timelines in the future, the magnitude of which will depend, in part, on the length and severity of the restrictions and other limitations on our ability to conduct our business in the ordinary course.
The ultimate impact and evolving effects of the COVID-19 pandemic or a similar health epidemic are highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business, our clinical trials, healthcare systems or the global economy as a whole. However, these effects could harm our operations, and we will continue to monitor the COVID-19 situation closely. For additional information about risks and uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic that may impact our business, financial condition and results of operations, see the section titled “Risk Factors” under Part I, Item 1A in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue from the sale of any products, and we do not expect to generate any revenue unless and until we obtain regulatory approval of and begin to commercialize one of our gene therapy product candidates in development.
Research and Development Expense
Since our inception, our operations have primarily been focused on organizing and staffing our company, raising capital, and acquiring, preparing for and advancing our product candidates into clinical development. Our research and development expenses include program-specific costs, as well as unallocated internal costs.
Program-specific costs include:
•direct third-party costs, which include expenses incurred under agreements with CROs and contract manufacturing organizations, the cost of consultants who assist with the development of our product candidates on a program-specific basis, investigator grants, sponsored research, manufacturing costs in connection with producing materials for use in conducting nonclinical and clinical studies, and any other third-party expenses directly attributable to the development of our product candidates; and
•upfront payments for the purchase of in-process research and development and milestone payments, which include costs incurred under our agreements with UMMS and Oxford, as well as costs incurred for our discontinued AXO-AAV-OPMD program.
Unallocated internal costs include:
•stock-based compensation expense for research and development personnel;
•personnel-related expenses, which include employee-related expenses, such as salaries, benefits and travel expenses, for research and development personnel; and
•other expenses, which includes the cost of consultants who assist with our research and development but are not allocated to a specific program.
Research and development activities will continue to be central to our business model and will vary significantly based upon the success of our programs and the achievement of milestones requiring payments to our partners, UMMS and Oxford. We plan to substantially increase our research and development expenses in the fiscal year ending March 31, 2022, as we continue the enrollment of patients in our GM1 and GM2 clinical trials, and commission the manufacturing of clinical supplies for these trials. As well, it is possible that Oxford will complete the development of a suspension-based manufacturing process for AXO-Lenti-PD this fiscal year, and, as a result, we will be responsible for one or more batches of clinical supplies for this program.
Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials.
The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials of our products in development and any other product candidates will depend on a variety of factors that include, but are not limited to, the following:
•the number of trials required for approval;
•the per patient trial costs;
•the number of patients who participate in the trials;
•the number of sites included in the trials;
•the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•the dose that patients receive;
•the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•the potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
•the duration of patient follow-up;
•any delays in key trial activities and patient enrollment or diversion of healthcare resources as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•production shortages or other supply interruptions in clinical trial materials resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic;
•the timing and receipt of regulatory approvals; and
•the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidates.
In addition, the probability of success of our gene therapy products in development and any other product candidate will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval of our gene therapy product candidates for any indication in any country. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine in advance the duration and completion costs of any clinical trial we conduct, or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our products in development or other product candidates, if at all.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of stock-based compensation, including expense allocated to us related to common share awards and options issued by RSL to certain of our employees and to certain employees of RSL and certain of its subsidiaries; legal and accounting fees; consulting services; and employee-related expenses such as salaries, benefits and travel expenses, for general and administrative personnel. In prior periods, a significant component of our total stock-based compensation expense related to allocated costs from RSL for common share awards and options issued by RSL to certain of our employees, as well as to certain employees of RSL and certain of its subsidiaries. Stock-based compensation expense is allocated to us from RSL based upon the relative percentage of time utilized by certain employees of RSL and certain of its subsidiaries on our matters, as well as based upon our employees that hold such RSL common share awards and options. These common share awards and options are fair valued on the date of grant with expense recognized over the requisite service period. The fair value of each such option is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes closed-form option-pricing model. These common share awards and options are subject to specified vesting schedules and requirements (a mix of time-based, performance-based and corporate event-based, including targets for RSL’s post-initial public offering market capitalization and future financing events), which could result in significant stock-based compensation expense allocated to us from RSL in the future, if achieved.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will at least approximate those incurred during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 in the near term.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
For the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, our research and development expenses consisted of the following (in thousands):
Research and development expenses were $24.9 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to $47.1 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. The $22.2 million decrease was primarily related to $14.0 million in certain nonrecurring development and regulatory milestones achieved in the prior year for the AXO-Lenti-PD ($13.0 million) and AXO-AAV-GM2 programs. In addition, there were reduced program-specific research and development costs of $7.2 million due to (i) lower AXO-Lenti-PD clinical expenses as the enrollment of Cohort 2 was completed in the prior year, as well as lower manufacturing expenses due to the delays at Oxford, (ii) reduced clinical and manufacturing expenses while awaiting FDA clearance of the IND for the AXO-AAV-GM2 program, and (iii) the discontinuation of the AXO-AAV-OPMD program during the prior year.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $17.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 and $22.1 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease of $4.8 million was primarily related to reductions in stock-based compensation expense of $2.2 million primarily attributable to lower grant date fair values per share for equity awards and lower headcount and personnel costs (including severance) of $1.3 million attributable to lower headcount.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $0.8 million and $4.4 million for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in interest expense during the current year was primarily due to the April 2020 prepayment of the $15.7 million outstanding principal balance on our loan and security agreement with Hercules Capital, Inc. ("Hercules").
Other Income
Other income was $10.4 million and $1.4 million for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Other income for the year ended March 31, 2021 included income of approximately $11.3 million associated with gains on our investment in Arvelle Therapeutics B.V. ("Arvelle") that was sold in February 2021, which was partially offset by foreign exchange losses. Other income for the year ended March 31, 2020 consisted primarily of foreign exchange gains and interest income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since our initial public offering in June 2015, our operations have been financed primarily through sales of common stock and pre-funded warrants, as well as borrowings under our credit facilities. As of March 31, 2021, we had $119.0 million of cash and cash equivalents available to us, and in April 2020, we prepaid the remaining outstanding principal balance, equal to $15.7 million, together with $0.3 million of accrued interest, fees and other amounts due under our loan and security agreement with Hercules.
Capital Requirements
We are currently in the clinical stage of operations and have not yet achieved profitability. We expect to continue to incur significant operating and net losses, as well as negative cash flows from operations, for the foreseeable future as we continue to develop our gene therapy product candidates and prepare for potential future regulatory approvals and commercialization of our products. We have not generated any revenue to date and do not expect to generate product revenue unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for at least one of our gene therapy product candidates. Our current cash and cash equivalents balance will also not be sufficient to complete all necessary development activities and commercially launch our products.
We expect to spend substantial amounts to complete the development of, seek regulatory approvals for and commercialize our product candidates. In addition, as part of our business development strategy, we generally structure our license agreements and collaboration agreements so that a significant portion of the total license cost is contingent upon the successful achievement of specified development, regulatory or commercial milestones. As a result, we will require cash to make payments upon achievement of these milestones under these agreements. Based on our anticipated timeline for the achievement of development, regulatory and commercial milestones, we do not expect significant milestone payments under our license and collaboration agreements to come due prior to March 31, 2022.
Because the length of time and activities associated with successful development of our product candidates are highly uncertain, we are unable to estimate the actual funds we will require for development and any approved marketing and commercialization activities. However, we anticipate that our current cash and cash equivalents balance is sufficient to fund our clinical milestones beyond the expected dates of major upcoming milestones for our AXO-AAV-GM1 gene therapy program for the treatment of GM1 gangliosidosis. Our future funding requirements, both near and long-term, will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•the progress, timing, costs and results of our clinical trials of our product candidates;
•the outcome, timing and cost of meeting regulatory requirements established by the FDA, the EMA, or the PMDA, and other comparable foreign regulatory authorities;
•the achievement of certain development, regulatory and commercialization milestones that give rise to milestone and royalty payments to licensors;
•the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing our patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•the cost of obtaining necessary intellectual property and defending potential intellectual property disputes, including patent infringement actions brought by third parties against us or our product candidates or any future product candidates;
•the effect of competing technological and market developments;
•the cost and timing of completion of clinical-stage and commercial-scale manufacturing activities, including costs that may result from delays in the development of a suspension-based manufacturing process by our partner, Oxford;
•the cost of establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities for our product candidates in regions where we choose to commercialize our products on our own; and
•the initiation, progress, timing and results of our commercialization of our product candidates, if approved for commercial sale.
For the years ended March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020, we incurred net losses of $32.4 million and $72.6 million, respectively. As of March 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents totaled $119.0 million and our accumulated deficit was $791.1 million. We estimate that our current cash and cash equivalents balance is sufficient to support operations beyond the twelve-month period following the date that the accompanying consolidated financial statements were issued, including beyond the expected dates of major upcoming milestones for our AXO-AAV-GM1 gene therapy program for the treatment of GM1 gangliosidosis. As such, we have determined that there is no longer substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for the one-year period following the date that the accompanying consolidated financial statements were issued. These estimates are based on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenue from sales of our products in development, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings and potential collaboration, license or development agreements. We do not currently have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our stockholders’ ownership interests will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. In addition, if we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may be required to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
In order to meet our long-term operating requirements, we will need, among other things, additional capital resources. We continually assess multiple options to obtain additional funding to support our operations, including proceeds from offerings of our equity securities or debt, or transactions involving product development, technology licensing or collaboration arrangements, or other sources of capital to complete our currently planned development programs. Sources of a sufficient amount of financing may not be available to us on favorable terms, if at all, and our ability to raise additional capital may be adversely impacted by potentially worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to and volatility in the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, extreme price and volume fluctuations in the stock market in general, and the Nasdaq Global Select Market, in particular, have resulted in volatile and sometimes decreased stock prices for many companies, including us. Broad market and industry factors, including worsening economic conditions and other adverse effects or developments relating to the evolving effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, may negatively affect the market price of our common stock, regardless of our actual operating performance, and impact our ability to raise sufficient additional capital on acceptable terms, if at all. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
At-the-Market Equity Offering Program
We have engaged SVB Leerink LLC as our agent to sell shares of our common stock from time to time through an at-the-market equity offering program. SVB Leerink LLC is entitled to compensation for its services in an amount equal to 3% of the gross proceeds of any of our shares of common stock sold. As of March 31, 2021, we have sold approximately 29.7 million shares of common stock for total proceeds of approximately $90.5 million, net of brokerage fees, under the sales agreement since April 2020. Subsequent to March 31, 2021, we have sold approximately 0.2 million shares of common stock for total proceeds of approximately $0.5 million under the sales agreement, net of brokerage fees.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for each of the periods shown (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities consist of net loss adjusted for non-cash items, including depreciation and stock-based compensation expenses, as well as the effect of changes in working capital and other activities.
For the year ended March 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $46.6 million and was primarily attributable to a net loss of $32.4 million, which includes costs incurred for research and development activities, including CRO fees, manufacturing, regulatory and other clinical trial costs, as well as our general and administrative expenses, in addition to other income of $11.3 million associated with gains on our investment in Arvelle, an increase of $4.4 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets and decreases of $3.1 million in accounts payable and $2.1 million in accrued expenses, which were partially offset by $4.5 million of non-cash stock-based compensation expense and $1.5 million of operating lease right-of-use asset amortization expense
For the year ended March 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $67.5 million and was primarily attributable to a net loss of $72.6 million, which includes costs incurred for research and development activities, including $14.0 million for development and regulatory milestones achieved, CRO fees, manufacturing, regulatory and other clinical trial costs, as well as our general and administrative expenses, in addition to a decrease of $9.3 million in accrued expenses, which were partially offset by $7.9 million of non-cash stock-based compensation expense, a decrease of.$2.9 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets and an increase of $2.7 million in accounts payable.
Investing Activities
For the year ended March 31, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities was $12.4 million, consisting of proceeds of $12.8 million from the sale of our long-term investment in Arvelle that was partially offset by purchases of fixed assets.
For the year ended March 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $0.3 million, consisting of purchases of fixed assets.
Financing Activities
For the year ended March 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $73.6 million and consisted primarily of $89.2 million of net proceeds from the issuance and sale of our shares of common stock under our share sales agreement with SVB Leerink LLC, partially offset by $15.7 million of principal payments made on long-term debt.
For the year ended March 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $41.5 million and consisted primarily of $70.8 million of net proceeds from the issuance and sale of our shares of common stock and pre-funded warrants in a public offering, partially offset by $29.6 million of payments made on long-term debt.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under the SEC’s rules.
Contractual Obligations
The following table provides information with respect to our outstanding contractual obligations as of March 31, 2021:
In addition, we have entered into services agreements with third parties for pharmaceutical manufacturing and research activities in the normal course of business, which can generally be terminated by us with 30- or 60-days' written notice, unless otherwise indicated. These cancellable contracts are not included in the table above. Further, certain of our manufacturing agreements could require early termination and wind-down payments due from us upon either the termination of our clinical trials or if we unilaterally terminate such agreements for convenience, which agreements are not included in the table above.
Milestone and Royalty Payments to UMMS and Oxford
In addition to the amounts shown in the above table, we are contractually obligated to make payments to UMMS totaling up to $24.5 million upon the achievement of specified development and regulatory milestones, including development and regulatory milestones of $1.0 million and $1.0 million that were achieved in February 2019 and October 2019, respectively, and that were paid during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, and up to $39.8 million upon the achievement of specified commercial milestones for AXO-AAV-GM1 and AXO-AAV-GM2. We are also obligated to pay UMMS tiered mid-single digit royalties based on yearly net sales of the licensed products, subject to a specified annual minimum amount. Additionally, we will pay UMMS a percent of any revenues we receive from any third-party sublicenses to licensed products at rates ranging in the mid-single digits to mid-teens. We could also be obligated to make payments to Oxford totaling up to $55.0 million upon the achievement of specified development milestones, including certain development milestones that were achieved in April 2019 that resulted in a $13.0 million net payment due to Oxford that was paid during the year ended March 31, 2020, and up to $757.5 million upon the achievement of specified regulatory and sales milestones, as well as a tiered royalty from 7% to 10% of the yearly aggregate net sales of the underlying gene therapy products.
These payments are contingent upon the occurrence of certain future events and, given the nature of those events, it is unclear when, if ever, we may be required to make sure payments, and with respect to royalty payments, what the total amount of such payments will be. Further, the timing of any of the foregoing future payments is not reasonably estimable. For those reasons, these contingent payments have not been included in the table above.
Real Property Leases
In June 2017, we entered into a license agreement with a third-party to lease office space in New York, New York that expired in January 2021, and we also leased office space in Princeton, New Jersey under an agreement that expired in October 2020. In October 2019, we entered into an agreement with a third-party to lease office space in Durham, North Carolina under a lease agreement expiring in November 2022, and in August 2020, we entered into a lease agreement with a third-party for an office facility in New York, New York that commenced in December 2020 and expires in June 2026. For the years ended March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020, we incurred $1.6 million and $1.8 million, respectively, in rent expense under these agreements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For detailed information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements and the expected impact on our financial statements, refer to Note 2 "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," in the accompanying notes to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management's discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the dates of the balance sheets and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting periods. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, we evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. Significant estimates include research and development accruals. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We define our critical accounting policies as those under U.S. GAAP that require us to make subjective estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations, as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles.
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Not all of these significant accounting policies, however, require that we make estimates and assumptions that we believe are "critical accounting estimates." We believe that our estimates relating to research and development accruals have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements and consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates and are "critical accounting estimates."
Research and Development Accruals
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Clinical study costs are accrued over the service periods specified in the contracts and adjusted as necessary based upon an ongoing review of the level of effort and costs actually incurred. The Company’s assessment of the completeness of the information is subject to variability and uncertainty. In addition, in certain circumstances, the determination of the nature and amount of services that have been received during the reporting period requires judgment as the timing and pattern of vendor invoicing does not correspond to the level of services provided. Payments for a product license prior to regulatory approval of the product and payments for milestones achieved prior to regulatory approval of the product are expensed in the period incurred as research and development. Milestone payments made in connection with final regulatory approvals are capitalized and amortized to cost of revenue over the remaining useful life of the asset. Research and development costs are charged to expense when incurred and currently primarily consist of the development and regulatory milestones achieved for our AXO-AAV-GM1, AXO-AAV-GM2 and AXO-Lenti-PD gene therapy programs, as well as research and development materials acquired from UMMS and Oxford and expenses from third parties who conduct research and development activities on our behalf. We expense in-process research and development projects acquired as asset acquisitions which have not reached technological feasibility, and which have no alternative future use.