ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with "Selected Consolidated Financial Data" under Part II, Item 6 and our audited consolidated financial statements and supplementary data as presented under Part II, Item 8 of this report. Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform to current period presentations. For a comparison of 2019 results to 2018 results and other 2018 information not included herein, refer “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” under Part II, Item 7 of our 2019 Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations contains forward-looking statements. These statements are based on current expectations and assumptions, which are subject to risks and uncertainties. See our cautionary language at the beginning of this report under “Forward-Looking Statements”. Actual results could differ materially because of various factors, including but not limited to those discussed in “Risk Factors,” under Part I, Item 1A of this report.
Our fiscal year ends December 31st and, unless otherwise noted, references to years or fiscal years are for fiscal years ended December 31st.
Overview of Company Operations
SVB Financial is a diversified financial services company, as well as a bank holding company and a financial holding company. SVB Financial was incorporated in the state of Delaware in March 1999. Through our various subsidiaries and divisions, we offer a variety of banking and financial products and services. For more than 35 years, we have been dedicated to helping innovative companies and their investors succeed, especially in the technology, life science/healthcare, private equity/venture capital and premium wine industries. We provide our clients of all sizes and stages with a diverse set of products and services to support them through all stages of their life cycles, and key innovation markets around the world.
We offer commercial and private banking products and services through our principal subsidiary, the Bank, which is a California-state chartered bank founded in 1983 and a member of the Federal Reserve System. Through its subsidiaries, the Bank also offers asset management, private wealth management and other investment services. In addition, through SVB Financial's other subsidiaries and divisions, we also offer investment banking services and non-banking products and services, such as funds management, M&A advisory services and venture capital and private equity investment.
Management’s Overview of 2020 Financial Performance
Overall, our performance in 2020 reflected the resilience of our markets and our ability to execute effectively. In spite of a near zero market rate environment for most of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and adoption of CECL, we had a record year with strong profitability and unprecedented balance sheet growth fueled by continued strong client fundraising and exit activity. Additionally, we had investment banking revenue which exceeded our expectations, stable credit and outsized warrant and investment gains. During 2020, we managed through the COVID-19 pandemic by utilizing our business continuity plans to maintain client service while most of our employees and partners worked from home. We supported and engaged with clients virtually, including the hosting of remote events designed to facilitate our response to the business needs of our clients within the innovation ecosystem. We also successfully administered client support initiatives, such as those which allowed temporary payment deferrals and other relief provided through the PPP. We provided employees extended benefits, as well as practical support for working from home. Additionally, we committed financial support for local, regional and global activities focused on health security, food security and shelter, and small business owner relief during this unprecedented time.
Our core business continued to perform well as a result of our ongoing focus on innovation companies and their investors and continued efforts to secure client relationships. We saw continued success in working with private equity/venture capital firms and life science/healthcare clients as well as clients in our private banking division. Additionally, on January 4, 2021, we announced our acquisition of Boston Private Financial Holdings, which we expect to close in mid-2021, subject to the satisfaction of customary closing conditions. We believe this acquisition will significantly accelerate and scale the growth of our private bank and wealth management strategy, advance our expertise, products and technology; and provide the opportunity to deepen our client relationships.
Recent Developments - COVID-19
The current global health crisis created by the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in unprecedented challenges and volatility in economic, market and business conditions. It has caused significant economic and financial disruptions that have adversely affected, and are likely to continue to adversely affect, our business, financial condition and results of operations. We cannot predict at this time the scope and duration of the pandemic, as COVID-19 has not yet been contained and the number of cases remains elevated and may continue to increase in many locations, including in the United States and other
international locations in which we operate. Moreover, the impact of COVID-19 on economic, market and business conditions is likely to be exacerbated if uncontained for a prolonged period of time, and even if it is contained, there may be a seasonal or other resurgence of the pandemic as we have seen domestically and internationally. While there have been varying governmental and other responses to slow or control the spread of COVID-19 and to mitigate the adverse impact of COVID-19, such as stay at home orders, restrictions on business activities, economic relief for individuals and businesses, and monetary policy measures, such responses have met varying degrees of success, and it remains uncertain whether these actions will be successful as the pandemic continues.
The global spread of COVID-19 accelerated in March 2020 at which time it was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. Since then, we have been focused on our business and human response to the crisis --- managing and operating our business as seamlessly as possible, and supporting our clients, employees and communities as we weather the crisis together.
During this volatile time, we remain focused on our capital and liquidity. We are “well-capitalized,” remaining above all applicable regulatory capital requirements. We have a liquid and high-quality balance sheet, with approximately half of our assets as of December 31, 2020 held in cash and marketable securities, primarily agency-backed mortgage securities and U.S. Treasuries. We also have access to other funding sources, as necessary. Moreover, we paused our stock repurchase program, and the program expired on October 29, 2020. In addition, we have also elected to use a phase-in transitional approach for the estimated impact of CECL on our regulatory capital, as permitted by the 2020 CECL Transition Rule.
The uncertainties of the duration and severity of the effect of COVID-19 on economic, market and business conditions have made it more difficult to forecast our operating results and the macroeconomic conditions to which our business is subject. Some notable negative effects emerged late in the first quarter and continued through the fourth quarter, as discussed in this Management Discussion and Analysis section, but any longer-term effects or trends remain subject to significant uncertainty. Moreover, we are subject to heightened business, operational (including fraud), market, credit and other risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which may have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. (See “Risk Factors” under Part II, Item 1A of this report)
We continue to serve our clients during this difficult time, while managing our credit risk. During the fourth quarter, we continued to provide special debt relief assistance to support certain clients who are experiencing financial hardships related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including offering certain venture-backed companies, Private Bank, Wine and other clients the opportunity to temporarily defer their scheduled loan principal payments. We continue to engage with our clients to understand client needs, and we may implement additional assistance or other relief to support clients across various sectors and life stages. Additionally, we continue to participate as a lender in the PPP and the second draw loan program under the CARES Act and the U.K. Coronavirus Business Interruption Loan Scheme ("CBILS") and Coronavirus Large Business Interruption Loan Scheme ("CLBILS"), and may participate in other government relief programs in the U.S. or internationally. These government programs are complex and our participation in any of these programs may lead to governmental, regulatory and other scrutiny, litigation, negative publicity and reputation damage for us and our customers who participate. For example, like many other participating banks in the United States, we have been named in various lawsuits regarding the right to agent fees under the PPP. Overall, these relief measures, whether our own programs or our participation in government programs, are new programs for us and we may not be successful in implementing or administering the programs as intended. Further, the extent to which these programs are successful in assisting our clients is uncertain. These relief programs are temporary in nature, such as the PPP, and our loan payment deferral programs, which expired during the second half of the year (certain of our programs ended in the third quarter with the remaining ending by year end). Our clients may experience financial difficulties without the continued support from these programs. If these relief measures are not effective, or if they are effective for only a limited period and our clients experience delayed financial hardship, there may be an adverse effect on our revenue and results of operations, including increased provisions in our allowance for credit losses, higher rates of default and increased credit losses in future periods.
We are also prioritizing the safety and well-being of our employees. In March 2020, we activated our business continuity and pandemic plans globally, moving to a work-from-home plan, prohibiting all business travel, postponing or moving online all SVB-hosted events, and enabling remote access to our systems. We have implemented various programs to provide work, life and health-related support for our employees, ranging from expanded time-off, counseling and medical benefits for employees directly impacted by COVID-19, to providing reimbursements and practical support for working from home. In addition, we are also developing a plan for employees to eventually return to work in our offices, which will be subject to a variety of complex considerations. While much of our workforce continues to work from home through the crisis (currently expected until July 2021, subject to further extensions or other changes) and perhaps to some extent beyond the crisis, in the event that we allow an increase in remote working practices even after the pandemic subsides, we will need to continue to provide support to our employees to work effectively in a remote environment, taking into consideration needs relating to technology, physical working conditions, work/life balance, and continued team collaboration.
Moreover, consistent with our tradition of supporting and giving back to our communities, we have also committed $5.5 million to local, regional and global COVID-19 relief activities in various U.S. and international locations where we have offices. This includes corporate contributions to global, national and regional charities, direct community-based giving, and a 3:1 match for employees’ donations to relevant causes. Additionally, we have donated approximately $20 million in PPP fees received from the SBA, net of our costs incurred, to charitable relief efforts.
Although the effects of the pandemic remain uncertain, for the year ending 2021, we currently expect growth in average on-balance sheet deposits and average loans and stable core fees. While credit metrics have been stable to date, we continue to monitor our portfolio vigilantly, in light of continued economic uncertainty, fading government stimulus and expiring deferral programs. Additionally, volatile equity markets, IPO and M&A activity may impact investment banking and market-sensitive revenues. Even after the pandemic subsides, it is possible that the U.S. and other major economies will continue to experience a prolonged recession, which we expect would materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition, liquidity, capital and results of operations.
Results for the fiscal year ended, and as of, December 31, 2020 (compared to the fiscal year ended, and as of, December 31, 2019, where applicable):
BALANCE SHEET EARNINGS
Assets. $85.8 billion in average total assets (up 35.7%). $115.5 billion in period-end total assets (up 62.7%).
Loans. $37.3 billion in average total loan balances, amortized cost (up 24.6%). $45.2 billion in period-end total loan balances, amortized cost (up 36.2%).
Total Client Funds. (on-balance sheet deposits and off-balance sheet client investment funds). $192.8 billion in average total client fund balances (up 31.5%). $243.0 billion in period-end total client fund balances (up 51.0%).
AFS/HTM Fixed Income Investments. $31.8 billion in average fixed income investment securities (up 30.9%). $47.5 billion in period-end fixed income investment securities (up 70.5%).
EPS. Earnings per diluted share of $22.87 (up 5.2%).
Net Income. Consolidated net income available to common stockholders of $1.19 billion (up 4.8%).
- Net interest income of $2.16 billion (up 2.8%).
- Net interest margin of 2.67% (down 84bps).
- Noninterest income of $1.84 billion (up 50.6%), non-GAAP core fee income+ of $603.2 million (down 6.0%) and non-GAAP SVB Leerink revenue++ of $480.6 million (up 91.1%).
- Noninterest expense of $2.04 billion (up 27.1%).
ROE. Return on average equity (“ROE”) performance of 16.83% (down 16.0%).
Operating Efficiency Ratio. Operating efficiency ratio of 50.92% with a non-GAAP core operating efficiency ratio of 55.90%+++.
CAPITAL CREDIT QUALITY
Capital++++. Continued strong capital, with all capital ratios considered "well-capitalized" under banking regulations. SVBFG and SVB capital ratios, respectively, were:
- CET 1 risk-based capital ratio of 11.04% and 10.70%.
- Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of 11.89% and 10.70%.
- Total risk-based capital ratio of 12.64% and 11.49%. - Tier 1 leverage ratio of 7.45% and 6.43%.
Credit Quality. Stable credit in an evolving credit environment.
- Allowance for credit losses of 0.99% as a percentage of period-end total loans.
- Allowance for unfunded credit commitments of 0.38% as a percentage of total unfunded credit commitments.
- Provision for loans of 0.42% as a percentage of total loans.
- Net loan charge-offs of 0.20% as a percentage of average total loans.
+ Consists of fee income from client investments, foreign exchange, credit cards, deposit services, lending related activities and letters of credit and standby letters of credit. This is a non-GAAP financial measure. (See the non-GAAP reconciliation under “Results of Operations-Noninterest Income”).
++ Consists of investment banking revenue and commissions. This is a non-GAAP financial measure. (See the non-GAAP reconciliation under “Results of Operations-Noninterest Income”).
+++This ratio excludes certain financial line items where performance is typically subject to market or other conditions beyond our control and excludes SVB Leerink revenue and expenses as well as other non-recurring expenses. It is calculated by dividing noninterest expense after adjusting for noninterest expense attributable to SVB Leerink and other non-recurring expenses by total revenue after adjusting for noninterest income attributable to SVB Leerink, net gains or losses on investment securities and equity warrant assets, investment banking revenue and commissions. Additionally, noninterest expense and total revenue are adjusted for income or losses and expenses attributable to noncontrolling interests and adjustments to net interest income for a taxable equivalent basis. This is a non-GAAP financial measure. (See the non-GAAP reconciliation under "Results of Operations-Noninterest Expense").
++++ In March 2020, the federal banking agencies provided transitional relief to banking organizations with respect to the impact of CECL on regulatory capital. Under the 2020 CECL Transition Rule, banking organizations may delay the estimated impact of CECL on regulatory capital for two years, followed by a three-year period to phase out the aggregate capital benefit provided during the initial two-year delay. We have elected to use this five-year transition option. For additional details, see "Capital Resources" within "Consolidated Financial Condition" under Part 1, Item 2 of this report.
A summary of our performance in 2020 compared to 2019 is as follows:
(1)See “Results of Operations-Noninterest Income” for a description and reconciliation of non-GAAP core fee income, non-GAAP core fee income plus SVB Leerink revenue and non-GAAP SVB Leerink revenue.
(2)See “Results of Operations-Noninterest Expense” for a description and reconciliation of non-GAAP noninterest expense and non-GAAP core operating efficiency ratio.
(3)Ratio represents consolidated net income available to common stockholders divided by average assets.
(4)Ratio represents consolidated net income available to common stockholders divided by average SVBFG common stockholders’ equity.
(5)For the year ended December 31, 2020, the ratios are calculated using the amortized cost basis for total loans as a result of the adoption of CECL. Prior period ratios were calculated using total gross loans in accordance with previous methodology.
(6)See “Capital Resources-Capital Ratios” for a reconciliation of non-GAAP tangible common equity to tangible assets and tangible common equity to risk-weighted assets.
(7)The operating efficiency ratio is calculated by dividing total noninterest expense by total net interest income plus noninterest income.
(8)Ratio represents total cost of deposits and is calculated by dividing interest expense from deposits by average total deposits.
(9)Book value per common share is calculated by dividing total SVBFG common stockholders’ equity by total outstanding common shares at period-end.
(10)Tangible book value per common share is calculated by dividing tangible common equity by total outstanding common shares at period-end. Tangible common equity is a non-GAAP measure defined under the section “Capital Resources-Capital Ratios.”
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our accounting policies are fundamental to understanding our financial condition and results of operations. We have identified one policy as being critical because it requires us to make particularly difficult, subjective and/or complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain, and because it is likely that materially different amounts would be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis and we base these estimates on historical experiences and various other factors and assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
This critical accounting policy addresses the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses for loans and unfunded credit commitments. Our senior management has discussed and reviewed the development, selection, application and disclosure of this critical accounting policy with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
We disclose our method and approach for this accounting policy in Note 2-“Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Allowance for Credit Losses
We consider this accounting policy to be critical as estimation of expected credit losses involves material management estimates and is susceptible to significant changes in the near-term. Determining the allowance for credit losses for loans and unfunded credit commitments requires us to make forecasts that are highly uncertain and require a high degree of judgment. A committee comprised of senior management evaluates the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses for loans, which includes review of loan portfolio segmentation, quantitative models, internal and external data inputs, economic forecasts, credit risk ratings and qualitative adjustments.
Expected Credit Losses Estimate for Loans and Unfunded Credit Commitments
The methodology for estimating the amount of expected credit losses ("ECL") reported in the allowance for credit losses is the sum of two main components: (1) ECL assessed on a collective basis for pools of loans and unfunded credit commitments that share similar risk characteristics and (2) ECL assessed for individual loans and unfunded credit commitments that do not share similar risk characteristics with other loans. Estimating the amount of ECL involves significant judgment on various matters including the assessment of risk characteristics, assignment of risk ratings, development and weighting of macroeconomic forecasts, and incorporation of historical loss experience.
We derive an estimated ECL using three predictive metrics: (1) probability of default ("PD"), (2) loss given default ("LGD") and (3) exposure at default ("EAD"), over the estimated life of the exposure. PD and LGD assumptions are developed based on quantitative models and inherent risk of credit loss, both of which involve significant judgment. One of the most significant areas of judgment involved in estimating the allowance for credit losses relates to the macroeconomic forecasts used to estimate credit losses. The selection of variables used in our econometric models varies by loan portfolio, but typically includes real gross domestic product ("GDP") growth and unemployment rates. Changes in management’s assumptions and forecasts could significantly affect its estimate of expected credit losses across various risk-based segments. For example, macroeconomic conditions and forecasts related to the duration and severity of the economic downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic have been rapidly changing and remain highly uncertain. Alternative forecasts considered could have significant impact on the ECL.
To the extent the remaining contractual lives of loans in the portfolio extend beyond this three-year period, we revert to historical averages using an autoregressive method of mean reversion that will continue to gradually trend towards the mean historical loss over the remaining contractual lives of loans, adjusted for prepayments. The macroeconomic scenarios are reviewed on a quarterly basis.
We also apply certain qualitative factor adjustments to the results obtained through our quantitative ECL models to consider model imprecision, emerging risk assessments, trends and other subjective factors that may not be adequately represented in the quantitative ECL models. These adjustments to historical loss information are for asset specific risk characteristics, and also reflect our assessment of the extent that current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts differ from conditions that existed during the period over which historical information was evaluated. Given the current processes and risk monitoring by the Bank, management believes the combination of the quantitative model results and the qualitative factor adjustment represents a reasonable and appropriate estimate of ECL.
Allowance for Loan Losses and Allowance for Unfunded Credit Commitments
For our method and approach for our critical accounting policy related to the allowance for loan losses and allowance for unfunded credit commitments, which were superseded by recently adopted accounting standards in 2020, please refer to Note 2-“Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Adoption of New Accounting Standards
Financial Instruments - Credit Losses
In June 2016, the FASB issued a new Accounting Standard Update (ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments- Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments), which amends the incurred loss impairment methodology in current GAAP with a methodology that reflects a current expected credit loss measurement to estimate the allowance for credit losses over the contractual life of the financial assets (including loans, unfunded credit commitments and HTM securities) and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. While the CECL model does not apply to available-for-sale debt securities, ASU 2016-13 does require entities to record an allowance for credit losses when recognizing credit losses for available-for-sale securities, rather than reduce the amortized cost of the securities by direct write-offs, which allows for reversal of credit impairments in future periods based on improvements in credit. We adopted the guidance on January 1, 2020, using a modified retrospective approach. We recognized the cumulative effect of initially applying CECL as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings, net of tax. The comparative information has not been restated and continues to be reported under the accounting standards in effect for those periods.
We completed a comprehensive implementation process that included loss forecasting model development, evaluation of technical accounting topics, updates to our allowance for credit loss accounting policies, reporting processes and related internal controls, overall operational readiness for our adoption of CECL as well as parallel runs for CECL alongside our previous allowance process. We provided quarterly updates to senior management and to the Audit and Credit Committees of the Board of Directors throughout the implementation process. For additional details regarding our allowance for credit losses methodology, see Note 9-“Loans and Allowance for Credit Losses: Loans and Unfunded Credit Commitments” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Based on our loan, unfunded credit commitment and HTM security portfolios composition at December 31, 2019, and the then current economic environment, the cumulative effect of the changes to our consolidated balance sheets at January 1, 2020, for the adoption of CECL were as follows:
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In March 2020, the FASB issued a new Accounting Standard Update (ASU No. 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting). This ASU provides temporary optional expedients and exceptions to GAAP guidance on contract modifications and hedge accounting to ease the financial reporting
burdens of the expected market transition from LIBOR and other interbank offered rates to alternative reference rates, such as SOFR. For instance, entities can (1) elect not to apply certain modification accounting requirements to contracts affected by reference rate reform, if certain criteria are met, an entity that makes this election would not have to remeasure the contracts at the modification date or reassess a previous accounting determination; (2) elect various optional expedients that would allow them to continue applying hedge accounting for hedging relationships affected by reference rate reform, if certain criteria are met; and (3) make a one-time election to sell and/or reclassify held-to-maturity debt securities that reference an interest rate affected by reference rate reform. This guidance became effective on March 12, 2020 and an entity may elect to prospectively apply each category of exemption independently, either in the interim period that includes March 12, 2020, or in a subsequent period through December 31, 2022. The effective guidance did not have an impact on our consolidated financial position or results of operations nor to the disclosures in the notes to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020. We have implemented a process to assess the population of contracts that will be impacted by this ASU and to evaluate expedients we will use and when we might apply them. We are currently evaluating the impact this guidance will have on our financial position, results of operations, cash flows and disclosures.
In December 2019, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes which is part of the FASB’s initiative to reduce cost and complexity related to accounting for income taxes. The ASU eliminates certain exceptions to the general principles of ASC 740, Income Taxes, and simplifies income tax accounting in several areas. The amendments are effective for fiscal years (and interim periods within those fiscal years) beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The ASU allows entities to adopt this provision on a retrospective basis for all periods presented or a modified retrospective basis through a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the period of adoption. We do not anticipate a material impact from this ASU on our financial position, results of operations, cash flows and disclosures.
Results of Operations
Net Interest Income and Margin (Fully Taxable Equivalent Basis)
Net interest income is defined as the difference between: (i) interest earned on loans, fixed income investments in our available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities portfolios and short-term investment securities and (ii) interest paid on funding sources. Net interest margin is defined as net interest income, on a fully taxable equivalent basis, as a percentage of average interest-earning assets. Net interest income and net interest margin are presented on a fully taxable equivalent basis to consistently reflect income from taxable loans and securities and tax-exempt securities based on the applicable federal statutory tax rate.
Analysis of Net Interest Income Changes Due to Volume and Rate (Fully Taxable Equivalent Basis)
Net interest income is affected by changes in the amount and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, referred to as “volume change.” Net interest income is also affected by changes in yields earned on interest-earning assets and rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities, referred to as “rate change.” The following table sets forth changes in interest income for each major category of interest-earning assets and interest expense for each major category of interest-bearing liabilities. The table also reflects the amount of simultaneous changes attributable to both volume and rate changes for the years indicated. For this table, changes that are not solely due to either volume or rate are allocated in proportion to the percentage changes in average volume and average rate.
Net Interest Income (Fully Taxable Equivalent Basis)
Net interest income increased by $64.0 million to $2.2 billion in 2020, compared to $2.1 billion in 2019. Overall, the increase in our net interest income was due primarily to an increase in interest earned from growth in our average fixed income securities and loan balances as well as decreases in interest paid on deposits due to market interest rate decreases. These increases were partially offset by lower interest earned on cash and cash equivalents, fixed income investments and loans reflective of the three 25 basis point Federal Funds rate decreases in the latter half of 2019 as well as the aggregate 150 basis point decrease in March 2020 as well as lower LIBOR rates.
The main factors affecting interest income and interest expense for 2020, compared to 2019, are discussed below:
•Interest income for 2020 decreased by $63.5 million primarily due to:
◦A $79.1 million decrease in interest income from loans to $1.5 billion in 2020, compared to $1.6 billion in 2019. This decrease was reflective of a decrease in the overall yield on our loan portfolio of 127 basis points to 4.08 percent from 5.35 percent partially offset by an increase in average loan balances of $7.3 billion. Gross loan yields, excluding loan interest recoveries and loan fees, decreased by 122 basis points to 3.57 percent from 4.79 percent, reflective primarily of the impact of the decreases in Federal Funds rates as discussed above, partially offset by an increase reflective of the impact of the reclassification of unrealized gains on interest rate swap cash flow hedges that were terminated in the first quarter of 2020 and protection from effective loan floors, and
◦A $70.9 million decrease in interest income from our interest earning cash and short-term investment securities to $25.5 million, compared to $96.4 million in 2019. The decrease was due primarily to the decrease in Federal Funds interest rates as discussed above, partially offset by growth in average balances of $6.3 billion.
These decreases were offset by the following:
◦An $86.5 million increase in interest income from our fixed income investment securities to $712.3 million in 2020, compared to $625.8 million in 2019. The increase was due primarily to the increase of $7.5 billion in average fixed income investment securities, partially offset by declines in yields earned on these
investments reflective of the lower interest rate market environment, net of an acceleration of discount accretion due to an increase in expected prepayments for fixed rate commercial mortgaged-backed securities in our held-to-maturity portfolio.
•Interest expense for 2020 decreased to $85.3 million, compared to $212.8 million for 2019, primarily due to:
◦A $117.5 million decrease in interest expense on deposits due primarily to a decrease in interest paid on our interest-bearing money market and on-balance sheet sweep deposits reflective of the decreases in market rates. These decreases were partially offset by interest expense from $8.5 billion of growth in average balances for our interest-bearing money markets deposits.
◦A $10.0 million decrease in interest expense on borrowings due primarily to the extinguishment of our 5.375% Senior Notes, partially offset by interest expense for our 3.125% Senior Notes issued towards the end of the second quarter of 2020.
Net Interest Margin (Fully Taxable Equivalent Basis)
Our net interest margin decreased by 84 basis points to 2.67 percent in 2020, compared to 3.51 percent in 2019.
The decrease in our net interest margin in 2020 was reflective primarily of the decreases in the Federal Funds and lower LIBOR rates as discussed above, as well as a shift in the mix of the growth in our interest-earning assets to lower-yielding short-term investment securities portfolio relative to the growth in our loan portfolio driven by growth in our average deposits, partially offset by gains from our interest rate swap cash flow hedges which were terminated in the first quarter of 2020 and protection from effective loan floors. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our loan portfolio comprised 46 percent of our average interest-earning assets, a decrease from 50 percent for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Average Balances, Yields and Rates Paid (Fully Taxable Equivalent Basis)
The average yield earned on interest-earning assets is the amount of fully taxable equivalent interest income expressed as a percentage of average interest-earning assets. The average rate paid on funding sources is the amount of interest expense expressed as a percentage of average funding sources. The following tables set forth average assets, liabilities, noncontrolling interests, preferred stock and SVBFG common stockholders’ equity, interest income, interest expense, yields and rates and the composition of our net interest margin in 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Average Balances, Yields and Rates Paid for the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
(1)Includes average interest-earning deposits in other financial institutions of $1.1 billion, $0.9 billion and $0.8 billion in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. For 2020, 2019 and 2018, balances also include $9.9 billion, $4.1 billion and $1.6 billion, respectively, deposited at the FRB, earning interest at the Federal Funds target rate.
(2)Yields on interest-earning investment securities do not give effect to changes in fair value that are reflected in other comprehensive income.
(3)Interest income on non-taxable investment securities is presented on a fully taxable equivalent basis using the federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0 percent for all periods presented.
(4)Nonaccrual loans are reflected in the average balances of loans.
(5)Interest income includes loan fees of $190.9 million, $167.6 million and $136.6 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(6)Average investment securities of $2.0 billion, $1.1 billion, and $0.8 billion in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, were classified as other assets as they were noninterest-earning assets. These investments primarily consisted of non-marketable and other equity securities.
Provision for Credit Losses
The following table summarizes our allowance for credit losses for loans, unfunded credit commitments and HTM securities for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively:
(1)The “allowance for credit losses for unfunded credit commitments” is included as a component of “Other liabilities.”
(2)The "allowance for credit losses for HTM securities" is included as a component of "HTM securities" and presented net in our consolidated financial statements.
(3)For the year ended December 31, 2020, loan amounts are disclosed, and ratios are calculated, using the amortized cost basis as a result of the adoption of CECL. Prior period loan amounts are disclosed, and ratios are calculated, using the gross basis in accordance with previous methodology.
The provision for credit losses is the combination of (i) the provision for loans, (ii) the provision for unfunded credit commitments and (iii) the provision for HTM securities for the year ending December 31, 2020. For the years ending December 31, 2019 and 2018, the provision for credit losses is the combination of both the provision for loan losses and the provision for unfunded credit commitments. For a more detailed discussion of credit quality and the allowance for credit losses, see “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” above, “Consolidated Financial Condition-Credit Quality and the Allowance for Credit Losses for Loans and for Unfunded Credit Commitments” below and Note 9-“Loans and Allowance for
Credit Losses: Loans and Unfunded Credit Commitments” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report for further details on our allowance for credit losses.
Provision for Loans
We had a provision for loans of $189.2 million in 2020, compared to a provision of $94.2 million in 2019. The provision for loans of $189.2 million in 2020 was driven primarily by $56.6 million in additional reserves for our performing loans based on our forecast models of the current economic environment under the CECL methodology adopted January 1, 2020, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as changes in loan composition within our portfolio segments, $59.8 million in net new nonaccrual loans, $49.2 million for charge-offs not specifically reserved for at December 31, 2019 and $54.6 million in additional reserves for period-end loan growth, partially offset by $29.0 million of recoveries.
The provision for loan losses of $94.2 million in 2019, under the previous incurred loss methodology, was reflective primarily of $38.7 million from period-end loan growth, $56.3 million in net new specific reserves for nonaccrual loans and $43.2 million from charge-offs not specifically reserved for, partially offset by a decrease of $23.0 million for our performing loans and $21.0 million of recoveries.
Provision for Unfunded Credit Commitments
We recorded a provision for unfunded credit commitments of $30.1 million in 2020, compared to a provision of $12.2 million in 2019. Our provision for unfunded credit commitments in 2020 was driven primarily by the forecast models of the current economic environment under the CECL methodology adopted January 1, 2020, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as growth in unfunded credit commitments.
We recorded a provision for unfunded credit commitments of $12.2 million in 2019. Our provision for unfunded credit commitments in 2019 was driven primarily by growth in unfunded credit commitments of $5.3 billion.
Provision for HTM Securities
We recorded a provision for HTM securities of $0.2 million in 2020 under the CECL methodology adopted January 1, 2020, compared to a provision of zero under the previous incurred loss methodology. Our provision for HTM securities was driven primarily by the forecast models of the current economic environment, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our HTM portfolio as of December 31, 2020 was entirely made up of Aa2 or better rated bonds, all considered high quality.
Noninterest Income
For the year ended December 31, 2020, noninterest income was $1.84 billion, compared to $1.22 billion for comparable 2019 period. For the year ended December 31, 2020, non-GAAP noninterest income, net of noncontrolling interests was $1.75 billion, compared to $1.17 billion for the comparable 2019 period. For the year ended December 31, 2020, non-GAAP core fee income was $603.2 million, compared to $641.8 million for the comparable 2019 period. For the year ended December 31, 2020, non-GAAP SVB Leerink revenue was $480.6 million, compared to $251.5 million for the comparable 2019 period. (See reconciliations of non-GAAP measures used below under "Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures".)
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our audited consolidated financial statements presented in accordance with GAAP, we use certain non-GAAP measures of financial performance (including, but not limited to, non-GAAP core fee income, non-GAAP SVB Leerink revenue, non-GAAP core fee income plus SVB Leerink revenue, non-GAAP noninterest income and non-GAAP net gains on investment securities). These supplemental performance measures may vary from, and may not be comparable to, similarly titled measures by other companies in our industry. Non-GAAP financial measures are not in accordance with, or an alternative for, GAAP. Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s performance that either excludes or includes amounts that are not normally excluded or included in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. A non-GAAP financial measure may also be a financial metric that is not required by GAAP or other applicable requirement.
We believe these non-GAAP financial measures, when taken together with the corresponding GAAP financial measures, provide meaningful supplemental information regarding our performance by excluding items that represent income attributable to investors other than us and our subsidiaries and certain other non-recurring items. Our management uses, and believes that investors benefit from referring to, these non-GAAP financial measures in assessing our operating results and when planning, forecasting and analyzing future periods. However, these non-GAAP financial measures should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for or preferable to, financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Included in noninterest income is income and expense attributable to noncontrolling interests. We recognize, as part of our investment funds management business through SVB Capital, the entire income or loss from funds consolidated in accordance with ASC Topic 810 as discussed in Note 2-“Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report. We are required under GAAP to consolidate 100% of the results of these entities, even though we may own less than 100% of such entities. The relevant amounts attributable to investors other than us are reflected under “Net Income Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests” on our statements of income. Where applicable, the tables below for noninterest income and net gains on investment securities exclude noncontrolling interests.
Core fee income is a non-GAAP financial measure, which represents GAAP noninterest income, but excludes (i) SVB Leerink revenue, (ii) certain line items where performance is typically subject to market or other conditions beyond our control, primarily our net gains (losses) on investment securities and equity warrant assets, and (iii) other noninterest income. Core fee income represents client investment fees, foreign exchange fees, credit card fees, deposit service charges, lending related fees and letters of credit and standby letters of credit fees.
SVB Leerink revenue is a non-GAAP financial measure, which represents noninterest income but excludes (i) Core fee income, and (ii) certain line items where performance is typically subject to market or other conditions beyond our control, primarily our net gains (losses) on investment securities and equity warrant assets, and other noninterest income. SVB Leerink revenue represents investment banking revenue and commissions.
Core fee income plus SVB Leerink revenue is a non-GAAP measure, which represents GAAP noninterest income, but excludes certain line items where performance is typically subject to market or other conditions beyond our control, primarily our net gains (losses) on investment securities and equity warrant assets, and other noninterest income. Core fee income plus SVB Leerink revenue represents core fee income plus investment banking revenue and commissions.
The following table provides a reconciliation of GAAP noninterest income to non-GAAP noninterest income, net of noncontrolling interests for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively:
The following table provides a reconciliation of GAAP noninterest income to non-GAAP core fee income for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively:
NM-Not meaningful
(1)Non-GAAP core fee income plus SVB Leerink revenue represents noninterest income, but excludes certain line items where performance is typically subject to market or other conditions beyond our control and other noninterest income. Core fee income plus SVB Leerink revenue is non-GAAP core fee income (as defined in footnote (3) below) with the addition of investment banking revenue and commissions.
(2)Non-GAAP SVB Leerink revenue represents investment banking revenue and commissions, but excludes certain line items where performance is typically subject to market or other conditions beyond our control and other noninterest income.
(3)Non-GAAP core fee income represents noninterest income, but excludes (i) certain line items where performance is typically subject to market or other conditions beyond our control, (ii) our investment banking revenue and commissions and (iii) other noninterest income. Non-GAAP core fee income represents client investment fees, foreign exchange fees, credit card fees, deposit service charges, lending related fees and letters of credit and standby letters of credit fees.
Gains on Investment Securities, Net
Net gains on investment securities include gains and losses from our non-marketable and other equity securities, which include public equity securities held as a result of exercised equity warrant assets, as well as gains and losses from sales of our AFS debt securities portfolio, when applicable.
Our non-marketable and other equity securities portfolio primarily represents investments in venture capital and private equity funds, including a joint venture bank in China, debt funds, the newly acquired managed credit platform, private and public portfolio companies and qualified affordable housing projects. We experience variability in the performance of our non-marketable and other equity securities from period to period, which results in net gains or losses on investment securities (both realized and unrealized). This variability is due to a number of factors, including unrealized changes in the values of our investments, changes in the amount of realized gains and losses from distributions, changes in liquidity events and general economic and market conditions. Unrealized gains or losses from non-marketable and other equity securities for any single period are typically driven by valuation changes, and are therefore subject to potential increases or decreases in future periods. Such variability may lead to volatility in the gains or losses from investment securities. As such, our results for a particular period are not necessarily indicative of our expected performance in a future period.
The extent to which any unrealized gains or losses will become realized is subject to a variety of factors, including, among other things, the expiration of certain sales restrictions to which these equity securities may be subject to (e.g. lock-up agreements), changes in prevailing market prices, market conditions, the actual sales or distributions of securities and the timing of such actual sales or distributions, which, to the extent such securities are managed by our managed funds, are subject to our funds' separate discretionary sales/distributions and governance processes.
Our AFS securities portfolio is a fixed income investment portfolio that is managed with the objective of earning an appropriate portfolio yield over the long-term while maintaining sufficient liquidity and credit diversification as well as addressing our asset/liability management objectives. Though infrequent, sales of debt securities in our AFS securities portfolio may result in net gains or losses and are conducted pursuant to the guidelines of our investment policy related to the management of our liquidity position and interest rate risk.
In 2020, we had net gains on investment securities of $420.8 million, compared to $134.7 million in 2019. Non-GAAP net gains on investment securities, net of noncontrolling interests were $334.3 million in 2020, compared to $86.2 million in 2019, respectively. Net gains on investment securities, net of noncontrolling interests of $334.3 million in 2020 were driven by the following:
•Gains of $89.9 million from our managed funds of funds portfolio and managed direct venture funds, related primarily to net unrealized valuation increases in investments held by the funds in the portfolio,
•Gains of $66.0 million from our strategic and other investments portfolio, primarily driven by net unrealized valuation increases in both private and public company investments held in our strategic venture capital funds,
•Gains of $94.8 million from gains from our public equity securities, primarily driven by $72.0 million from unrealized gains for the 2.4 million common shares held as of December 31, 2020 in BigCommerce Holdings, Inc ("BigCommerce") and $14.7 million realized gains for the sale of BigCommerce equity shares,
•Gains of $61.2 million from our AFS debt securities portfolio, resulting from the sale of $2.6 billion of U.S. Treasury securities during the quarter, and
•Gains of $16.0 million from carried interest on our managed credit funds, acquired from WRG which closed on December 23, 2020. Performance fees earned from the arrangement existing prior to the acquisition of the debt fund business from WRG were previously recorded in other noninterest income and exchanged for carried interest as part of the acquisition. As a result, we recorded unrealized gains of $16.0 million net of noncontrolling interest related to carried interest on the managed credit funds. These gains were primarily driven by the IPO of BigCommerce.
Net gains on investment securities, net of noncontrolling interests of $86.2 million in 2019 were driven by the following:
•Gains of $37.9 million from our managed funds of funds portfolio, related primarily to net unrealized valuation increases in both private and public company investments held by the funds in the portfolio,
•Gains of $33.1 million from our strategic and other investments portfolio, primarily driven by net unrealized valuation increases in both private and public company investments held in our strategic venture capital funds, and
•Gains of $7.9 million from our managed direct venture funds, related primarily to net unrealized valuation increases in investments held by the funds in the portfolio.
The following table provides a reconciliation of GAAP total gains (losses) on investment securities, net, to non-GAAP net gains (losses) on investment securities, net of noncontrolling interests, for 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Gains on Equity Warrant Assets, Net
Gains on equity warrant assets, net, were $237.4 million in 2020, compared to $138.1 million in 2019. Net gains on equity warrant assets of $237.4 million in 2020 were primarily due to the following:
•Net gains of $179.6 million from the exercises of equity warrant assets in 2020 driven by robust IPO, special purpose acquisition company ("SPAC") and M&A activity during 2020, including $10.8 million from our exercised warrant position in BigCommerce, and
•Net gains of $59.7 million from changes in warrant valuations in 2020 driven by valuation increases in our private company warrant portfolio.
Gains on equity warrant assets, net, of $138.1 million in 2019 were primarily due to the following:
•Net gains of $107.2 million from the exercises of equity warrant assets in 2019, driven by increased IPO activity during 2019, and
•Net gains of $34.4 million from changes in warrant valuations in 2019, driven by valuation increases in our private company warrant portfolio.
A summary of gains on equity warrant assets, net, for 2020, 2019 and 2018 is as follows:
(1)At December 31, 2020, we held warrants in 2,602 companies, compared to 2,268 companies at December 31, 2019. The total value of our warrant portfolio was $203.4 million at December 31, 2020 and $165.5 million at December 31, 2019. Warrants in 25 companies each had fair values greater than $1.0 million and collectively represented $75.9 million, or 37.3 percent, of the fair value of the total warrant portfolio at December 31, 2020.
Investment in Root, Inc.
As of December 31, 2020, we held investments in Root, Inc. (“Root”) of approximately 14.0 million common stock shares directly held by two of our SVB Capital funds (in which SVBFG holds certain carried interests), of which we estimated to be entitled to approximately $24.8 million before taxes in the form of carried interest subject to the fund's performance and assuming the fund exceeds certain performance targets. Carried interest may be subject to change to the extent fund performance levels fluctuate.
Investment in BigCommerce
As of December 31, 2020, we held an investment in BigCommerce of approximately 2.4 million common shares pursuant to our exercise of certain warrants and debt conversion and 1.4 million shares held through our SVB Capital Funds (in which SVBFG holds certain carried interests), of which we estimate to be entitled to approximately $11.5 million before taxes in the form of carried interest subject to the fund's performance and assuming the fund exceeds certain performance targets. Carried interest may be subject to change to the extent fund performance levels fluctuate.
Gains (or losses) related to our equity securities in public companies such as Root and BigCommerce are based on valuation changes or the sale of any securities, and are subject to such companies' stock price, which are subject to market conditions and various other factors. Additionally, the public equity investment expected gains and losses, and the extent to which such gains (or losses) will become realized is subject to a variety of factors, including among other factors, changes in prevailing market prices and the timing of any sales of securities, which are subject to our securities sales and governance process as well as certain sales restrictions (e.g. lock-up agreements). The lock up agreement for common stock shares held in Root is scheduled to expire during April 2021 and the lock up agreement for common shares held in BigCommerce expired in February 2021.
As of the date of this filing, we have sold all of our common shares of BigCommerce subsequent to the lock-up expiration resulting in pre-tax gains on investment securities of approximately $43.0 million to be recorded during the first quarter of 2021. Additionally, all BigCommerce shares held through our SVB Capital Funds were distributed to the limited partners subsequent to the lock-up expiration. The distribution to fund investors did not result in a realized gain or loss to SVB Financial Group and there was no distribution of carried interest to the General Partner. We do not anticipate the price of BigCommerce common shares upon distribution will have a material impact on the amount of expected carried interest previously disclosed above. Carried interest may be subject to change to the extent fund performance levels fluctuate.
Non-GAAP Core Fee Income and Non-GAAP SVB Leerink Revenue
(1)Non-GAAP core fee income represents noninterest income, but excludes (i) certain line items where performance is typically subject to market or other conditions beyond our control, (ii) our investment banking revenue and commissions and (iii) other noninterest income. See “Use of Non-GAAP Measures” above.
(2)Non-GAAP SVB Leerink revenue represents noninterest income, but excludes (i) certain line items where performance is typically subject to market or other conditions beyond our control, (ii) non-GAAP core fee income, and (iii) other noninterest income. See “Use of Non-GAAP Measures” above.
(3)Non-GAAP core fee income plus SVB Leerink revenue represents noninterest income, but excludes (i) certain line items where performance is typically subject to market or other conditions beyond our control, and (ii) other noninterest income. See “Use of Non-GAAP Measures” above.
Client Investment Fees
We offer a variety of investment products on which we earn fees. These products include money market mutual funds, overnight repurchase agreements and sweep money market funds available through the Bank, client-directed accounts offered through our broker-dealer, SVB Wealth Advisory, and fixed income management services offered through SVB Asset Management, our investment advisory subsidiary.
Client investment fees were $132.2 million in 2020, compared to $182.1 million in 2019. The decrease in client investment fees is reflective of a reduction in fee margin resulting from lower short-term market rates.
The following table summarizes average client investment funds for 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(1)These funds represent investments in third-party money market mutual funds and fixed-income securities managed by SVB Asset Management.
(2)Client investment funds are maintained at third-party financial institutions and are not recorded on our balance sheet.
The following table summarizes period-end client investment funds at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(1)These funds represent investments in third-party money market mutual funds and fixed-income securities managed by SVB Asset Management.
(2)Client investment funds are maintained at third-party financial institutions and are not recorded on our balance sheet.
Foreign Exchange Fees
Foreign exchange fees were $178.7 million in 2020, compared to $159.3 million in 2019. The increase in foreign exchange fees was primarily due to increased foreign currency risk hedging as well as private equity activity. The increase is due primarily to the overall increase in the number of clients executing spot contracts resulting in higher trade volumes from the previous year reflective of our global expansion initiative and increased client engagement efforts. Foreign exchange fees have been, and may further be, impacted by effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
NM-Not meaningful
Credit Card Fees
Credit card fees were $97.7 million in 2020, compared to $118.7 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower transaction volumes starting in March of 2020 reflective of the COVID-19 pandemic interrupting normal business activity and reduced client spending. A summary of credit card fees by instrument type for 2020, 2019 and 2018 is as follows:
Deposit Service Charges
Deposit service charges were $90.3 million in 2020, compared to $89.2 million in 2019. The increase was attributable to higher deposit client counts as well as higher volumes of our transaction-based fee products. However, client activity was impacted by a slower macro-economic environment resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic
Lending Related Fees
Lending related fees were $57.5 million in 2020, compared to $49.9 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to increases in fees earned from unused lines of credit due to strong client liquidity. A summary of lending related fees by type for 2020, 2019 and 2018 is as follows:
Letters of Credit and Standby Letters of Credit Fees
Letters of credit and standby letters of credit fees were $46.7 million in 2020, compared to $42.7 million in 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increases in deferred fee income reflective of larger letter of credit issuances.
Investment Banking Revenue
Investment banking revenue, attributable to the acquisition of SVB Leerink in January 2019, was $414.0 million in 2020, compared to $195.2 million in 2019. The increase was due to exceptional levels of funding activity in the life science/healthcare secondary markets and by the increase in public equity underwriting fees. A summary of investment banking revenue by type for 2020, 2019 and 2018 is as follows:
NM-Not meaningful
Commissions
Commissions were $66.6 million in 2020, compared to $56.3 million in 2019. Commissions include commissions received from clients for the execution of agency-based brokerage transactions in listed and over-the-counter equities. The increase was driven by client trading activity, consistent with market volumes.
Other Noninterest Income
Total other noninterest income was $98.1 million in 2020, compared to income of $55.4 million in 2019. The increase was primarily driven by the $30.0 million recognized gain upon the exercise and conversion of our convertible debt option for BigCommerce during the third quarter of 2020.
A summary of other noninterest income for 2020, 2019 and 2018 is as follows:
(1)Represents the net revaluation of client and internal foreign currency denominated financial instruments. We enter into foreign exchange forward contracts to economically reduce our foreign exchange exposure related to client and internal foreign currency denominated financial instruments.
(2)Includes dividends on FHLB/FRB stock, correspondent bank rebate income, incentive fees related to carried interest, valuation fee income and other fee income.
Noninterest Expense
A summary of noninterest expense for 2020, 2019 and 2018 is as follows:
Included in noninterest expense is expense attributable to noncontrolling interests. See below for a description and reconciliation of non-GAAP noninterest expense and non-GAAP core operating efficiency ratio, both of which exclude noncontrolling interests.
Non-GAAP Noninterest Expense
We use and report non-GAAP noninterest expense, non-GAAP taxable equivalent revenue and non-GAAP core operating efficiency ratio, which excludes noncontrolling interests, SVB Leerink and other non-recurring expenses. We believe these non-GAAP financial measures, when taken together with the corresponding GAAP financial measures, provide meaningful supplemental information regarding our performance by: (i) excluding certain items that represent expenses attributable to investors other than us and our subsidiaries, or certain items that do not occur every reporting period; or (ii) providing additional information used by management that is not otherwise required by GAAP or other applicable requirements. Our management uses, and believes that investors benefit from referring to, these non-GAAP financial measures in assessing our operating results and when planning, forecasting and analyzing future periods. However, these
non-GAAP financial measures should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for or preferable to, financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
The table below provides a summary of non-GAAP noninterest expense and non-GAAP core operating efficiency ratio, both net of noncontrolling interests:
NM-Not meaningful
(1)The non-GAAP core operating efficiency ratio is calculated by dividing noninterest expense after adjusting for noninterest expense attributable to SVB Leerink and other non-recurring expenses by total revenue after adjusting for net interest income attributable to SVB Leerink, net gains or losses on investment securities and equity warrant assets, investment banking revenue and commissions. Additionally, noninterest expense and total revenue are adjusted for income or losses and expenses attributable to noncontrolling interests and adjustments to net interest income for a taxable equivalent basis.
Compensation and Benefits Expense
The following table provides a summary of our compensation and benefits expense:
(1)Other employee incentives and benefits includes employer payroll taxes, group health and life insurance, share-based compensation, 401(k), ESOP, warrant incentive and retention plans, agency fees and other employee-related expenses.
Compensation and benefits expense was $1.3 billion in 2020, compared to $989.7 million in 2019. The key factors driving the increase in compensation and benefits expense in 2020 were as follows:
•An increase of $79.7 million in salaries and wages expense, reflective primarily of an increase in the number of average FTEs by 678 to 4,040 in 2020, compared to 3,362 in 2019, driven by strong hiring for in-sourcing, product development and revenue growth, as well as annual pay raises.
•An increase of $175.8 million in incentive compensation plans expense attributable primarily to an increase in SVB Leerink incentive compensation expense as a result of a strong 2020 full-year financial performance.
•An increase of $73.2 million in other employee incentives and benefits expense attributable primarily to an increase in warrant incentive plan expense due to higher gains on equity warrant assets from exercises in 2020 as compared to 2019 and an increase in deferred compensation expense primarily driven by the appreciation in market valuations in the underlying investment securities in the plan in 2020.
Our variable compensation plans primarily consist of our Incentive Compensation Plan, Direct Drive Incentive Compensation Plan, Retention Program, Warrant Incentive Plan, Deferred Compensation Plan, 401(k) and ESOP Plan, SVB Leerink Incentive Compensation Plan and SVB Leerink Retention Award. Total costs incurred under these plans were $546.5 million in 2020, compared to $347.3 million in 2019. These amounts are included in total compensation and benefits expense discussed above.
Professional Services
Professional services expense was $247.1 million in 2020, compared to $205.5 million in 2019. The increase in 2020 was primarily related to costs to support the PPP during the year 2020 as well as continued investment in our infrastructure, initiatives, and operating projects to support our presence both domestically and globally.
Premises and Equipment
Premises and equipment expense was $127.1 million in 2020, compared to $96.8 million in 2019. The increase was related to investments in projects, systems and technology to support our revenue growth and related initiatives as well as other operating costs.
Net Occupancy
Net occupancy expense was $100.9 million in 2020, compared to $69.3 million in 2019. The increase was due primarily to impairment and accelerated depreciation of right of use assets and other fixed assets of $29.3 million related to vacating leased office space in several locations during 2020.
Business Development and Travel
Business development and travel expense was $23.7 million in 2020, compared to $68.9 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 on the global economy and our restrictions placed on domestic and international travel beginning March 2020.
FDIC and State Assessments
FDIC and state assessments expense was $27.6 million in 2020, compared to $18.5 million in 2019. The increase was due primarily to the increase in our average assets.
Other Noninterest Expense
A summary of other noninterest expense for 2020, 2019 and 2018 is as follows:
Other noninterest expense was $190.2 million in 2020, compared to $152.6 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to the donation of $20.0 million from net PPP fees received from the SBA and a $6.9 million increase in investment banking expenses due to strong investment banking activity.
Operating Efficiency Ratio
The GAAP operating efficiency ratio increased primarily due to $49.3 million of non-recurring expenses related to real estate and charitable donations as well as higher SVB Leerink expenses as a percentage of SVB Leerink revenue. The non-GAAP core operating efficiency ratio increased due primarily to the overall increase in expenses related to our core business as a percentage of revenue driven primarily by increased compensation and benefits expense.
Net Income Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests
Included in net income is income and expense attributable to noncontrolling interests. The relevant amounts allocated to investors in our consolidated subsidiaries, other than us, are reflected under “net income attributable to noncontrolling interests” on our consolidated statements of income.
In the table below, noninterest income consists primarily of investment gains and losses from our consolidated funds. Noninterest expense is primarily related to management fees paid by our managed funds to SVB Financial's subsidiaries as the managed funds’ general partners. A summary of net income attributable to noncontrolling interests for 2020, 2019 and 2018 is as follows:
(1)Represents noncontrolling interests’ share in net interest income, noninterest income and noninterest expense.
(2)Represents the preferred allocation of income (or change in income) earned by us as the general partner of certain consolidated funds.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests was $85.9 million in 2020, compared to $47.9 million in 2019. Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests of $85.9 million for 2020 was primarily a result of the following:
•Net gains on investment securities (including carried interest allocation) attributable to noncontrolling interests of $86.4 million ($29.4 million excluding carried interest allocation) primarily from our managed funds of funds and our managed direct venture funds portfolios, related primarily to net unrealized valuation increases in both private and public company investments held by the funds in the portfolios, and
•Noninterest expense of $0.5 million, primarily related to management fees paid by the noncontrolling interests to our subsidiaries that serve as the general partner.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests was $47.9 million in 2019. Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests of $47.9 million for 2019 was primarily a result of the following:
•Net gains on investment securities (including carried interest allocation) attributable to noncontrolling interests of $48.5 million ($20.2 million excluding carried interest allocation) primarily from our managed funds of funds and our managed direct venture funds portfolios, related primarily to net unrealized valuation increases in both private and public company investments held by the funds in the portfolios, and
•Noninterest expense of $0.8 million, primarily related to management fees paid by the noncontrolling interests to our subsidiaries that serve as the general partner.
Income Taxes
Our effective income tax expense rate was 27.0 percent in 2020, compared to 27.2 percent in 2019. Our effective tax rate is calculated by dividing income tax expense by the sum of income before income tax expense and the net income attributable to noncontrolling interests. The components of our effective tax rates for 2020 and 2019 are discussed in Note 18-“Income Taxes” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report.
The decrease in our effective tax rate for 2020 was primarily due to an increase in the net tax benefits from our investments in qualified affordable housing projects as compared to 2019.
Operating Segment Results
We have four segments for which we report our financial information: Global Commercial Bank (“GCB”), SVB Private Bank, SVB Capital and SVB Leerink.
We report segment information based on the “management” approach. The management approach designates the internal reporting used by management for making decisions and assessing performance as the source of our reporting segments. Refer to Note 24-“Segment Reporting” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report for additional details.
The following is our reportable segment information for 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Global Commercial Bank
Income before income tax expense from our GCB decreased to $1.4 billion in 2020, compared to $1.5 billion in 2019. The key components of GCB's performance are discussed below.
Net interest income from GCB increased by $174.8 million in 2020, due primarily to an increase in loan interest income resulting mainly from higher average loan balances, partially offset by a decrease in loan yields as a result of rate decreases. In addition, strong deposit growth provided a higher earnings credit and a low rate environment produced a lower earnings charge for funded loans creating a benefit of a higher net FTP earnings credit.
GCB had a provision for credit losses of $166.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a provision of $91.8 million for the comparable 2019 period. The $74.2 million increase is primarily due to the $59.2 million in additional reserves for our performing loans based on our forecast models of the current economic environment under the CECL methodology adopted January 1, 2020, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as changes in loan composition within our portfolio segments. The provision of $166.0 million also consisted of $30.7 million in additional reserves for period-end loan growth, $49.2 million for charge-offs not specifically reserved for at December 31, 2019 and $59.8 million in net new nonaccrual loans, partially offset by $29.0 million of recoveries.
The provision for loan losses of $94.2 million in 2019, under the previous incurred loss methodology, was reflective primarily of $38.7 million from period-end loan growth, $56.3 million in net new specific reserves for nonaccrual loans and $43.2 million from charge-offs not specifically reserved for, partially offset by a decrease of $23.0 million for our performing loans and $21.0 million of recoveries.
Noninterest income decreased by $32.2 million in 2020, related primarily to an overall decrease in our core fees (lower client investment fees and credit card fees offset by increases in foreign exchange fees and lending related fees). The decreases were due primarily to the impact of the federal rate cuts on yield rates affecting client investment fees as well as a decrease in transactional volume on credit cards due to COVID. The increase in foreign exchange fees was due primarily to increased trade volumes reflective of our global expansion initiative and increased client engagement efforts.
Noninterest expense increased by $145.1 million in 2020, due primarily to increased expenses for compensation and benefits and professional services, partially offset by a decrease in business development and travel expense. Compensation and benefits expenses increased as a result of higher salaries and wages. The increase in GCB salaries and wages expenses was due primarily to an increase in the average number of FTEs at GCB, which increased by 524 to 2,874 FTEs in 2020, compared to 2,350 FTEs in 2019. Professional services expenses increased due to higher expenses primarily related to our continued effort towards investments in our infrastructure, initiatives and operating projects to support our presence both domestically and globally. Business development and travel expense decreased primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 on the global economy and our restrictions placed on domestic and international travel beginning March 2020.
SVB Private Bank
NM-Not meaningful
Income before income tax expense from SVB Private Bank increased to $13.6 million in 2020, compared to $11.9 million in 2019. The key drivers of SVB Private Bank's performance are discussed below:
Net interest income increased by $26.5 million in 2020, due primarily to an increase in average loans, partially offset by decreases in loan yields as a result of overall market rate decreases.
The provision for credit losses increased by $19.0 million due primarily to a $22.8 million increase due to loan growth partially offset by a $3.4 million decrease in reserves for our performing loans reflective primarily of improved economic scenarios in our forecast models as well as a qualitative adjustment reflective of strong credit performance.
Noninterest expense increased $5.9 million to $46.1 million in 2020 due to an $6.9 million increase in compensation and benefits, partially offset by a $1.1 million decrease in business development and travel expense. Incentive compensation expense increased as a result of a strong performance during 2020. The increase in salaries and wages was due to an increase in the average number of FTEs at SVB Private Bank, which increased to 139 FTEs at year end December 31, 2020, from 123 for 2019.
SVB Capital
SVB Capital’s components of noninterest income primarily include net gains and losses on non-marketable and other equity securities, carried interest and fund management fees. All components of income before income tax expense discussed below are net of noncontrolling interests.
We experience variability in the performance of SVB Capital from period to period due to a number of factors, including changes in the values of our funds’ underlying investments, changes in the amount of distributions and general economic and market conditions. Such variability may lead to volatility in the gains and losses from investment securities and cause our results to differ from period to period.
Income before income tax expense from SVB Capital was $175.4 million in 2020, compared to $91.6 million in 2019. The key drivers of SVB Capital's performance are discussed below.
Noninterest income was $226.0 million in 2020, compared to $122.4 million in 2019. SVB Capital’s components of noninterest income primarily included the following:
•Net gains on investment securities of $170.3 million, primarily driven by unrealized net valuation increases from private company investments held in our managed funds of funds portfolio as well as in our managed direct venture fund portfolio,
•Fund management fees of $35.7 million, included in other noninterest income, and
•Gains on equity warrant assets of $10.8 million reflective of net valuation increases in equity warrant assets associated with our joint venture bank in China, included in other noninterest income.
Noninterest expense increased $19.8 million to $50.6 million in 2020 due to an $8.8 million increase in compensation and benefits as a result of higher incentive compensation expense and higher salaries and wages expenses as well as an increase in other noninterest expense. Incentive compensation expense increased as a result of a strong performance during 2020. The increase in salaries and wages was due to an increase in the average number of FTEs at SVB Capital, which increased to 47 FTEs at year end December 31, 2020, from 39 for 2019. Other noninterest expense increased $9.5 million primarily due to referral expenses associated with the $10.8 million in gains on equity warrant assets associated with our joint venture bank in China.
SVB Leerink
NM-Not meaningful
SVB Leerink’s components of noninterest income primarily include investment banking revenue, commissions and net gains and losses on non-marketable and other equity securities, carried interest and fund management fees. All components of income before income tax expense discussed below are net of noncontrolling interests.
Noninterest income increased $231.5 million to $496.0 million in 2020, primarily due to a $218.8 million increase in investment banking revenues compared to 2019. The $218.8 million increase in investment banking revenues was due to record high levels of funding activity in the life science/healthcare secondary markets and by the increase in public equity underwriting fees.
Noninterest expense increased $126.3 million to $379.0 million in 2020, primarily due to a $131.6 million increase in compensation and benefit expense due to an increase in incentive plan expense as a result of a strong performance during 2020, partially offset by a $7.7 million decrease in business travel expense due to the impact of travel restrictions put in place in response to the COVID-19 pandemic towards the end of the first quarter of 2020.
Consolidated Financial Condition
Our total assets, and total liabilities and stockholders' equity were $115.5 billion at December 31, 2020 and $71.0 billion at December 31, 2019. Refer below to a summary of the individual components driving the changes in total assets, total liabilities and stockholders' equity.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents totaled $17.7 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $10.9 billion, or 160.6 percent, compared to $6.8 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase was driven by the significant growth in deposits of $40.2 billion driven primarily by increases during the second half of 2020. As of December 31, 2020, $13.7 billion of our cash and due from banks was deposited at the FRB and was earning interest at the Federal Funds target rate, and interest-earning deposits in other financial institutions were $3.0 billion. As of December 31, 2019, $3.7 billion, of our cash and due from banks was deposited at the FRB and was earning interest at the Federal Funds target rate and interest-earning deposits in other financial institutions were $2.1 billion.
Investment Securities
Investment securities totaled $49.3 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $20.2 billion, or 69.6 percent, compared to $29.1 billion at December 31, 2019. Our investment securities portfolio consists primarily of: (i) an AFS securities portfolio and a HTM securities portfolio, both of which consist of interest-earning fixed income investment securities; and (ii) a non-marketable and other equity securities portfolio, which represents primarily investments managed as part of our funds management business, investments in qualified affordable housing projects, as well as public equity securities held as a result of exercised equity warrant assets. The major components of the change are explained below.
The following table presents a profile of our investment securities portfolio at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(1)Amortized cost net of allowance for credit losses of $392 thousand for December 31, 2020 and zero for both December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Available-for-Sale Securities
Period-end AFS securities were $30.9 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $14.0 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase of $16.9 billion in 2020 was primarily due to purchases of new investments of $23.2 billion and a $0.6 billion increase in our AFS portfolio reflective of the 150 basis point decrease in Federal Funds interest rates, partially offset by $4.2 billion in paydowns and scheduled maturities, and sales of $2.7 billion of U.S. Treasury securities. Securities classified as available-for-sale are carried at fair value with changes in fair value recorded as unrealized gains or losses in a separate component of stockholders' equity.
The following table summarizes the remaining contractual principal maturities and fully taxable equivalent yields on fixed income securities, carried at fair value, classified as AFS as of December 31, 2020. The weighted average yield is computed using the amortized cost of fixed income investment securities, which are reported at fair value. For U.S. Treasury securities, U.S. agency debentures and foreign government debt securities, the expected maturity is the actual contractual maturity of the notes. Expected remaining maturities for certain U.S. agency debentures may occur earlier than their contractual maturities because the note issuers have the right to call outstanding amounts ahead of their contractual maturity. Expected maturities for mortgage-backed securities may differ significantly from their contractual maturities because mortgage borrowers have the right to prepay outstanding loan obligations with or without penalties. Mortgage-backed securities classified as AFS typically have original contractual maturities from 10 to 30 years whereas expected average lives of these securities tend to be significantly shorter and vary based upon structure and prepayments in lower interest rate environments. The weighted average yield on mortgage-backed securities is based on prepayment assumptions at the purchase date. Actual yields earned may differ significantly based upon actual prepayments.
Held-to-Maturity Securities
Period-end HTM securities were $16.6 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.8 billion, or 19.9 percent, compared to $13.8 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase was due to new purchases of $6.8 billion, partially offset by paydowns and scheduled maturities of $4.0 billion.
Securities classified as HTM are accounted for at cost with no adjustments for changes in fair value. For securities re-designated as HTM from AFS, the unrealized gains at the date of transfer will continue to be reported as a separate component of shareholders' equity and are being amortized over the life of the securities in a manner consistent with the amortization of a premium or discount.
The following table summarizes the remaining contractual principal maturities and fully taxable equivalent yields on fixed income investment securities classified as HTM as of December 31, 2020. Interest income on certain municipal bonds and notes (non-taxable investments) are presented on a fully taxable equivalent basis using the federal statutory tax rate of 21.0 percent. The weighted average yield is computed using the amortized cost of fixed income investment securities. For U.S. agency debentures, the expected maturity is the actual contractual maturity of the notes. Expected maturities for mortgage-backed securities may differ significantly from their contractual maturities because mortgage borrowers have the right to prepay outstanding loan obligations with or without penalties. Mortgage-backed securities classified as HTM typically have original contractual maturities from 10 to 30 years whereas expected average lives of these securities tend to be significantly shorter and vary based upon structure and prepayments in lower interest rate environments. The weighted average yield on mortgage-backed securities is based on prepayment assumptions at the purchase date. Actual yields earned may differ significantly based upon actual prepayments.
Portfolio duration is a standard measure used to approximate changes in the market value of fixed income instruments due to a change in market interest rates. The measure is an estimate based on the level of current market interest rates, expectations for changes in the path of forward rates and the effect of forward rates on mortgage prepayment speed assumptions. As such, portfolio duration will fluctuate with changes in market interest rates. Changes in portfolio duration are also impacted by changes in the mix of longer versus shorter term-to-maturity securities. At December 31, 2020, our estimated fixed income securities portfolio weighted-average duration was 3.7 years, compared to 3.9 at December 31, 2019.
Non-Marketable and Other Equity Securities
Non-marketable and other equity securities were $1.8 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.6 billion, or 48.5 percent, compared to $1.2 billion at December 31, 2019. Included in our non-marketable and other equity securities carried under fair value accounting are amounts that are attributable to noncontrolling interests. We are required under GAAP to consolidate certain SVB Capital funds, even though we may own less than 100 percent of such entities. See below for a summary of the carrying value (as reported) of non-marketable and other equity securities compared to the amounts attributable to SVBFG.
The increase in non-marketable and other equity securities of $0.6 billion in 2020 was primarily attributable to equity securities from exercised warrants, valuation increases in our other public equity securities, new investments within our qualified housing projects portfolio and valuation increases and additional investment in our venture capital and private equity funds investments.
The following table summarizes the carrying value (as reported) of non-marketable and other equity securities compared to the amounts attributable to SVBFG (which generally represents the carrying value times our ownership percentage) at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(1)The following table shows the amounts of venture capital and private equity fund investments held by the following consolidated funds and amounts attributable to SVBFG for each fund at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(2)The carrying values represented investments in 162 and 205 funds (primarily venture capital funds) at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, where our ownership interest is typically less than 5% of the voting interests of each such fund and in which we do not have the ability to exercise significant influence over the partnerships operating activities and financial policies. Our unconsolidated venture capital and private equity fund investments at fair value based on the fund investments' net asset values per share as obtained from the general partners of the funds. For each fund investment, we adjust the net asset value per share for differences between our measurement date and the date of the fund investment’s net asset value by using the most recently available financial information from the investee general partner, for example September 30th, for our December 31st consolidated financial statements, adjusted for any contributions paid, distributions received from the investment and significant fund transactions or market events during the reporting period.
(3)Investments classified as "Other investments without a readily determinable fair value" include direct equity investments in private companies. The carrying value is based on the price at which the investment was acquired plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for identical or similar investments. We consider a range of factors when adjusting the fair value of these investments, including, but not limited to, the term and nature of the investment, local market conditions, values for comparable securities, current and projected operating performance, exit strategies, financing transactions subsequent to the acquisition of the investment and a discount for certain investments that have lock-up restrictions or other features that indicate a discount to fair value is warranted. For further details on the carrying value of these investments refer to Note 8-“Investment Securities" of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report.
(4)Investments classified as other equity securities (fair value accounting) represent shares held in public companies as a result of exercising public equity warrant assets and direct equity investments in public companies held by our consolidated funds. Changes in the fair value recognized through net income. This amount includes total unrealized gains of $72.0 million in BigCommerce which was subject to a lock-up agreement as of December 31, 2020. The lock-up expired in February 2021 at which time we sold all of our common shares as discussed above.
(5)The following table shows the carrying value and our ownership percentage of each investment at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (equity method accounting):
(i)Our ownership includes direct ownership interest of 1.3 percent and indirect ownership interest of 3.8 percent through our investments in Strategic Investors Fund II, LP.
(ii)Our ownership includes direct ownership interest of 11.5 percent in the fund and an indirect interest in the fund through our investment in Gold Hill Capital 2008, LLC of 4.0 percent.
Volcker Rule
On June 6, 2017, we received notice that the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve approved the Company’s application for an extension of the permitted conformance period for the Company’s investments in “illiquid” covered funds. The approval extends the deadline by which the Company must sell, divest, restructure or otherwise conform such investments to the provisions of the Volcker Rule until the earlier of (i) July 21, 2022 or (ii) the date by which each fund matures by its terms or is otherwise conformed to the Volcker Rule.
As implemented under the Dodd-Frank Act, the Volcker Rule prohibits, subject to certain exceptions, a banking entity, such as the Company, from sponsoring or investing in covered funds, defined to include many venture capital and private equity funds. As noted above, the Company currently maintains certain investments deemed to be prohibited covered fund investments. As of December 31, 2020, under current regulations, we estimate that the aggregate carrying value and fair value of venture capital and private equity fund investments deemed to be prohibited covered fund interests, and therefore subject to the Volcker Rule’s restrictions, was approximately $230 million. We are currently assessing the extent of the impact of amendments to the Volcker Rule which provide for certain exclusions from the Volcker Rule restrictions. (For more information, see "Business - Supervision and Regulatory - Proprietary Trading and Relationships with Certain Funds" under Part I, Item I of this report.)
Loans
The following table details the composition of the loan portfolio, amortized cost basis, as of the five most recent year-ends:
(1)Due to the diverse nature of energy and resource innovation products and services, for our loan-related reporting purposes, ERI-related loans are reported under the Investor Dependent, Cash Flow Dependent and Balance Sheet Dependent risk-based segments above.
(2)As of December 31, 2020, as a result of enhanced portfolio characteristic definitions for our risk-based segments, loans in the amount of $426.6 million and $52.5 million that would have been reported in Other under historical definitions, are now being reported in our Private Bank and Premium Wine risk-based segments, respectively.
(3)Total loans at amortized cost is net of unearned income of $226 million, $163 million, $173 million, $148 million and $125 million in 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
(4)Included within our total loan portfolio are credit card loans of $400 million, $395 million, $335 million, $270 million, and $224 million at December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively, and primarily represent corporate credit cards.
(5)Included in our total loan portfolio are construction loans of $118 million, $183 million, $196 million, $169 million and $175 million at December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively. Construction loans consist of qualified affordable housing project loans made to fulfill our responsibilities under the Community Reinvestment Act and are primarily secured by real estate.
(6)Of our total loans, the table below includes those secured by real estate at amortized cost at December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016 and were comprised of the following:
Loans, amortized cost basis, increased from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 with the largest increases driven primarily by our Global Fund Banking, SBA and Private Bank risk-based segments. The increase in risk-based segments was primarily driven by participation in the Paycheck Protection Program and increased credit line utilization as well as new client acquisition.
Loan Concentration
Loan concentrations may exist when there are borrowers engaged in similar activities or types of loans extended to a diverse group of borrowers that could cause those borrowers or portfolios to be similarly impacted by economic or other conditions. A substantial percentage of our loans are commercial in nature. The breakdown of total loans and loans as a percentage of total loans by risk-based segment is as follows:
(1)As of December 31, 2020, loan amounts are disclosed using the amortized cost basis as a result of the adoption of CECL. Prior period loan amounts are disclosed using the gross basis.
The following table provides a summary of total loans by size and risk-based segment. The breakout below is based on total client balances (individually or in the aggregate) as of December 31, 2020 to any single client:
(1)As of December 31, 2020, loan amounts are disclosed using the amortized cost basis as a result of the adoption of CECL. Prior period loan amounts are disclosed using the gross basis.
(2)Included in total loans at amortized cost is approximately $1.6 billion in PPP loans. The PPP loans consist of loans from all risk-based segments.
At December 31, 2020, loans equal to or greater than $20 million to any single client (individually or in the aggregate) totaled $26.7 billion, or 59.0 percent of our total loan portfolio. These loans represented 544 clients, and of these loans, $65.0 million were on nonaccrual status as of December 31, 2020.
The following table provides a summary of loans by size and risk-based segment. The breakout below is based on total client balances (individually or in the aggregate) as of December 31, 2019:
(1)As of December 31, 2020, loan amounts are disclosed using the amortized cost basis as a result of the adoption of CECL. Prior period loan amounts are disclosed using the gross basis.
At December 31, 2019, loans equal to or greater than $20 million to any single client (individually or in the aggregate) totaled $17.8 billion, or 53.4 percent of our total loan portfolio. These loans represented 397 clients, and of these loans, $37.3 million were on nonaccrual status as of December 31, 2019.
Our three main market segments include (i) Global Fund Banking (formerly private equity/venture capital), (ii) technology (software/internet and hardware) and life science/healthcare and (iii) SVB Private Bank.
(i) Global Fund Banking
Our Global Fund Banking loan portfolio includes financial services to clients in the private equity/venture capital community. Our lending to private equity/venture capital firms and funds represented 57 percent of total loans at December 31, 2020 and 53 percent at December 31, 2019. The vast majority of this portfolio consists of capital call lines of credit, the repayment of which is dependent on the payment of capital calls by the underlying limited partner investors in the funds managed by these firms. These facilities are generally governed by meaningful financial covenants oriented towards ensuring that the funds' remaining callable capital is sufficient to repay the loan, and larger commitments (typically provided to larger private equity funds) are often secured by an assignment of the general partner's right to call capital from the fund's limited partner investors.
(ii) Technology and Life Science/Healthcare
Our technology and life science/healthcare loan portfolios include loans to clients at the various stages of their life cycles. The risk-based segments for our technology and life science/healthcare market segments are classified as investor dependent, cash flow dependent or balance sheet dependent for reporting purposes.
Investor dependent loans represented 11 percent of total loans at December 31, 2020 and 13 percent at December 31, 2019. These loans are made to companies in both our Accelerator (early-stage) and Growth practices (mid-stage and later-stage).
Cash flow dependent loans, which include sponsor led buyout lending, represented 11 percent of total loans at December 31, 2020 and 13 percent at December 31, 2019. Sponsor led buyout loans represented 4 percent of total loans at December 31, 2020, compared to 7 percent at December 31, 2019.
Balance sheet dependent loans, which include asset-based loans, represented 5 percent of total loans at December 31, 2020 and 4 percent at December 31, 2019. Working capital lines and accounts receivable financing, both part of our asset-based lending, represented one percent and half a percent of total loans, respectively, at December 31, 2020 and two percent and one percent of total loans, respectively, at December 31, 2019.
(iii) SVB Private Bank
Our SVB Private Bank clients are primarily executive leaders and senior investment professionals in the innovation economy. Our lending to SVB Private Bank clients represented 11 percent of total loans at December 31, 2020 and 10 percent at December 31, 2019. Many of these clients have mortgages, which represented 83 percent of this portfolio at December 31, 2020; the balance of this portfolio consisted of home equity lines of credit, restricted and private stock loans, capital call lines of credit, lines of credit against liquid assets and other secured and unsecured lending products. In addition, we provide owner occupied commercial mortgages to Private Bank clients and real estate secured loans to eligible employees through our EHOP.
Paycheck Protection Program
Beginning in April 2020, we accepted applications under the PPP administered by the Small Business Association (“SBA”) under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act"), as amended by the Economic Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act (the "Economic Aid Act") enacted on December 27, 2020, and have originated loans to qualified small businesses. Under the terms of the program, loans funded through the PPP are eligible to be forgiven if certain requirements are met, including using the funds for certain costs relating to payroll, healthcare and qualifying mortgage interest, rent and utility payments. Eligible expenses also include covered operations expenditures, covered property damage costs, covered supplier costs and covered worker protection expenditures. To the extent not forgiven, loans are subject to certain terms including, among others, the following: maximum two-year term for loans issued before June 5, 2020 (unless borrower and lender agree otherwise); a maximum five-year term for loans issued on or after June 5, 2020; an interest rate of 1.0%; deferral of loan payments until a loan forgiveness decision is rendered or until 10 months after the end of a borrower’s forgiveness covered period; and no requirement for any collateral or personal guarantees. PPP borrowers are not required to pay any fees to the government or the lender, and the loans may be repaid by the borrower at any time. The SBA, however, will pay lenders a processing fee based on the size of the PPP loan, ranging from 1% to 5% of the loan for loans made before the enactment of the Economic Aid Act, and thereafter, a processing fee of (1) the lesser of 50% of the loan or $2,500 for loans of not more than $50,000, (2) 5% of the loan for loans above $50,000 but not more than $350,000 and (3) 3% of the loan for loans above $350,000 (and, in case of the first draw PPP loans only, a fee of 1% for the loans at or above $2,000,000). Pursuant to the Economic Aid Act, additional loans may be issued up until March 31, 2021, and certain PPP
borrowers are able to apply for second draw loans in an amount of up to $2 million. We continue to participate in the PPP, including the second draw loan program.
As of December 31, 2020, we have outstanding PPP loans in the amount of $1.6 billion, as approved by the SBA. This funded amount reflects repayments received as of such date.
Additionally, we have donated approximately $20 million in PPP fees received from the SBA, net of our costs incurred, to charitable relief efforts.
Loan Deferral Programs
In April 2020, we implemented three loan payment deferral programs targeted to assist borrowers who were the most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. These programs included relief for venture-backed, private bank and wine borrowers who met certain criteria. The three-month private bank and wine deferral programs ended, and payments resumed, in the third quarter of 2020. The six-month venture debt and private bank deferral programs ended, and payments resumed, in the fourth quarter of 2020. As of December 31, 2020, loans modified under these programs had outstanding balances of $768.9 million, $12.6 million and $1.6 million for venture-backed, private bank and wine borrowers, respectively. These amounts reflect repayments received as of December 31, 2020.
For loans modified under these programs, in accordance with the provisions of Section 4013 of the CARES Act, we elected to not apply troubled debt restructuring classifications to borrowers who were current as of December 31, 2019. In addition, for loans modified under these programs that did not meet the CARES Act criteria, we applied the guidance in an interagency statement issued by bank regulatory agencies. Using this guidance, we may find that borrowers are not experiencing financial difficulty that may otherwise result in a TDR classification, in accordance with ASC Subtopic 310-40, if loan modifications are performed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, provide short-term loan payment deferrals (e.g. six months in duration) and are granted to borrowers who were current as of the implementation date of the loan modification program. We evaluated all loans modified under these programs against the CARES Act and interagency guidance, as applicable, and determined the loan modifications would not be considered TDRs. We did not defer interest income recognition during periods of payment deferral, nor did any qualifying modification trigger nonaccrual status. The effectiveness of our programs is uncertain considering the unknown duration and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
State Concentrations
Approximately 26 percent of our outstanding total loan balances as of December 31, 2020 were to borrowers based in California compared to 27 percent as of December 31, 2019. Additionally, as of December 31, 2020, borrowers in New York and Massachusetts increased to 10 percent of our outstanding total loan balances each as of December 31, 2020, compared to nine percent each as of December 31, 2019. Other than California, New York and Massachusetts, as of December 31, 2020, there are no states with loan balances greater than or equal to 10 percent.
See generally "Risk Factors-Credit Risks" set forth under Part I, Item 1A of this report.
As of December 31, 2020, 92 percent, or $41.4 billion, of our outstanding total loans were variable-rate loans that adjust at a prescribed measurement date upon a change in our prime-lending rate or other variable indices, compared to 93 percent, or $30.9 billion, as of December 31, 2019. The following table sets forth the remaining contractual maturity distribution of our total loans by risk-based segment at December 31, 2020, for fixed and variable rate loans:
Upon maturity, loans satisfying our credit quality standards may be eligible for renewal. Such renewals are subject to the normal underwriting and credit administration practices associated with new loans. We do not grant loans with unconditional extension terms.
Loan Administration
The Credit Committee of our Board of Directors oversees our credit risks and strategies, as well as our key credit policies and lending practices.
Subject to the oversight of the Credit Committee, lending authority is delegated to our Chief Credit Officer and other senior members of our lending management based on certain size and underwriting criteria.
Credit Quality Indicators
As of both December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our total criticized loans and nonaccrual loans collectively represented three percent of our total loans. Criticized loans and nonaccrual loans to early-stage clients represented 15 percent and 23 percent of our total criticized loans and nonaccrual loan balances at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Loans to early-stage clients represent a relatively small percentage of our overall portfolio at three and five percent of total loans at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. It is common for an early-stage client’s remaining liquidity to fall temporarily below the threshold for a pass-rated credit during its capital-raising period for a new round of funding. Based on our experience, for most early-stage clients, this situation typically lasts one to two quarters and generally resolves itself with a subsequent round of venture funding, though there are exceptions, from time to time. As a result, we expect that each of our early-stage clients will reside in our criticized portfolio during a portion of their life cycle.
Credit Quality and Allowance for Credit Losses for Loans and for Unfunded Credit Commitments
The following table presents a summary of the activity for the allowance for credit losses as of the five most recent year-ends:
To determine the ACL for performing loans as of December 31, 2020, we utilized three scenarios, on a weighted basis, from Moody’s Analytics December 2020 forecast in our expected lifetime loss estimates. The baseline scenario, which carries the highest weighting, reflected an unemployment rate of seven percent as of December 31, 2020, as a result of expected business re-openings and the effect of government aid programs, and a GDP growth rate of four percent as of December 31, 2020, reflecting expected economic recovery as well as the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We also utilized a more favorable (Moody’s S1, Upside) and a less favorable (Moody’s S3, Downside) economic forecast scenario, in addition to the baseline. To the extent we identified credit risk considerations that were not captured by the Moody's Analytics December 2020 scenarios, we addressed the risk through management's qualitative adjustments to our ACL for performing loans.
In 2020, total charge-offs increased to $102.9 million compared to $92.6 million in 2019. Gross loan charge-offs in 2020 came primarily from our Investor Dependent loan portfolio.
The following table summarizes the allocation of the ACL for our portfolio segments as of the five most recent year-ends:
(1)Represents loan balances as a percentage of total loans at each respective year-end. As of December 31, 2020, loan amounts are disclosed using the amortized cost basis as a result of the adoption of CECL. Prior period loan amounts are disclosed using the gross basis.
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets consist of loans on nonaccrual status, loans past due 90 days or more still accruing interest, and Other Real Estate Owned (“OREO”) and other foreclosed assets. We measure all loans placed on nonaccrual status for impairment based on the fair value of the underlying collateral or the net present value of the expected cash flows. The table below sets forth certain data and ratios between nonperforming loans, nonperforming assets and the allowance for credit losses for loans and unfunded credit commitments:
(1)As of December 31, 2020, loan amounts are disclosed, and ratios are calculated, using the amortized cost basis as a result of the adoption of CECL. Prior period loan amounts are disclosed, and ratios calculated, using the gross basis.
(2)The “allowance for credit losses for unfunded credit commitments” is included as a component of other liabilities and any provision is included in the "provision for credit losses" in the statement of income. See “Provision for Credit Losses” for a discussion of the changes to the allowance.
(3)Includes unfunded loan commitments and letters of credit.
Our allowance for credit losses for loans as a percentage of total loans increased eight basis points to 0.99 percent at December 31, 2020, compared to 0.91 percent at December 31, 2019 under the previous incurred loss methodology. The increase was due primarily to a nine basis point increase in our performing loan reserve as a percentage of total loans and a one basis point decrease for nonaccrual loans.
Our allowance for credit losses for performing loans was $393.7 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $260.1 million at December 31, 2019. Included in the allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2020 is the day one impact of adopting CECL of $22.4 million driven by an increase in our expected credit loss for our Investor Dependent loan portfolio given the higher relative risk as well as the portfolio's duration, which is taken into account under the CECL methodology, partially offset by a decrease for our Global Fund Banking loan portfolio, given its higher historical credit quality and shorter duration. The remaining $111.2 million increase was due primarily to an increase of $56.6 million related to the expected credit losses for our performing loan reserves based on our forecast models of the current economic environment and $54.6 million related to period-end loan growth of $12.0 billion.
Nonaccrual Loans
The following table presents a detailed composition of nonaccrual loans by risk-based segment as of the five most recent year-ends:
(1)As of December 31, 2020, loan amounts are disclosed using the amortized cost basis as a result of the adoption of CECL. Prior period loan amounts are disclosed using the gross basis.
The following table presents a summary of changes in nonaccrual loans for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1)As of December 31, 2020, loan amounts are disclosed using the amortized cost basis as a result of the adoption of CECL. Prior period loan amounts are disclosed using the gross basis.
Our nonaccrual loan balance increased $1.6 million to $104.2 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $102.7 million at December 31, 2019. Our nonaccrual loan balance increased $1.6 million primarily driven by $200.8 million in new nonaccrual loans, partially offset by $136.4 million in paydowns and other reductions and $62.8 million charge-offs. New nonaccrual loans were driven primarily by $57.4 million for six clients in our Investor Dependent portfolio, $40.3 million for two clients in our Sponsor Led Buyout portfolio and $14.8 million for one client in our Balance Sheet Dependent portfolio. Repayments were primarily driven by $34.5 million for one Sponsor Led Buyout client that was added to our nonaccrual loan portfolio in 2019, $11.7 million for one Balance Sheet Dependent client that was added in 2020 and $11.7 million for three Investor Dependent clients two of which were added in 2020 and one in 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we have specifically reserved $54.0 million for our nonaccrual loans.
Average nonaccrual loans for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016 were $85.1 million, $160.3 million, $117.1 million, $123.8 million, and $108.7 million, respectively. The decrease in average nonaccrual loans was
primarily driven by large paydowns in the first and third quarters of 2020 and the new nonaccruals occurring in the latter part of the second and third quarters. If the nonaccrual loans for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016 had not been nonperforming, $2.4 million, $5.6 million, $7.4 million, $7.7 million and $4.6 million, respectively, in interest income would have been recorded.
Accrued Interest Receivable and Other Assets
A summary of accrued interest receivable and other assets at December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
(1)See “Derivatives” section below.
Foreign Exchange Spot Contract Assets
The increase of $1.3 billion in foreign exchange spot contract assets was primarily due to an overall increase in the amount of unsettled spot trades reflective of several large trades at year-end December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019.
Accrued interest receivable
The increase of $27.8 million in accrued interest receivable was primarily due to an overall increase in the interest receivable for mortgage backed securities at year-end December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019.
Other Assets
Other assets includes various asset amounts for other operational transactions. The increase of $17.7 million was primarily due to a $57.9 million increase in Leerink trade receivables reflective of increased investment banking activity, partially offset by $27.3 million decrease in deferred compensation and $10.7 million decrease in merchant card receivables.
Derivatives
Derivative instruments are recorded as a component of other assets and other liabilities on the balance sheet. The following table provides a summary of derivative assets and liabilities at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Equity Warrant Assets
In connection with negotiating credit facilities and certain other services, we often obtain rights to acquire stock in the form of equity warrant assets in primarily private, venture-backed companies in the technology and life science/healthcare industries. At December 31, 2020, we held warrants in 2,602 companies, compared to 2,268 companies at December 31, 2019. Warrants in 25 companies each had values greater than $1.0 million and collectively represented $75.9 million, or 37.3 percent, of the fair value of the total warrant portfolio. The change in fair value of equity warrant assets is recorded in gains on equity warrant assets, net, in noninterest income, a component of consolidated net income. The following table provides a summary of transactions and valuation changes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Foreign Exchange Forward and Foreign Currency Option Contracts
We enter into foreign exchange forward contracts and foreign currency option contracts with clients involved in foreign activities, either as the purchaser or seller, depending upon the clients' need. For each forward or option contract entered into with our clients, we enter into an opposite way forward or option contract with a correspondent bank, which mitigates the risk of fluctuations in currency rates. We also enter into forward contracts with correspondent banks to economically reduce our foreign exchange exposure related to certain foreign currency denominated instruments. Net gains and losses on the revaluation of foreign currency denominated instruments are recorded in the line item "Other" as part of noninterest income, a component of consolidated net income. We have not experienced nonperformance by any of our counterparties and therefore have not incurred any related losses. Further, we anticipate performance by all counterparties. Our net exposure for foreign exchange forward and foreign currency option contracts, net of cash collateral, was $31.0 million at December 31, 2020 and $22.2 million at December 31, 2019. For additional information on our foreign exchange forward contracts and foreign currency option contracts, see Note 15-“Derivative Financial Instruments” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Client Interest Rate Derivatives
We sell interest rate contracts to clients who wish to mitigate their interest rate exposure. We economically reduce the interest rate risk from this business by entering into opposite way contracts with correspondent banks. Our net exposure for
client interest rate derivative contracts, net of cash collateral, was $67.3 million at December 31, 2020 and $28.6 million at December 31, 2019. For information on our client interest rate derivatives, refer to Note 15-“Derivative Financial Instruments” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Interest Rate Swaps
To manage interest rate risk on our variable-interest rate loan portfolio, we enter into interest rate swap contracts to hedge against future changes in interest rates by using hedging instruments to lock in future cash inflows that would otherwise be impacted by movements in the market interest rates. We designate these interest rate swap contracts as cash flow hedges that qualify for hedge accounting under ASC 815 and record them in other assets and other liabilities. Our net exposure for interest rate swaps, net of cash collateral, was zero at December 31, 2020. As of March 31, 2020, all derivatives previously classified as hedges with notional balances totaling $5.0 billion and a net asset fair value of $227.5 million were terminated. Refer to Note 15-“Derivative Financial Instruments” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report for additional information regarding the termination of our interest rate swap cash flow hedges during the first quarter of 2020.
Deposits
The following table presents the composition of our deposits as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
The increase in deposits of $40.2 billion in 2020 was driven by strong public and private fundraising and exit activity as well as significant new client acquisition. We saw growth across all portfolios with the primary contributors coming from our technology and life science/healthcare portfolios. No material portion of our deposits has been obtained from a single depositor and the loss of any one depositor would not materially affect our business. Approximately 12 percent and 13 percent of our total deposits at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, were from our clients in Asia.
The increase in deposits of $12.4 billion in 2019 was driven primarily by a healthy equity funding environment across a majority of our market segments with robust activities in the IPO and secondary public offering markets as well as strong new client acquisition.
At December 31, 2020, 35 percent of our total deposits were interest-bearing deposits, compared to 34 percent at December 31, 2019.
At December 31, 2020, the aggregate balance of time deposit accounts individually equal to or greater than $100,000 totaled $686 million, compared to $185 million at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, $686 million in time deposit accounts individually equal to or greater than $100,000 were scheduled to mature within one year. The maturity profile of our time deposits as of December 31, 2020 is as follows:
Short-Term Borrowings
The following table summarizes our short-term borrowings that mature in one month or less:
We had $20.6 million in short-term borrowings at December 31, 2020, compared to $17.4 million at December 31, 2019. There were no overnight short-term borrowings as of December 31, 2020 or 2019. For more information on our short-term debt, see Note 14-“Short-Term Borrowings and Long-Term Debt” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Average daily balances and maximum month-end balances for our short-term borrowings in 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
(1)As part of our liquidity risk management practices, we periodically test availability and access to overnight borrowings in the Federal Funds market. These balances represent short-term borrowings.
(2)Represents cash collateral received from certain counterparties in relation to market value exposures of derivative contracts in our favor.
Long-Term Debt
The following table represents outstanding long-term debt at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
As of December 31, 2020, long-term debt was comprised of our 3.50% Senior Notes and 3.125% Senior Notes. The increase in our long-term debt at December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019 was due to the issuance of 3.125% Senior Notes during the second quarter of 2020. For more information on our long-term debt outstanding at December 31, 2020, refer to Note 14-“Short-Term Borrowings and Long-Term Debt” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report.
On February 2, 2021, the Company issued $500 million of Senior Notes. Refer to Note 28-“Subsequent Events” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report for additional information.
Other Liabilities
A summary of other liabilities at December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
(1)See “Derivatives” section above.
Foreign Exchange Spot Contract Liabilities
The increase of $1.3 billion in foreign exchange spot contract liabilities was due primarily to an increase in the amount of unsettled spot trades at December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019.
Accrued Compensation
Accrued compensation includes amounts for our Incentive Compensation Plan, Direct Drive Incentive Compensation Plan, Retention Program, Warrant Incentive Plan, ESOP, SVB Leerink Incentive Compensation Plan, SVB Leerink Retention Award and other compensation arrangements. The increase of $191.0 million was due primarily to an increase in our SVB Leerink incentive accruals as a result of our strong 2020 full-year financial performance, and as well as the increase in the number of average FTEs in 2020. For a description of our variable compensation plans, refer to Note 19-“Employee Compensation and Benefit Plans” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Allowance for Unfunded Credit Commitments
Allowance for unfunded credit commitments includes an allowance for both our unfunded loan commitments and our letters of credit. The increase of $53.1 million was due primarily to the day one impact of the adoption of CECL of $22.8 million as well as an $30.2 million increase for the year ended December 31, 2020, driven primarily by growth in unfunded credit commitments of $7.5 billion.
Net Deferred Tax Liabilities
Net deferred tax liabilities increased to $173.0 million due to an increase in unrealized gains recorded to accumulated other comprehensive income from our available-for-sale securities and the termination of our interest rate swap cash flow
hedge contracts, as discussed in the "Derivatives" section above, as well as gains from conversion of convertible debt options, partially offset by an increase in allowance for credit losses for loans.
Other Liabilities
Other liabilities includes various accrued liability amounts for other operational transactions. The increase of $137.1 million was reflective primarily of a $68.2 million increase in investment securities payable due to unsettled purchases of fixed income investment securities and a $41.3 million increase in income tax payable.
Noncontrolling Interests
Noncontrolling interests totaled $213.8 million and $150.8 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase was due to net income attributable to noncontrolling interests of $85.9 million, partially offset by net capital distributions of $22.9 million primarily to investors in our managed funds of funds for the year ended December 31, 2020. For more information, refer to Note 2-“Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Capital Resources
We maintain an adequate capital base to support anticipated asset growth, operating needs, and credit and other business risks, and to provide for SVB Financial and the Bank to be in compliance with applicable regulatory capital guidelines, including the joint agency rules implementing the "Basel III" capital rules (the "Capital Rules"). Our primary sources of new capital include retained earnings and proceeds from the sale and issuance of our capital stock or other securities. Under the oversight of the Finance Committee of our Board of Directors, management engages in regular capital planning processes in an effort to optimize the use of the capital available to us and to appropriately plan for our future capital needs. The capital plan considers capital needs for the foreseeable future and allocates capital to both existing and future business activities. Expected future use or activities for which capital may be set aside include balance sheet growth and associated relative increases in market or credit exposure, investment activity, potential product and business expansions, acquisitions and strategic or infrastructure investments. In addition, we conduct capital stress tests as part of our annual capital planning process. The capital stress tests allow us to assess the impact of adverse changes in the economy and interest rates on our capital adequacy position.
Common Stock
On November 13, 2018, the Company announced a program to purchase up to $500 million of our outstanding common stock (the "Stock Repurchase Program"). The program completed on July 1, 2019, after we repurchased and retired 2.2 million shares of our outstanding common stock totaling $499.6 million.
On October 24, 2019, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized a new stock repurchase program that enabled the Company to repurchase up to $350 million of its outstanding common stock. Under the program, we purchased and retired 244,223 shares of our outstanding common stock totaling $60.0 million. This program expired on October 29, 2020.
Preferred Stock
On December 9, 2019, the Company issued depositary shares each representing a 1/40th ownership interest in 350,000 shares of Series A Preferred Stock with $0.001 par value and liquidation preference of $1,000 per share, or $25 per depositary share. The Series A Preferred Stock has no stated maturity and is not subject to any sinking fund or other obligation of SVB Financial Group. Dividends are approved by the Board of Directors and, if declared, are payable quarterly, in arrears, at a rate per annum equal to 5.25 percent.
As of December 31, 2020, there were 350,000 shares issued and outstanding of Series A Preferred Stock, which had a carrying value of $340.1 million and liquidation preference of $350 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company's Board of Directors declared and SVB Financial distributed quarterly cash dividends totaling $17.2 million to Series A Preferred Stock holders.
On February 2, 2021, the Company issued Series B Preferred Stock. Refer to Note 28-“Subsequent Events” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report for additional information.
SVBFG Stockholders’ Equity
SVBFG stockholders’ equity totaled $8.2 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.7 billion, or 27.0 percent compared to $6.5 billion at December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily the result of net income of $1.2 billion in 2020, an increase in accumulated other comprehensive income reflective primarily of a $544.9 million ($393.3 million net of tax) increase in the fair value of our AFS securities portfolio driven by decreases in period-end market interest rates, and $182.0 million ($131.4 million net of tax) of remaining unrealized gains on cash flow hedge.
Funds generated through retained earnings are a significant source of capital and liquidity and are expected to continue to be so in the future.
Capital Ratios
Regulatory capital ratios for SVB Financial and the Bank exceeded minimum federal regulatory guidelines under the current Capital Rules as well as for a well-capitalized bank holding company and insured depository institution, respectively, as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. See Note 23-“Regulatory Matters” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report for further information. Capital ratios for SVB Financial and the Bank, compared to the minimum capital ratios are set forth below:
(1)Percentages represent the minimum capital ratios plus, as applicable, the fully phased-in 2.5% CET1 capital conservation buffer under the Capital Rules.
(2)"Well-Capitalized Minimum" CET 1 risk-based capital and Tier 1 leverage ratios are not formally defined under applicable banking regulations for bank holding companies.
(3)Capital ratios include regulatory capital phase-in of the allowance for credit losses under the 2020 CECL Transition Rule for periods beginning December 31, 2020.
(4)See below for a reconciliation of non-GAAP tangible common equity to tangible assets and tangible common equity to risk-weighted assets.
(5)The FRB has not issued any minimum guidelines for the tangible common equity to tangible assets ratio or the tangible common equity to risk-weighted assets ratio, however, we believe these ratios provide meaningful supplemental information regarding our capital levels and are therefore provided above.
Risk-based capital ratios (CET 1, tier 1, total risk-based capital, and tier 1 leverage) for SVB Financial decreased as of December 31, 2020, compared to the same ratios as of December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of a proportionally higher increase in our risk-weighted assets relative to the increase in capital during 2020. The increase in risk-weighted assets was driven primarily by the increases in our loan and fixed income portfolios during 2020. The increase in average assets was driven by increases in fixed income investments and loan portfolios, as well as cash and cash equivalents reflective of strong deposit growth. The increase in capital was reflective primarily of net income of $1.2 billion.
Risk-based capital ratios (CET 1, tier 1, total risk-based capital, and tier 1 leverage) for Silicon Valley Bank (the "Bank") decreased as of December 31, 2020, compared to the same ratios as of December 31, 2019. The decreases were a result of the proportionally higher increase in our risk-weighted assets and average assets relative to the increase in capital during 2020. The increase in risk-weighted assets and average assets were driven by increases in our loan and fixed income
portfolios, as well as cash and cash equivalents 2020 reflective of strong deposit growth. The increases in capital includes for Silicon valley bank was driven by net income as well as a $700 million downstream capital infusion from our bank holding company.
Regulatory Capital Phase-In under the 2020 CECL Transition Rule
In March 2020, the federal banking agencies issued the 2020 CECL Transition Rule, which provides transitional relief to banking organizations with respect to the impact of CECL on regulatory capital. Under the rule, banking organizations that adopt CECL during the 2020 calendar year, such as SVB Financial and the Bank, may delay the estimated impact of CECL on regulatory capital for two years, followed by a three-year period to phase out the aggregate capital benefit provided during the initial two-year delay. The rule prescribes a methodology for estimating the impact of differences in credit loss allowances reflected under CECL versus under the incurred loss methodology during the five-year transition period. We have elected to use the five-year transition option under the 2020 CECL Transition Rule.
Capital Simplification Rules
In July 2019, the federal banking agencies adopted final rules intended to simplify compliance with capital rules for non-advanced approaches banking organizations (the “Capital Simplification Rules”), such as SVB Financial and the Bank. The Capital Simplification Rules took effect for SVB Financial as of January 1, 2020 and simplify the capital treatment of mortgage servicing assets, certain deferred tax assets, investments in unconsolidated financial institutions and minority interests for banking organizations.
All our reported capital ratios remain above the levels considered to be "well capitalized" under applicable banking regulations.
Non-GAAP Tangible Common Equity to Tangible Assets and Non-GAAP Tangible Common Equity to Risk-weighted Assets
The tangible common equity, or tangible book value, to tangible assets ratio and the tangible common equity to risk-weighted assets ratios are not required by GAAP or applicable bank regulatory requirements. However, we believe these ratios provide meaningful supplemental information regarding our capital levels. Our management uses, and believes that investors benefit from referring to, these ratios in evaluating the adequacy of the Company’s capital levels; however, this financial measure should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for or preferable to, comparable financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. These ratios are calculated by dividing total SVBFG stockholder’s equity, by total period-end assets and risk-weighted assets, after reducing both amounts by acquired intangibles, if any. The manner in which this ratio is calculated varies among companies. Accordingly, our ratio is not necessarily comparable to similar measures of other companies. The following table provides a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures with financial measures defined by GAAP:
SVB Financial's and the Bank's tangible common equity to tangible assets and SVB Financial's risk-weighted assets ratios decreased due to the proportionally higher increases in tangible and risk-weighted assets relative to tangible common equity. The increase in risk-tangible and risk-weighted assets were driven by robust asset growth during 2020 driven by increases in fixed income and loan portfolios. Increased capital was reflective primarily of net income.
The increase in the Bank's tangible common equity to tangible assets ratio was driven by the increase in capital due to the large unrealized gains from the available for sale and securities and unrealized gains on the cash flow hedges during 2020. See "SVBFG Stockholders’ Equity" above for further details on changes to the individual components of our equity balance.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations
In the normal course of business, we use financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk to meet the financing needs of our customers. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit, commercial and standby letters of credit and commitments to invest in venture capital and private equity fund investments. These instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk. Credit risk is defined as the possibility of sustaining a loss because other parties to the financial instrument fail to perform in accordance with the terms of the contract. The actual liquidity needs and the credit risk that we have experienced have historically been lower than the contractual amount of these commitments because a significant portion of these commitments expire without being drawn upon. Refer to the discussion of our off-balance sheet arrangements in Note 21-“Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, Guarantees and Other Commitments” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report.
The following table summarizes our unfunded commercial commitments as of December 31, 2020:
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations to make future payments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Includes time deposits and deposits with no defined maturity, such as noninterest-bearing demand, interest-bearing checking, savings, money market and sweep accounts.
(2)Amounts exclude contractual interest.
Excluded from the tables above are unfunded commitment obligations of $22.1 million to our managed funds of funds and other fund investments for which neither the payment, timing, nor eventual obligation is certain. Subject to applicable regulatory requirements, including the Volcker Rule (see "Business - Supervision and Regulation" under Part I, Item 1 of this report), we make commitments to invest in venture capital and private equity funds, which in turn make investments generally in, or in some cases make loans to, privately-held companies. Commitments to invest in these funds are generally made for a 10-year period from the inception of the fund. Although the limited partnership agreements governing these investments typically do not restrict the general partners from calling 100% of committed capital in one year, it is customary for these funds to generally call most of the capital commitments over 5 to 7 years; however in certain cases, the funds may not call 100% of committed capital over the life of the fund. The actual timing of future cash requirements to fund these commitments is generally dependent upon the investment cycle, overall market conditions, and the nature and type of industry in which the privately held companies operate. Additionally, our consolidated managed funds of funds have $4.3 million of remaining unfunded commitments to venture capital and private equity funds. See Note 8-“Investment Securities" of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report for further disclosure related to non-marketable and other equity securities. Additional discussion of our off-balance sheet arrangements for these fund investments is included in Note 21-“Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, Guarantees and Other Commitments” of the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Liquidity
The objective of liquidity management is to ensure that funds are available in a timely manner to meet our financial obligations, including, as necessary, paying creditors, meeting depositors’ needs, accommodating loan demand and growth, funding investments, repurchasing securities and other operating or capital needs, without incurring undue cost or risk, or causing a disruption to normal operating conditions.
We regularly assess the amount and likelihood of projected funding requirements through a review of factors such as historical deposit volatility and funding patterns, present and forecasted market and economic conditions, individual client funding needs, and existing and planned business activities. Our Asset/Liability Committee (“ALCO”), which is a management committee, provides oversight to the liquidity management process and recommends policy guidelines for the approval of the Finance Committee of our Board of Directors, and courses of action to address our actual and projected liquidity needs. Additionally, we routinely conduct liquidity stress testing as part of our liquidity management practices.
Our deposit base is, and historically has been, our primary source of liquidity. Our deposit levels and cost of deposits may fluctuate from time to time due to a variety of factors, including market conditions, prevailing interest rates, changes in client deposit behaviors, availability of insurance protection, and our offering of deposit products. At December 31, 2020, our period-end total deposit balances increased to $102.0 billion, compared to $61.8 billion at December 31, 2019.
Our liquidity requirements can also be met through the use of our portfolio of liquid assets. Our definition of liquid assets includes cash and cash equivalents in excess of the minimum levels necessary to carry out normal business operations, short-term investment securities maturing within one year, AFS securities eligible and available for financing or pledging purposes with a maturity in excess of one year and anticipated near-term cash flows from investments.
We have certain facilities in place to enable us to access short-term borrowings on a secured and unsecured basis. Our secured facilities include collateral pledged to the FHLB of San Francisco and the discount window at the FRB (using both fixed income securities and loans as collateral). Our unsecured facility consists of our uncommitted federal funds lines. As of December 31, 2020, collateral pledged to the FHLB of San Francisco was comprised primarily of fixed income investment securities and loans and had a carrying value of $6.8 billion, of which $5.8 billion was available to support additional borrowings. As of December 31, 2020, collateral pledged to the discount window at the FRB was comprised of fixed income investment securities and had a carrying value of $0.9 billion, all of which was unused and available to support additional borrowings. Our total unused and available borrowing capacity for our uncommitted federal funds lines totaled $1.9 billion at December 31, 2020. Our total unused and available borrowing capacity under our master repurchase agreements with various financial institutions totaled $4.0 billion at December 31, 2020.
In connection with our participation in the PPP under the CARES Act as discussed, we considered participating in the Federal Reserve’s Paycheck Protection Program Lending Facility ("PPPLF"). The PPPLF was established to allow participating institutions to facilitate lending under the PPP and extends credit to eligible PPP loan originators on a non-recourse basis, taking PPP loans as collateral at face value. Ultimately, we were able to extend credit to PPP borrowers without relying on the PPPLF. Additionally, interim final capital rules issued by federal bank regulatory agencies have neutralized the regulatory capital effects of participating in the PPP, in that loans outstanding are assessed a zero percent risk weight for regulatory capital purposes.
On a stand-alone basis, SVB Financial’s primary liquidity channels include dividends from the Bank, its portfolio of liquid assets, and its ability to raise debt and capital. The ability of the Bank to pay dividends is subject to certain regulations described in “Business-Supervision and Regulation-Restrictions on Dividends” under Part I, Item 1 of this report.
Consolidated Summary of Cash Flows
Below is a summary of our average cash position and statement of cash flows for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively: (For further details, see our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows under "Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" under Part II, Item 8 of this report.)
Average cash and cash equivalents increased to $13.3 billion in 2020, compared to $6.5 billion for 2019. Average deposits increased $20.0 billion which enabled us to grow our average loan portfolio by $7.3 billion in 2020.
Cash provided by operating activities of $1.4 billion in 2020 included net income before noncontrolling interests of $1.3 billion and $200 million from changes in other assets and liabilities, offset by $49 million from changes from adjustments to reconcile to net income to net cash.
Cash used for investing activities of $31.2 billion in 2020 included $19.1 billion of net outflows from our fixed income securities portfolio due to $30.0 billion of purchases, offset by fixed income inflows of $10.9 billion in portfolio cash flows from sales, maturities and paydowns, and $11.9 billion of net outflows from funded loans.
Cash provided by financing activities of $40.7 billion in 2020 was driven primarily by the net increase in deposits of $40.2 billion and $0.5 billion from the issuance of our 3.125% Senior Notes.
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 were $17.7 billion, compared to $6.8 billion at December 31, 2019.
Cash provided by operating activities of $1.2 billion in 2019 included net income before noncontrolling interests of $1.2 billion. These net inflows were offset by $62 million of adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash and $82 million from changes in other assets and liabilities.
Cash used for investing activities of $9.4 billion in 2019 included $4.8 billion of net outflows from the net increase in loans funded and $4.4 billion of net outflows from our fixed income securities portfolio due to $10.4 billion of purchases, offset by fixed income inflows of $6.0 billion of portfolio cash flows from sales, maturities and paydowns.
Cash provided by financing activities of $11.4 billion in 2019 was driven primarily by the net increase in deposits of $12.4 billion and $0.3 billion in proceeds from issuance of preferred stock, partially offset by a $1.0 billion decrease in borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2019 as well as $0.4 billion in cash outflows from the repurchase of our common stock under the Stock Repurchase Program.
Subsequent Events
Potential Fraudulent Client Activity
The Company recently became aware of potentially fraudulent activity conducted by JES Global Capital III, L.P. (“JES”), a client of the Bank, in connection with a loan transaction funded in early February 2021.
We are currently investigating this incident to determine our potential credit exposure, which is currently estimated to be up to $70 million, net of tax, relating to a Global Fund Banking capital call line of credit. We have been advised that a principal of JES was recently arrested, and the matter is pending in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New
York. We are continuing to work with the appropriate law enforcement authorities in connection with this matter and intend to pursue all available sources of recovery and other measures to mitigate the potential loss.
Based on our review of the potentially fraudulent activity, as well as our risk assessment review of the Global Fund Banking loan portfolio conducted in light of the incident, the Company currently believes this incident is an isolated occurrence involving a single business relationship.
This matter (and other updates about the first quarter of 2021) was initially disclosed by the Company in a Current Report on Form 8-K on February 26, 2021. We may be limited in any additional information we can disclose due to the ongoing investigation.