ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Significant components of the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section include:
● Overview. The overview section provides a summary of Six Flags and the principal factors affecting our results of operations.
● Critical Accounting Policies. The critical accounting policies section provides detail with respect to accounting policies that are considered by management to require significant judgment and use of estimates and that could have a significant impact on our financial statements.
● Recent Events. The recent events section provides a brief description of recent developments at the Company.
● Results of Operations. The results of operations section provides an analysis of our results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and a discussion of items affecting the comparability of our financial statements for those years. Please refer to the results of operations section described in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” set forth in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, for our discussion and analysis of our results for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 and a discussion of items affecting the comparability of our financial statements for those years.
● Liquidity, Capital Commitments and Resources. The liquidity, capital commitments and resources section provides a discussion of our cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020, and our outstanding debt and commitments existing as of December 31, 2020.
● Market Risks and Security Analyses. We are principally exposed to market risk related to interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates, which are described in the market risks and security analyses section.
● Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements. This section provides a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements applicable to Six Flags, including a discussion of the impact or potential impact of such standards on our financial statements when applicable.
The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements relating to future events or our future financial performance, which involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. Please see the discussion regarding forward-looking statements included under the caption "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" and "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for a discussion of some of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements.
The following discussion and analysis presents information that we believe is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our consolidated balance sheets and results of operations. This information should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Overview
We are the largest regional theme park operator in the world and the largest operator of waterparks in North America based on the number of parks we operate. Of our 26 regional theme and waterparks, 23 are located in the United States, two parks are located in Mexico and one is located in Montreal, Canada. Our parks are located in geographically diverse markets across North America and generally offer a broad selection of state-of-the-art and traditional thrill rides, water attractions, themed areas, concerts and shows, restaurants, game venues and retail outlets, thereby providing a complete family-oriented entertainment experience. We work continuously to improve our parks and our guests’ experiences and to meet our guests’ evolving needs and preferences.
During 2020, we, like many companies worldwide, experienced a significant negative impact on our business as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In part, our results reflect several strategic adjustments we made in response to the temporary park closures and additional health and safety requirements we experienced in our 2020 operating environment. These adjustments were precipitated by rapid changes in public health requirements and guidelines and reflected our efforts to address the significant operating challenges they presented to protect the safety of our employees and guests. Our revenue is derived from (i) the sale of tickets for entrance to our parks (which accounted for approximately 57% of total revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020, and approximately 55% of total revenue during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018), (ii) the sale of food and beverages, merchandise, games and attractions, parking and other services inside our parks, and (iii) sponsorship, international agreements and accommodations. Revenue from ticket sales and in-park sales are primarily impacted by park attendance and, as anticipated, we sold significantly fewer season passes and memberships while many of our parks remained closed compared to the same period in 2019. As a result, the number of all members and season pass holders, decreased 51% as of the end of the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. We had 1.7 million members, 19% of whom had paused their memberships, and 2.1 million season pass holders as of the end of 2020 compared to 2.6 million members and 5.1 million season pass holders at the end of 2019. Revenues from sponsorship, international agreements and accommodations can be impacted by the term, timing and extent of services and fees under these arrangements, which can result in fluctuations from year to year. During 2020, our earnings from park operations excluding the impact of interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization and any other non-cash income or expenditures (“Park EBITDA”) decreased relative to the prior year, as a result of the temporary suspension of park operations related to the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak and the resulting decrease in attendance related to the reduction in operating days.
Our principal costs of operations include salaries and wages, employee benefits, advertising, third party services, repairs and maintenance, utilities, rent and insurance. A large portion of our expenses is relatively fixed as our costs for full-time employees, maintenance, utilities, rent, advertising and insurance do not vary significantly with attendance.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("U.S. GAAP") requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses earned and incurred during the reporting period. Critical accounting estimates are fundamental to the portrayal of both our financial condition and results of operations and often require difficult, subjective and complex estimates and judgments. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis using historical experience and other factors, including the current economic environment, which we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. We adjust such estimates and assumptions when facts and circumstances dictate. As future events and their effects cannot be determined with precision, actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. Changes in these estimates resulting from the continuing changes in the economic environment will be reflected in the financial statements in future periods. The following discussion addresses the items we have identified as our critical accounting estimates and discusses our review of applicable accounting pronouncements that have been issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”). See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report for further discussion of these and other accounting policies.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
Goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are tested for impairment annually, or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that the assets may not be recoverable. We identify our reporting unit and determine the carrying value of the reporting unit by assigning the assets and liabilities, including the existing goodwill and intangible assets, to the reporting unit. We then determine the fair value of the reporting unit and compare it to the carrying amount of the reporting unit. All of our parks are operated in a similar manner and have comparable characteristics in that they produce and distribute similar services and products using similar processes, have similar types of customers, are subject to similar regulations and exhibit similar economic characteristics. As such, we are a single reporting unit. For each year, the fair value of the single reporting unit exceeded our carrying amount (provided that we have one reporting unit at the same level for which Holdings’ common stock is traded, we believe our market capitalization is the best indicator of our reporting unit’s fair value). We have performed a qualitative analysis on our indefinite-lived intangible assets during the fourth quarter of each year.
The fair value of indefinite-lived intangible assets is generally determined based on a discounted cash flow analysis. An impairment loss occurs to the extent that the carrying value exceeds the fair value. For goodwill, if the fair value of the reporting unit were to be less than the carrying amount, an impairment loss would be recognized to the extent that the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value.
We review long-lived assets, including finite-lived intangible assets subject to amortization, for impairment upon the occurrence of events or changes in circumstances that would indicate that the carrying value of an asset or groups of assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset or group of assets to the future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset or group of assets. If such assets are not considered to be fully recoverable, any impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset or group of assets exceeds its respective fair value. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
Accounting for Income Taxes
As part of the process of preparing consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This process involves us estimating our actual current tax exposure together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items, such as depreciation periods for our property and equipment and recognition of our deferred revenue, for tax and financial accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included in our consolidated balance sheets. We must then assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets (primarily net operating loss carryforwards) will be recovered by way of offset against taxable income. To the extent we believe that recovery is not likely, we must establish a valuation allowance. To the extent we establish a valuation allowance or increase or decrease this allowance in a period, we must reflect such amount as income tax expense or benefit in the consolidated statements of operations.
A high degree of management judgment is required in determining our provision or benefit for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets. Variables that will impact whether our deferred tax assets will be utilized prior to their expiration include, among other things, attendance, spending per capita and other revenues, foreign taxable income, capital expenditures, levels of debt, interest rates, operating expenses, sales of assets, and changes in state or federal tax laws. In determining the valuation allowance, we do not consider, and under generally accepted accounting principles cannot consider, the possible changes in state or federal tax laws until the laws change. To the extent we reduce capital expenditures, our future accelerated tax deductions for our rides and equipment will be reduced, and our interest expense deductions could correspondingly decrease as cash flows that previously would have been utilized for capital expenditures could be utilized to lower our outstanding debt balances. Increases in capital expenditures without corresponding increases in net revenues would reduce short-term taxable income and increase the likelihood of additional valuation allowances being required as net operating loss carryforwards could expire prior to their utilization. Conversely, increases in revenues in excess of operating expenses would reduce the likelihood of additional valuation allowances being required as the short-term taxable income would increase the utilization of net operating loss carryforwards prior to their expiration. We utilize deferred tax assets related to foreign tax credit attributes through foreign-sourced income as well as the recapture of overall domestic loss amounts re-characterized as domestic-source income. See Note 2 and Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report for further discussion.
Revenue Recognition
FASB Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (together with the series of Accounting Standards Updates described in the second paragraph under "Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements" in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report, "Topic 606") is based on the principle that revenue is recognized to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. We recognize revenue upon admission into our parks, provision of our services, or when products are delivered to our guests. Revenue is presented in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations net of sales taxes collected from our guests that are remitted or payable to government taxing authorities. For season passes, memberships in the initial twelve-month term and other multi-use admissions, we estimate a redemption rate based on historical experience and other factors and assumptions we believe to be customary and reasonable and recognize a pro-rata portion of the revenue as the guest attends our parks. Due to COVID-19, we extended the expiration date by one year on our 2020 season pass product, allowed the pause of membership payments and granted additional months to membership contracts post-cancellation equal to the number of closed months at the park where the membership was purchased. For any bundled products with multiple performance obligations, revenue is allocated using the retail price of each distinct performance obligation and products that are not sold on a stand-alone basis are treated as residual. In contrast to our season pass and other multi-use offerings (such as our all season dining pass program, which enables season pass holders and members to eat meals and snacks any day they visit the park for one upfront payment) that expire at the end of each operating season, the membership program continues on a month-to-month basis after the initial twelve-month membership term and can be canceled any time after the initial term pursuant to the terms of the membership program. Guests enrolled in the membership program can visit our parks an unlimited number of times anytime the parks are open as long as the guest remains enrolled in the membership program. We review the estimated redemption rate on an ongoing basis and revise it as necessary throughout the year, including impact of changes to our season pass and memberships described above. Amounts owed or received for multi-use admissions in excess of redemptions are recognized in deferred revenue. For active memberships after the initial twelve-month term, we recognize revenue monthly as payments are received.
Recent Events
COVID-19 Pandemic
We began 2020 by launching a transformation plan to reinvigorate revenue growth in our business, reduce operating expenses, and focus on improving our guests’ experience in the parks. However, the COVID-19 pandemic had significant impacts on our business. As a result, while we remain confident in our long-term strategy, our short-term focus pivoted towards adapting to the operating challenges resulting from the pandemic.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, federal, state and local governments implemented significant restrictions on travel, social conduct and business operations, including mass quarantine and social distancing mandates and orders. On March 13, 2020, we temporarily suspended operations at all of our theme parks and waterparks due to the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2020, 20 of the Company’s 26 parks operated for portions of the season but several of our larger parks could not operate rides. Parks that did operate had capacity and other operating limitations.
We quickly implemented plans to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and ensure the health and safety of our employees and guests. In response to the challenging environment, we focused on the following actions:
● Implementing immediate cost controls by right-sizing marketing and temporarily reducing salaries of all full-time employees by 25%;
● Strengthening liquidity through expansion of our revolving credit facility, suspension of testing of certain maintenance covenants in our credit facility, issuance of senior secured notes and suspension of dividend payments and our stock repurchase program;
● Enhancing financial flexibility by delaying or reducing capital expenses related to new rides and attractions;
● Developing measures to preserve our season pass holders and members;
● Opening parks as quickly as possible, while following governmental and public health guidelines; and
● Creating new sources of revenue by introducing animal and holiday drive-thru experiences at many parks.
We will continue to consider near-term exigencies and the long-term financial health of the business as clear steps are taken to mitigate the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Management and Board Changes
In March 2020, Laura W. Doerre became our Executive Vice President and General Counsel, and in October 2020, she assumed the additional duties of Chief Administrative Officer when Kathy Aslin, the Senior Vice President, Human Resources, resigned. Also in October 2020, Brett Petit, Senior Vice President, Marketing and Sales, resigned. In July 2020, Sandeep Reddy became our Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer. In August 2020, we enhanced the gender and ethnic diversity of Holdings’ board of directors when Esi Eggleston Bracey and Enrique Ramirez Mena joined as directors. In August 2020, Richard Roedel and Kurt Cellar, each a director since 2010, advised us of their intention to retire from Holdings’ board of directors at the end of their current term and that they will not stand for re-election at our 2021 annual meeting of stockholders. In February 2021, Holdings’ board of directors determined that Selim Bassoul would succeed Richard Roedel as Non-Executive Chairman effective immediately, and Nancy Krejsa, a director since 2017, advised us of her intention to retire from Holdings’ board of directors at the end of her current term and that she will not stand for re-election at our 2021 annual meeting of stockholders.
Amendments to Credit Facility
In April 2020, we increased the revolving credit commitments to the Second Amended and Restated Revolving Loan by $131.0 million, from $350.0 million to $481.0 million. In August 2020, we entered into another amendment to the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility that provided us with flexibility under certain financial maintenance covenants and the liquidity covenant, and reduced the commitment fee on the revolving credit facility. In connection
with these amendments to the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility, we agreed to suspend the repurchase of Holdings’ common stock and payment of dividends until the earlier of December 31, 2022, or such time as SFTP reduces the incremental revolving credit commitments by $131 million and begins using actual results to calculate covenant compliance. However, given the present uncertainty associated with the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our business and operations, we may determine that it is prudent to continue suspending the repurchase of Holdings’ common stock and payment of dividends after the restrictions under the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility are terminated depending on any then-existing limitations on our working capital.
2025 Notes Issuance
In April 2020, SFTP issued $725 million in aggregate principal amount of 7.00% senior secured notes in a private offering. The net proceeds from this offering were used to repay the outstanding balance of the Second Amended and Restated Revolving Loan, $315.0 million of the Second Amended and Restated Term Loan B and for general corporate matters and working capital purposes, including expenses relating to the offering.
Fiscal Year Change
Holdings’ Board of Directors determined that it is in the best interests of the Company to change its fiscal year end from December 31 to a 52-53 week fiscal year ending on the Sunday closest to December 31, effective as of the commencement of the Company’s fiscal year on January 1, 2021, to align the Company’s reporting calendar with how the Company operates its business and improve comparability across periods. The Company’s current fiscal year will end on January 2, 2022.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth summary financial information for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 vs. Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, totaled $356.6 million, a 76% decrease compared to $1,487.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was driven primarily by a 79% decrease in attendance due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including as a result of the temporary suspension of operations of our theme parks and waterparks on March 13, 2020, and the limited capacity at our parks that operated during 2020. The decrease in revenue was also attributable to a decrease in sponsorship, international agreements and accommodations revenue, due primarily to the termination of our contracts in China and Dubai, which generated revenue in the comparable prior year period, and reduced revenue from sponsorships and the suspension of nearly all of our accommodations operations due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Total guest spending per capita, which excludes sponsorship, international agreements and accommodations revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased $6.08 to $48.45 compared to the prior period due to a $4.99, or 20%, increase in admissions revenue per capita and a $1.09, or 6%, increase in in-park revenue per capita. The improvement in admissions spending per capita for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to recurring monthly membership revenue from members who retained their memberships on a monthly basis following the initial 12-month commitment period. Higher guest spending per capita by single-day guests also contributed to the increase. The increase in in-park revenue per capita in the year ended December 31, 2020, was due to recurring monthly all season membership products, such as all season dining passes, from members who retained their memberships on a monthly basis following the initial 12-month commitment period and the increase in single-day attendance mix. These increases were partially offset by lower in-park revenue per capita from attendance at our drive-through Safari at our park in Jackson, New Jersey, and animal only experience at our park in Vallejo, California and drive-through Holiday in the Park events at our parks in California, Illinois and Massachusetts, which offered limited in-park spending opportunities.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $218.1 million, or 36%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of fewer operating days and the cost mitigation measures introduced in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including a 25% reduction in full-time salaries and wages for the full-time employees and the elimination of nearly all seasonal labor costs at our parks that remained closed. Salaries for full-time salaried employees at the parks were restored to 100% two weeks prior to their respective park opening date. In December 2020, we reinstated full salaries for almost all remaining employees subject to the reduction. The closure of our parks and reduced operating hours and operating days at our parks that are operating resulted in additional savings in utilities and other costs. These savings were partially offset by the increased costs related to enhanced sanitization and additional preventative measures to help minimize the spread of COVID-19 and an increase in reserves associated with several legal claims.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $51.9 million, or 26%, compared to the same period in the prior year, driven by a reduction in advertising expense and salary, wage and benefit expense, including the reduction in executive officer salaries and the salaries of certain other corporate employees related to the cost reduction measures put in place in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The reductions were partially offset by an increase in stock-based compensation and insurance costs.
Cost of products sold
Costs of products sold for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $96.2 million, or 74%, compared to the same period in the prior year, primarily as a result of reduced sales of food, merchandise and other services due to the temporary suspension of park operations at many of our parks and reduced attendance at our parks that were operating in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Depreciation and amortization expense
Depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased $1.9 million, or 2%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in depreciation and amortization expense is primarily the result of asset additions made in conjunction with our ongoing capital program, partially offset by asset retirements.
Loss on disposal of assets
Loss on disposal of assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $7.7 million due primarily to the write-off of $9.7 million in conjunction with our ongoing Transformation Plan which was partially offset by the sale of assets in conjunction with our ongoing capital plan. Loss on disposal of assets for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $2.2 million which was primarily as a result of write-offs in conjunction with our ongoing capital plan.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net increased $41.4 million, or 37%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of additional interest expense related to the 2025 Notes issued in April 2020 and the de-designation of the June 2019 Swap Agreements and the Modified June 2019 Swap Agreement, which resulted in a $14.9 million reclassification from accumulated other comprehensive loss to interest expense in the consolidated statement of operations for the period ended December 31, 2020. For a more detailed description of our interest rate swap agreements, see Note 7 to the audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report. These increases were partially offset by lower borrowings under the Second Amended and Restated Revolving Loan and the Second Amended and Restated Term Loan B and the interest savings related to the prepayment of $50.5 million of the outstanding 2024 Notes in March 2020.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net increased $22.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of consultant and severance costs related to our transformation plan.
Income tax expense
Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $141.0 million compared to income tax expense of $91.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our consolidated effective tax rate was 27.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 29.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The effective tax rate exceeded the federal statutory rate of 21% due to state and foreign taxes on income as well as valuation allowances. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 exceeded the federal rate due to the state and foreign taxes on income as well as a non-cash valuation allowance recognized on foreign tax credits carryforwards that we estimate will expire unutilized due to changes in estimated future foreign source income related to the termination of our agreements with our partner in China.
Liquidity, Capital Commitments and Resources
General
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash generated from operations, funds from borrowings and existing cash on hand. Our principal uses of cash include the funding of working capital obligations, debt service, investments in parks (including capital projects), common stock dividends, payments to our partners in the Partnership Parks and common stock repurchases.
During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, Holdings paid $22.5 million, $279.0 million and $267.0 million, respectively, in cash dividends on its common stock.
On March 30, 2017, Holdings announced that its Board of Directors approved a new stock repurchase plan that permits Holdings to repurchase an incremental $500 million in shares of Holdings’ common stock (the "March 2017 Stock Repurchase Plan"). As of February 19, 2021, Holdings had repurchased 4,607,000 shares at a cumulative cost of approximately $268.3 million and an average price per share of $58.25 under the March 2017 Stock Repurchase Plan, leaving approximately $231.7 million available for permitted repurchases.
In connection with the amendments to the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility in April and August 2020, we agreed to suspend the repurchase of Holdings’ common stock and payment of dividends until the earlier of December 31, 2022, or such time as SFTP reduces the incremental revolving credit commitments by $131 million and begins using actual results to calculate covenant compliance. However, given the present uncertainty associated with the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our business and operations, we may determine that it is prudent to continue suspending the repurchase of Holdings’ common stock and payment of dividends after the restrictions under the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility are terminated depending on any then-existing limitations on our working capital.
The repurchase of common stock and the payment of cash dividends are reflected in our consolidated financial statements as a reduction of stockholders’ equity.
On June 16, 2016, Holdings issued the 2024 Notes. We used $150.0 million of the proceeds from the issuance of the 2024 Notes to reduce our borrowings under the 2015 Term Loan B. The remaining net proceeds were used for general corporate and working capital purposes, which primarily included repurchases of our common stock.
On April 13, 2017, Holdings issued the 2024 Notes Add-on and the 2027 Notes. A portion of the net proceeds from the issuance of these notes was used to redeem all of the outstanding 2021 Notes (as defined in Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report) and to satisfy and discharge the indenture governing the 2021 Notes, including to pay accrued and unpaid interest to the redemption date and the related redemption premium on the 2021 Notes, and to pay related fees and expenses.
On March 26, 2018, we entered into an amendment to the 2015 Credit Facility (as defined in Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report) that reduced the overall borrowing rate on the 2015 Term Loan B by 25 basis points through a reduction in the applicable margin from LIBOR plus 2.00% to LIBOR plus 1.75%. We capitalized $0.5 million of debt issuance costs directly associated with the amendment.
On April 18, 2018, we entered into an amendment to the 2015 Credit Facility that increased our 2015 Term Loan B borrowings by $39.0 million. We capitalized $0.3 million of debt issuance costs directly associated with the amendment. The proceeds of the additional borrowings were used for general corporate purposes, including repurchases of our common stock.
On April 17, 2019, we amended and restated the 2015 Credit Facility (as previously amended) with a Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility comprised of a $350.0 million revolving credit loan facility and an $800.0 million Tranche B term loan facility. In connection with entering into the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility, we repaid the amounts outstanding on the 2015 Revolving Loan and the outstanding 2015 Term Loan B and we recognized a loss on debt extinguishment of $6.2 million. The remaining proceeds from the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility were used for general corporate purposes, including payment of refinancing fees. We capitalized $8.9 million of debt issuance costs directly associated with the issuance of the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility.
On October 18, 2019, we entered into an amendment to the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility, which reduced the overall borrowing rate on the Second Amended and Restated Term Loan B by 25 basis points by reducing the applicable margin from LIBOR plus 2.00% to LIBOR plus 1.75%. Excluding the cost to execute the transaction, the lower borrowing rate reduced interest expense by approximately $2.0 million annually.
During March of 2020, we prepaid $50.5 million of the outstanding 2024 Notes principal, reducing the outstanding amount to $949.5 million. We recognized a loss on debt extinguishment of $1.0 million. Interest payments of $23.1 million for the 2024 Notes and the 2024 Notes Add-on are due semi-annually on January 31 and July 31 of each year.
On April 15, 2020, we received sufficient consents from the continuing lenders under the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility (the “Credit Agreement Amendment”) substantially concurrently with the closing of the $725 million 2025 Notes discussed below to, among other things, (i) permit the issuance of the 2025 Notes, including specifically, permitting the 2025 Notes to mature inside the Second Amended and Restated Term Loan B, (ii) suspend the testing of the senior secured leverage ratio financial maintenance covenant in the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility through the end of 2020, (iii) re-establish the financial maintenance covenant thereafter (provided that for the first, second, and third quarters in 2021 that such covenant is tested, we will be permitted to use the quarterly Borrower Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA (as defined in the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility) from the second, third and fourth quarters of 2019 in lieu of the actual Borrower Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA for the corresponding quarters of 2020) and (iv) add a minimum liquidity covenant that will apply from the date of the Credit Agreement Amendment through December 31, 2021. The Credit Agreement Amendment became effective on April 22, 2020, after giving effect to the repayment of a portion of the Second Amended and Restated Term Loan B with a portion of the proceeds from the 2025 Notes.
On April 22, 2020, SFTP completed the private sale of $725.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 7.00% senior secured notes due 2025 (the “2025 Notes”). The net proceeds from this offering were used to repay the outstanding balance of the Second Amended and Restated Revolving Loan and $315.0 million of the Second Amended and Restated Term Loan B and for general corporate and working capital purposes, including expenses relating to the offering. In conjunction with the $315.0 million repayment of the Second Amended and Restated Term Loan B, certain of our hedging instruments that were entered into to mitigate the risk of an increase in the LIBOR interest rate and which are discussed in Note 5, Derivative Financial Instruments, were de-designated. Consistent with policy, we hold and issue derivative instruments for risk management purposes only and do not utilize derivative instruments for trading or speculative purposes. Accordingly, in April 2020 we entered into counter-agreements designed to economically offset the impact of the de-designated swap agreements. Interest payments of $25.4 million are due semi-annually on January 1 and July 1 of each year, with the exception of January 1, 2021, which included the interest from April 22, 2020 through July 1, 2020 and totaled $35.1 million.
On August 26, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility which, among other things, (i) extended the previously effectuated suspension of the senior secured leverage ratio financial maintenance covenant in the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility through the end of 2021, (ii) re-established the senior secured leverage ratio financial maintenance covenant thereafter (provided that for each quarter in 2022 (other than the fourth quarter) that the financial maintenance covenant is tested, SFTP will be permitted to use its quarterly Borrower Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA (as defined in the credit agreement governing the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility) from the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2019 in lieu of the actual Borrower Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA for the corresponding quarters of 2021), (iii) reduced the commitment fee on the revolving credit facility, and (iv) extended the minimum liquidity covenant that will apply through December 31, 2022. The extension of the modifications to the financial covenant and other provisions in the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility pursuant to the August 2020 amendment will be in effect from the date of the amendment until the earlier of the delivery of the compliance certificate for the fourth quarter of 2022 and the date on which SFTP, in its sole discretion, elects to calculate its compliance with the financial maintenance covenant by using its actual Borrower Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA instead of the 2019 figures as outlined above. In addition, all of SFTP’s existing incremental revolving credit lenders agreed to extend the incremental $131 million revolving credit commitments to the Second Amended and Restated Revolving Loan by one year to December 31, 2022.
Based on historical and anticipated operating results, we believe cash flows from operations, available cash and amounts available under the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility will be adequate to meet our liquidity needs for at least the next twelve months, including any anticipated requirements for working capital, capital expenditures, scheduled debt service and obligations under arrangements relating to the Partnership Parks. Additionally, we expect to be able to use federal net operating loss carryforwards to reduce our federal income tax liability for several years. For the years 2019 through 2024, we have significant federal net operating loss carryforwards subject to an annual limitation that will offset approximately $32.5 million of taxable income per year. We expect taxable income in excess of the annual limitation in those years will be offset by net operating losses generated during 2020. In accordance with the CARES Act, any net operating loss carryforwards generated in 2020 are not subject to expiration and will carryforward indefinitely.
Our current and future liquidity is greatly dependent upon our operating results, which are driven largely by overall economic conditions as well as the price and perceived quality of the entertainment experience at our parks. Our liquidity could also be adversely affected by a disruption in the availability of credit as well as unfavorable weather; natural disasters; contagious diseases, such as Ebola, Zika, swine flu, COVID-19 or other diseases; accidents or the occurrence of an event or condition at our parks, including terrorist acts or threats inside or outside of our parks; negative publicity; or significant local competitive events, which could significantly reduce paid attendance and revenue related to that attendance at any of our parks. While we work with local police authorities on security-related precautions to prevent certain types of disturbances, we can make no assurance that these precautions will be able to prevent these types of occurrences. However, we believe our ownership of many parks in different geographic locations reduces the effects of adverse weather and these other types of occurrences on our consolidated results. If such an adverse event were to occur, we may be unable to borrow under the Second Amended and Restated Revolving Loan or may be required to repay amounts outstanding under the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility and/or may need to seek additional financing. In addition, we expect we may be required to seek additional financing to refinance all or a significant portion of our existing debt on or prior to maturity. The degree to which we are leveraged could adversely affect our ability to obtain any additional financing. See "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" and "Item 1A. Risk Factors" of this Annual Report.
As of December 31, 2020, our total indebtedness, net of discount and deferred financing costs, was $2,622.6 million which included $942.5 million of the 2024 Notes and 2024 Notes Add-on, $710.1 million of the 2025 Notes, $498.3 million of the 2027 Notes, and $471.7 million outstanding under the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility. Based on (i) non-revolving credit debt outstanding on that date, (ii) anticipated levels of working capital revolving borrowings during 2021 and 2022, (iii) estimated interest rates for floating-rate debt and (iv) the 2024 Notes, the 2025 Notes and the 2027 Notes, we anticipate annual cash interest payments of approximately $156.4 and $146.1 million during 2021 and 2022, respectively. Under the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility, all remaining outstanding principal of the Second Amended and Restated Term Loan B is due and payable on April 17, 2026.
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $157.8 million unrestricted cash and $460.0 million available for borrowing under the Second Amended and Restated Revolving Loan. Our ability to borrow under the Second Amended and Restated Revolving Loan is dependent upon compliance with certain conditions, including a maximum senior secured net leverage maintenance covenant, a minimum liquidity covenant and the absence of any material adverse change in our business or financial condition. If we were to become unable to borrow under the Second Amended and Restated Revolving Loan, and we failed to meet our projected results from operations significantly, we might be unable to pay in full our off-season obligations. A default under the Second Amended and Restated Revolving Loan could permit the lenders under the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility to accelerate the obligations thereunder. The Second Amended and Restated Revolving Loan expires on April 17, 2024. The terms and availability of the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility and other indebtedness are not affected by changes in the ratings issued by rating agencies in respect of our indebtedness. For a more detailed description of our indebtedness, see Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
We plan to strategically reinvest in our properties to improve the guest experience. For more information about our planned capital expenditures, please see “Capital Improvements and Other Initiatives” under Item 1. Business.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $190.9 million, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $410.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The significant decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was due to the decrease in operations during 2020 attributable to our temporary suspension of park operations due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $48.2 million to $90.9 million from $139.1 million, consisting primarily of capital expenditures, net of insurance proceeds, and partially offset by proceeds received from the disposal of assets. The decrease is attributable to the reduction in spending on capital expenditures due to COVID-19. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was $266.7 million and was primarily due to the issuance of the 2025 Notes, partially offset by the $315.0 million repayment of the Second Amended and Restated Term Loan B, the $50.5 million of the outstanding 2024 Notes principal we prepaid in March 2020, and the payment of $22.5 million in cash dividends. Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $143.0 million and was mostly attributable to the payment of $279.0 million in cash dividends and $40.8 million of distributions to noncontrolling interests, offset by net proceeds from entering into the Second Amended and Restated Credit Facility after repayment of the Amended and Restated Credit Facility.
Since our business is both seasonal in nature and involves significant levels of cash transactions, our net operating cash flows are largely driven by attendance and guest spending per capita levels. Most of our cash-based expenses are relatively fixed and do not vary significantly with either attendance or spending per capita assuming that the parks are operational. During 2020, we had significant cash savings due to the suspension of park operations at our properties. These cash-based operating expenses include salaries and wages, employee benefits, advertising, third party services, repairs and maintenance, utilities and insurance.
Partnership Park Obligations
We guarantee certain obligations relating to the Partnership Parks. These obligations include (i) minimum annual distributions (including rent) of approximately $75.2 million in 2021 (subject to cost of living adjustments in subsequent years) to the limited partners in the Partnerships Parks (based on our ownership of units as of December 31, 2020, our share of the distribution will be approximately $33.3 million), (ii) minimum capital expenditures at each of the Partnership Parks during rolling five-year periods, based generally on 6% of the Partnership Park’s revenues, (iii) an annual offer to purchase all outstanding limited partnership units at the Specified Price to the extent tendered by the unit holders, which annual offer must remain open from March 31 through late April of each year, and any limited partnership interest tendered during such time period must be fully paid for no later than May 15th of that year, (iv) making annual ground lease payments, and (v) either (a) purchasing all of the outstanding limited partnership interests in the Partnership Parks through the exercise of a call option upon the earlier of the occurrence of certain specified events and the end of the term of the partnerships that hold the Partnership Parks in 2027 (in the case of Georgia) and 2028 (in the case of Texas), or (b) causing each of the partnerships that hold the Partnership Parks to have no indebtedness and to meet certain other financial tests as of the end of the term of such partnership. See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information.
After payment of the minimum distribution, we are entitled to a management fee equal to 3% of prior year gross revenues and, thereafter, any additional cash will be distributed first to management fee in arrears and then towards the repayment of any interest and principal on intercompany loans. Any additional cash, to the extent available, is distributed 95% to us, in the case of SFOG, and 92.5% to us, in the case of SFOT.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
Set forth below is certain information regarding our debt, lease and purchase obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Payments are shown at principal amount. See Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report for further discussion on long-term debt.
(2) See Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report for further discussion on long-term debt. Amounts shown reflect variable interest rates in effect at December 31, 2020.
(3) Does not give effect to cost of living adjustments. Obligations not denominated in U.S. Dollars have been converted based on the exchange rates existing on December 31, 2020.
(4) Represents obligations as of December 31, 2020 with respect to insurance, inventory, media and advertising commitments, license fees, computer systems and hardware, and new rides and attractions. Of the amount shown for 2021, approximately $35.5 million represents capital items. The amount for the Warner Bros. license fee is an estimate based on the current amount payable under the license agreement, which is subject to periodic adjustments, and is therefore subject to change. Amounts for new rides and attractions are computed as of December 31, 2020 and include estimates of costs needed to complete such improvements that, in certain cases, are not contractually committed at that date. Amounts do not include obligations to employees that cannot be quantified as of December 31, 2020, which are discussed below. Amounts do not include purchase obligations existing at the individual park-level for supplies and other miscellaneous items, none of which are individually material.
Other Obligations
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we made contributions to our defined benefit pension plan of $1.5 million. During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we made contributions to our defined benefit pension plan of $6.0 million. To control increases in costs, our pension plan was "frozen" effective March 31, 2006, pursuant to which most participants (excluding certain union employees whose benefits have subsequently been frozen) no longer continued to earn future pension benefits. Effective February 16, 2009, the remaining participants in the pension plan no longer earned future benefits. See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report for more information on our pension benefit plan.
We are currently assessing making a contribution in 2021 to our pension plan based on our operating results during 2021. We plan to contribute to our 401(k) Plan in 2021, and our estimated expense for employee health insurance for 2021 is $17 million.
We maintain insurance of the type and in amounts that we believe is commercially reasonable and that is available to businesses in our industry. See "Insurance" under "Item 1. Business." Our insurance premiums and retention levels have remained relatively constant during the three-year period ended December 31, 2020. We cannot predict the level of the premiums that we may be required to pay for subsequent insurance coverage, the level of any retention applicable thereto, the level of aggregate coverage available or the availability of coverage for specific risks.
We are party to various legal actions arising in the normal course of business. See "Item 3. Legal Proceedings" of this Annual Report and Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report for information on certain significant litigation.
We may from time to time seek to retire our outstanding debt through cash purchases and/or exchanges for equity securities, in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases or exchanges, if any, will depend on the prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material.
The vast majority of our capital expenditures in 2021 and beyond are expected to be made on a discretionary basis.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“Update 2019-12”), which removes certain exceptions for investments, intraperiod allocations and interim tax calculations and adds guidance to reduce complexity in accounting for income taxes. Update 2019-12 is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The various amendments in Update 2019-12 are applied on a retrospective basis, modified retrospective basis and prospective basis, depending on the amendment. We are in the process of evaluating the impact of this amendment on our consolidated financial statements; however, we do not expect a material impact.
In August 2018, FASB issued ASU 2018-14, Compensation - Retirement Benefits - Defined Benefit Plans - General (Subtopic 715-20): Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Defined Benefit Plans: (“Update 2018-14”), which modifies the disclosure requirements for employers that sponsor defined benefit pension or other post-retirement plans. Update 2018-14 is effective for annual periods beginning after January 1, 2021, with early adoption permitted. Adoption is required to be applied on a retrospective basis to all periods presented. We are in the process of evaluating the impact of this amendment on our consolidated financial statements; however, we do not expect a material impact.
In March 2020, FASB issued ASU 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting (“Update 2020-04”), which provides optional expedients and exceptions for applying U.S. GAAP principles to contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions affected by reference rate reform if certain criteria are met. The amendments in Update 2020-04 apply only to contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions that reference LIBOR or another reference rate expected to be discontinued because of reference rate reform. The expedients and exceptions provided by the amendments do not apply to contract modifications made and hedging relationships entered into or evaluated after December 31, 2022, except for hedging relationships existing as of December 31, 2022, that an entity has elected optional expedients for and that are retained through the end of the hedging relationship. The provisions in Update 2020-04 are effective upon issuance and can be applied prospectively through December 31, 2022. Our adoption of ASU 2020-04 did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.