Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
(Dollar amounts in thousands, except where otherwise noted)
Description of Business
SJW Group is a publicly traded company and is a holding company with four subsidiaries:
SJWC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of SJW Group, is a public utility in the business of providing water service to approximately 231,000 connections that serve a population of approximately one million people in an area comprising approximately 139 square miles in the metropolitan San Jose, California area.
SJWNE LLC is a wholly-owned subsidiary of SJW Group. On October 9, 2019, CTWS became a wholly-owned subsidiary of SJWNE LLC. CTWS is a holding company whose subsidiaries are primarily public utilities providing water service to approximately 139,000 service connections that serve a population of approximately 485,000 people in 81 municipalities with a service area of approximately 269 square miles throughout Connecticut and Maine and 3,000 wastewater connections in Southbury, Connecticut.
SJWTX, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of SJW Group, doing business as Canyon Lake Water Service Company, is a public utility in the business of providing water service to approximately 20,000 connections that serve approximately 59,000 people. CLWSC’s service area comprises more than 247 square miles in Blanco, Comal, Hays and Travis County in the growing region between San Antonio and Austin, Texas. SJWTX, Inc. has a 25% interest in Acequia Water Supply Corporation. Acequia has been determined to be a variable interest entity within the scope of ASC Topic 810 with SJWTX, Inc. as the primary beneficiary. As a result, Acequia has been consolidated with SJWTX, Inc.
SJW Land Company, a wholly owned subsidiary of SJW Group, owns undeveloped land in the states of California and Tennessee, owns and operates commercial buildings in Tennessee and has a 70% limited partnership interest in 444 West Santa Clara Street, L.P. 444 West Santa Clara Street, L.P. has been determined to be a variable interest entity within the scope of ASC Topic 810 with SJW Land Company as the primary beneficiary. As a result, 444 West Santa Clara Street L.P. has been consolidated with SJW Land Company. In 2017, 444 West Santa Clara Street, L.P. sold all of its interests in the commercial building and land the partnership owned and operated and SJW Land Company also sold certain undeveloped land located in San Jose, California. The limited partnership is expected to dissolve in 2021.
Business Strategy for Water Utility Services
SJW Group focuses its business initiatives in three strategic areas:
(1)Regional regulated water utility operations;
(2)Regional non-tariffed water utility related services provided in accordance with the guidelines established by the CPUC in California, PURA in Connecticut, PUCT in Texas, and MPUC in Maine; and
(3)Out-of-region water and utility related services.
Regional Regulated Activities
SJW Group’s regulated utility operation is conducted through SJWC, Connecticut Water, CLWSC and Maine Water. SJW Group plans and applies a diligent and disciplined approach to maintaining and improving its water system infrastructures and also seeks to acquire regulated water systems adjacent to or near its existing service territory. Connecticut Water also provides regulated wastewater services.
The United States water utility industry is largely fragmented and is dominated by municipal-owned water systems. The water industry is regulated, and provides a life-sustaining product. This makes water utilities subject to lower business cycle risks than non-tariffed industries.
Regional Non-tariffed Activities
Operating in accordance with guidelines established by the CPUC, SJWC provides non-tariffed services, such as water system operations, maintenance agreements and antenna site leases under agreements with municipalities and other utilities. CLWSC provides non-tariffed wholesale water service to adjacent utilities and non-tariffed wastewater services. CTWS provides non-tariffed services, such as water system operations and maintenance agreements under agreements with municipalities and other utilities. Additionally, CTWS offers Linebacker, an optional service line protection program offered by CTWS to eligible residential customers through NEWUS in Connecticut and Maine Water in Maine covering the cost of repairs for leaking or broken water service lines which provide drinking water to a customer’s home. For customers who enroll in this program, CTWS will repair or replace a leaking or broken water service line, curb box, curb box cover, meter pit, meter pit cover, meter pit valve plus in-home water main shut off valve before the meter. Additionally, NEWUS offers expanded coverage to
Connecticut Water customers for failure of in-home plumbing, sewer and septic drainage lines and implemented modified terms and conditions with limitations on certain coverages.
SJW Group also seeks appropriate non-tariffed business opportunities that complement its existing operations or that allow it to extend its core competencies beyond existing operations. SJW Group seeks opportunities to fully utilize its capabilities and existing capacity by providing services to other regional water systems, which also will benefit its existing regional customers.
Out-of-Region Opportunities
SJW Group also from time to time pursues opportunities to participate in out-of-region water and utility related services, particularly regulated water businesses. SJW Group evaluates out-of-region and out-of-state opportunities that meet SJW Group’s risk and return profile.
The factors SJW Group considers in evaluating such opportunities include:
•Potential profitability;
•Regulatory environment;
•Additional growth opportunities within the region;
•Water supply, water quality and environmental issues;
•Capital requirements;
•General economic conditions; and
•Synergy potential.
As part of our pursuit of the above three strategic areas, we consider from time to time opportunities to acquire businesses and assets, for example the merger with CTWS in 2019. However, we cannot be certain we will be successful in identifying and consummating any strategic business combination or acquisitions relating to such opportunities. In addition, the execution of our business strategy will expose us to different risks than those associated with the current utility operations. We expect to incur costs in connection with the execution of this strategy and any integration of an acquired business could involve significant costs, the assumption of certain known and unknown liabilities related to the acquired assets, the diversion of management’s time and resources, the potential for a negative impact on SJW Group’s financial position and operating results, entering markets in which SJW Group has no or limited direct prior experience and the potential loss of key employees of any acquired company. Any strategic combination or acquisition we decide to undertake may also impact our ability to finance our business, affect our compliance with regulatory requirements, and impose additional burdens on our operations. Any businesses we acquire may not achieve sales, customer growth and projected profitability that would justify the investment. Any difficulties we encounter in the integration process, including the integration of controls necessary for internal control and financial reporting, could interfere with our operations, reduce our operating margins and adversely affect our internal controls. SJW Group cannot be certain that any transaction will be successful or that it will not materially harm operating results or our financial condition.
Real Estate Services
SJW Group’s real estate investment activity is conducted through SJW Land Company and Chester Realty, Inc. SJW Land Company owns undeveloped land in Tennessee and owns and operates commercial buildings in Tennessee. SJW Land Company also owns a limited partnership interest in 444 West Santa Clara Street, L.P. The partnership owned a commercial building in San Jose, California. In 2017, 444 West Santa Clara Street, L.P. sold all of its interests in the commercial building and land the partnership owned and operated and SJW Land Company sold the undeveloped land located in San Jose, California. The limited partnership is expected to dissolve in 2021. SJW Land Company manages its acquired income producing and other properties until such time a determination is made to reinvest proceeds from sale of such properties. Chester Realty, Inc. owns and operates land and commercial buildings in the State of Connecticut. Chester Realty, Inc. manages its income producing and other properties until such time a determination is made to reinvest proceeds from sale of such properties. SJW Land Company and Chester Realty, Inc.’s real estate investments diversify SJW Group’s asset base.
Critical Accounting Policies
SJW Group has identified accounting policies delineated below as the policies critical to its business operations and the understanding of the results of operations. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and revenues and expenses during the reporting period. SJW Group bases its estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other accounting policies, see Note 1 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.” SJW Group’s critical accounting policies are as follows:
Recognition of Regulatory Assets and Liabilities
Generally accepted accounting principles for water utilities include the recognition of regulatory assets and liabilities as permitted by ASC Topic 980. In accordance with ASC Topic 980, Water Utility Services, to the extent applicable, records deferred costs and credits on the balance sheet as regulatory assets and liabilities when it is probable that these costs and credits will be recognized in the ratemaking process in a period different from when the costs and credits are incurred. Accounting for such costs and credits is based on management’s judgment and prior historical ratemaking practices, and it occurs when management determines that it is probable that these costs and credits will be recognized in the future revenue of Water Utility Services through the ratemaking process. The regulatory assets and liabilities recorded by Water Utility Services primarily relate to the recognition of deferred income taxes for ratemaking versus tax accounting purposes, balancing and memorandum accounts, postretirement pension benefits, medical costs, accrued benefits for vacation and asset retirement obligations that have not been passed through in rates. The company adjusts the related asset and liabilities for these items through its regulatory asset and liability accounts at year-end, except for certain postretirement benefit costs and balancing and memorandum accounts which are adjusted monthly. The disallowance of any asset in future ratemaking, including deferred regulatory assets, would require Water Utility Services to immediately recognize the impact of the costs for financial reporting purposes. In December 2019, CPUC denied SJWC’s request in Advice Letter No. 532 to recover the 2018 balances of WCMA and was ordered to remove the WCMA accounts from the preliminary statement book. As a result of the decision, SJWC wrote off the total 2018 WCMA balance of $9.4 million and $0.6 million recorded in its 2019 WCMA memorandum accounts. (See also Note 1, “Summary of Accounting Principles” in the consolidated financial statements). No other disallowances were recognized during the years ending December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Recognition of Balancing and Memorandum Accounts
Balancing and memorandum accounts are utilized by our California operations. The purpose of a balancing account is to track the under-collection or over-collection associated with expense changes and the revenue authorized by the CPUC to offset those expense changes. Pursuant to Section 792.5 of the California Public Utilities Code, a balancing account must be maintained for expense items for which revenue offsets have been authorized.
Balancing accounts are currently being maintained for the following items: purchased water, purchased power, groundwater extraction charges, pensions, and general rate case and cost of capital true-ups. The amount in the water production balancing accounts varies with the seasonality of the water utility business such that, during the summer months when the demand for water is at its peak, the account tends to reflect an under-collection, while during the winter months when demand for water is relatively lower, the account tends to reflect an over-collection. The pension balancing account is intended to capture the difference between actual pension expense and the amount approved in rates by the CPUC. The general rate case true-up accounts are a result of revenue shortfalls authorized for collection or refund by the CPUC due to delayed rate case and cost of capital decisions.
SJWC also maintains memorandum accounts to track revenue impacts due to catastrophic events, certain unforeseen water quality expenses related to new federal and state water quality standards, energy efficiency, water conservation, water tariffs, and other approved activities or as directed by the CPUC. The Monterey Water Revenue Adjustment Mechanism tracks the difference between the revenue received for actual metered sales through the tiered volumetric rate and the revenue that would have been received with the same actual metered sales if a uniform rate would have been in effect.
Balancing and memorandum accounts are recognized by SJWC when it is probable that future recovery of previously incurred costs or future refunds that are to be credited to customers will occur through the ratemaking process. In addition, in the case of special revenue programs such as the WCMA, SJWC follows the requirements of ASC Topic 980-605-25-“Alternative Revenue Programs” in determining revenue recognition, including the requirement that such revenues will be collected within 24 months of the year-end in which the revenue is recorded. A reserve is recorded for amounts SJW Group estimates will not be collected within the 24-month period. This reserve is based on an estimate of actual usage over the recovery period, offset by applicable drought surcharges. In assessing the probability criteria for balancing and memorandum accounts between general rate cases, SJWC considers evidence that may exist prior to CPUC authorization that would satisfy ASC Topic 980
subtopic 340-25 recognition criteria. Such evidence may include regulatory rules and decisions, past practices, and other facts and circumstances that would indicate that recovery or refund is probable. When such evidence provides sufficient support, the balances are recorded in SJW Group’s financial statements.
It is typical for the CPUC to incorporate any over-collected and/or under-collected balances in balancing or memorandum accounts into customer rates at the time rate decisions are made as part of SJWC’s general rate case proceedings by assessing temporary surcredits and/or surcharges. In the case where SJWC’s balancing or memorandum-type accounts that have been authorized by the CPUC reach certain thresholds or have termination dates, SJWC can request the CPUC to recognize the amounts in customer rates prior to the next regular general rate case proceeding by filing an advice letter.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price paid over the estimated fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the acquisition of a business. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment annually on October 1st or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not, reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. SJW Group first performs a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is necessary to perform the quantitative impairment test. In assessing the qualitative factors, SJW Group considers the impact of these key factors: change in industry and competitive environment, financial performance, macroeconomic conditions, and other relevant Company-specific events. If SJW Group determines that as a result of the qualitative assessment it is more likely than not (> 50% likelihood) that the fair value is less than carrying amount, then a quantitative test is performed. SJW Group’s goodwill is primarily associated with the recent merger with CTWS on October 9, 2019. SJW Group performed an impairment analysis as of October 1, 2020. The qualitative assessment found no indicators of impairment and therefore did not perform the quantitative impairment test. No impairments occurred during 2020, 2019 or 2018.
Business Combinations
SJW Group applies the provisions of ASC Topic 805-“Business Combinations” for the purchase accounting related to the merger with CTWS on October 9, 2019. Topic 805 requires SJW Group to recognize separately from goodwill the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at the acquisition date fair values. Goodwill as of the acquisition date is measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. While SJW Group used our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, our estimates were inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the one year measurement period from the acquisition date, we recorded adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments were recorded to our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income. Accounting for business combinations requires SJW Group to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date, including estimates for intangible assets, contractual obligations assumed and pre-acquisition contingencies. Although SJW Group believes that the assumptions and estimates we make are reasonable and appropriate, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from CTWS’s management and are inherently uncertain. Events and circumstances may occur that may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results. The purchase price allocation process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions with respect to intangible assets. Although SJW Group believes the assumptions and estimates made are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience, market conditions and information obtained from management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain. Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired include, but are not limited to: future expected cash flows from services; historical and expected customer attrition rates and anticipated growth in revenue from acquired customers; the expected use of the acquired assets; and discount rates. SJW Group analyzed and revalued the acquired opening deferred tax asset and liability balances within the measurement period which resulted in a decrease to goodwill of $114. There was no impact associated with the measurement period adjustments to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
SJW Group’s financial condition and results of operations are influenced by a variety of factors including the following:
•Economic utility regulation;
•Infrastructure investment;
•Compliance with environmental, health and safety standards;
•Production expenses;
•Customer growth;
•Water usage per customer;
•Weather conditions, seasonality and sources of water supply; and
•Merger and acquisition activities, if any.
Economic Utility Regulation
Water Utility Services is generally subject to economic regulation by the Regulators overseeing public utilities. Regulatory policies vary from state to state and may change over time. In addition, there may be regulatory lag between the time a capital investment is made, a consumption decrease occurs, or an operating expense increases and when those items are adjusted in utility rates.
SJWC employs a forward-looking test year and has been authorized to use several mechanisms to mitigate risks faced due to regulatory lag and new and changing legislation, policies and regulation. These include memorandum accounts to track revenue impacts due to catastrophic events, certain unforeseen water quality expenses related to new federal and state water quality standards, energy efficiency, water conservation, water tariffs, and other approved activities or as directed by the CPUC. Rate recovery for the balances in these memorandum accounts is generally allowed in a subsequent general rate case. SJWC also maintains balancing accounts to track changes in purchased water, purchased power, groundwater extraction charges and pension costs for later rate recovery.
Regulatory risk is mitigated in California by use of a forward-looking test year which allows the return on and return of utility plant on a forecasted basis as it is placed in service, and in some cases interim rate relief is allowed in the event of regulatory lag.
Pursuant to Connecticut regulations, Connecticut Water employs a historical test year. To address regulatory risk due to regulatory lag and changing legislation policies and regulations, rate cases may be filed as necessary in Connecticut. Additionally, to mitigate regulatory lag for pipeline replacement and conservation related projects, the Connecticut State Legislature has approved WICA that allows for a surcharge to be added to customer bills semi-annually for certain eligible pre-approved projects. Further to mitigate risks from variations in revenues from changes in customer usage, the Connecticut State Legislature has approved a WRA to provide for recovery of the company’s authorized revenues.
Pursuant to Texas regulation, CLWSC employs a historical test year. To address regulatory risk due to regulatory lag and changing legislation policies and regulations, rate cases may be filed as necessary in Texas, provided there is no current rate case outstanding. Further, rate cases may not be filed more frequently than once every 12 months.
Pursuant to Maine regulations, Maine Water employs a historical test year. To address regulatory risk due to regulatory lag and changing legislation policies and regulations, rate cases may be filed as necessary in Maine. Additionally, to mitigate regulatory lag for all infrastructure replacements (except meters), the Maine State Legislature has approved of WISC that allows for a surcharge to be added to customer bills semi-annually for certain pre-approved projects.
Infrastructure Investment
The water utility business is capital-intensive. In 2020 and 2019, company-funded capital improvements were $195,323 and $164,325, respectively, for additions to, or replacements of, property, plant and equipment for our Water Utility Services. We plan to spend approximately $238,800 in 2020 and $1,384,386 over the next five years for capital improvements, subject to CPUC, PURA, PUCT, and MPUC approval. SJW Group funds these expenditures through a variety of sources, including earnings received from operations, debt and equity issuances, and borrowings. SJW Group relies upon lines of credit to fund capital expenditures in the short term and has historically issued long-term debt to refinance our short-term debt. While our ability to obtain financing will continue to be a key risk, we believe that based on our 2020 activities, we will have access to the external funding sources necessary to implement our on-going capital investment programs in the future.
Compliance with Environmental, Health and Safety Standards
Water Utility Services’ operations are subject to water quality and pollution control regulations issued by the EPA and environmental laws and regulations administered by the respective states and local regulatory agencies. Under the federal Safe Drinking Water Act, Water Utility Services is subject to regulation by the EPA of the quality of water it sells and treatment techniques it uses to make the water potable. The EPA promulgates nationally applicable standards, including maximum contaminant levels for drinking water. Water Utility Services has implemented monitoring activities and installed specific water treatment improvements enabling it to comply with existing maximum contaminant levels and plan for compliance with future drinking water regulations. However, the EPA and the respective state agencies have continuing authority to issue additional regulations under the Safe Drinking Water Act. Water Utility Services incur substantial costs associated with compliance with environmental, health and safety and water quality regulation to which our water services are subject.
Environmental, health and safety and water quality regulations are complex and change frequently, and the overall trend has been that they have become more stringent over time. It is possible that new or more stringent environmental standards and water quality regulations could be imposed that will increase Water Utility Services’ water quality compliance costs, hamper Water Utility Services’ available water supplies, and increase future capital expenditures. Future drinking water regulations may require increased monitoring, additional treatment of underground water supplies, fluoridation of all supplies, more stringent performance standards for treatment plants and procedures to further reduce levels of disinfection by-products. In the past, Water Utility Services have generally been able to recover expenses associated with compliance related to environmental, health and safety standards, but future recoveries could be affected by regulatory lag and the corresponding uncertainties surrounding rate recovery.
Production Expenses
Water Utility Services’ operations require significant production inputs which result in substantial production expenses. These expenses include power, which is used to operate pumps and other equipment, purchased water and groundwater extraction charges. For 2020, production expenses accounted for approximately 51% of our total operating expenses. Price increases associated with these production inputs would adversely impact our results of operations until rate relief is granted.
Customer Growth
Customer growth in our water Water Utility Services’ is driven by: (i) organic population growth within our authorized service areas and (ii) the addition of new customers to our regulated customer base by acquiring regulated water systems adjacent to or near our existing service territories. During 2019 and 2018, we had cash outflows of $835,465 and $2,496, respectively, for business acquisitions and water rights which we believe will allow SJW Group to expand our regulated customer base. In 2020, there was no cash outflows for business acquisitions and water rights. Before entering new regulated markets, we evaluate the regulatory environment to ensure that we will have the opportunity to achieve an appropriate rate of return on our investment while maintaining our high standards for quality, reliability and compliance with environmental, health and safety and water quality standards.
Water Usage Per Customer
Fluctuations in customer demand for water could be due to seasonality, restrictions of use, weather or lifestyle choices, all of which could affect Water Utility Services’ results of operations. SJWC residential usage increased 13.3% from 2019 to 2020 and decreased 0.8% from 2018 to 2019. SJWC business usage increased 1.4% and decreased 1.0% from 2019 to 2020 and from 2018 to 2019, respectively. In addition, 2020 residential and business usage was 12.75% higher and 2.57% lower, respectively, than the amount authorized in our 2019-2021 general rate case. Residential usage and business usage in 2019 was 0.4% and 3.94%, respectively, lower than the amount authorized in our 2019-2021 general rate case. CLWSC residential and business usage increased 13.6% from 2019 to 2020 and increased 2.1% from 2018 to 2019. CTWS residential and business usage per cubic feet was 78.86 and 232.43, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020. From the date of merger, October 9, 2019, to December 31, 2019, CTWS residential and business usage per cubic feet was 16.59 and 57.72, respectively. With the availability of the WRA in Connecticut that allows for recovery of authorized revenues, decreases in consumption year to year do not present the same financial risk as had historically been the case.
Weather Conditions, Seasonality and Sources of Water Supply
Our ability to meet the existing and future water demands of our customers depends on an adequate supply of water. Drought, governmental restrictions, overuse of sources of water, the protection of threatened species or habitats or other factors may limit the availability of ground and surface water. Also, customer usage of water is affected by weather conditions, in particular during the warmer months. Our water systems experience higher demand in the summer due to the warmer temperatures and increased usage by customers for outside irrigation of lawns and landscaping. In periods of drought, if customers are encouraged or required to conserve water due to a shortage of supply or restriction of use, revenue tends to be lower. Water use restrictions may be imposed at a regional or state level and may affect our service areas regardless of our readiness to meet unrestricted customer demands. Similarly, in unusually wet periods, water supply tends to be higher and customer demand tends to be lower, again resulting in lower revenues.
SJWC believes that its various sources of water supply, which consists of groundwater from wells, surface water from watershed run-off and diversion, reclaimed water, and purchased imported water, will be sufficient to meet customer demand for 2021. In addition, SJWC actively works with Valley Water to address California’s long-term water supply challenges by continuing to educate customers on responsible water use practices and to conduct long-range water supply planning. Connecticut Water and Maine Water believes that they will be able to meet customer demand for 2021 with their existing water supply which consists of groundwater from wells, surface water in reservoirs and purchased water treated by neighboring water utilities. CLWSC believes that it will be able to meet customer demand for 2021 with their water supply which consists of groundwater from wells and purchased treated and raw water from the GBRA.
Merger and Acquisition Activities
From time to time there may be opportunities to acquire businesses and assets. We cannot be certain we will be successful in identifying and consummating any strategic business combination or acquisitions relating to such opportunities. We expect to incur costs in connection with the execution of this pursuit and any integration of an acquired business could involve significant costs, the assumption of certain known and unknown liabilities related to the acquired assets, the diversion of management’s time and resources, the potential for a negative impact on SJW Group’s financial position and operating results. Any strategic combination or acquisition we decide to undertake may also impact our ability to finance our business, affect our compliance with regulatory requirements, and impose additional burdens on our operations. Any businesses we acquire may not achieve sales, customer growth and projected profitability that would justify the investment. Any difficulties we encounter in the integration process, including the integration of controls necessary for internal control and financial reporting, could interfere with our operations, reduce our operating margins and adversely affect our internal controls. SJW Group cannot be certain that any transaction will be successful or that it will not materially harm operating results or our financial condition.
Results of Operations
Among other things, water sales are seasonal in nature and influenced by weather conditions. The timing of precipitation and climatic conditions can cause seasonal water consumption by customers to vary significantly. Revenue is generally higher in the warm, dry summer months when water usage and sales are greater and lower in the winter months when cooler temperatures and increased rainfall curtail water usage and sales.
See Item 1, “Business” for a discussion of SJW Group’s general business and regulatory activities.
COVID-19 Update
In 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 has had significant impact on the global economy. SJW Group has taken precautions to protect the health and safety of employees, customers and the community while continuing to deliver safe and reliable water service as we are deemed to be an essential service provider. SJW Group’s response to the COVID-19 outbreak continues to evolve and has included: (i) suspending service disconnections for non-payments pursuant to orders from certain state regulators, which will remain for specified durations with the longest extending to June 30, 2021; (ii) waiving reconnection or facilities fees for affected customers and suspending deposit requirements for affected customers who must reconnect to the systems; (iii) the temporary closure of our walk-in customer payment centers where they were provided; (iv) increasing the number of employees telecommuting; and (v) delaying some capital improvement projects at our water utilities. The Regulators have approved regulatory mechanisms to either record a regulatory asset or track in memorandum account for expenses and savings related to COVID-19. SJWC and CLWSC have determined that future recovery of the account is probable and recognized the regulatory assets. Probability criteria has not been met for CTWS. If the Regulators disagrees with our calculation of these accounts, we may be required to make adjustments that could adversely affect our results of operations. SJW Group continues to monitor developments affecting our business, employees and suppliers and will take additional precautions as management believes is necessary. Please see other risks related to COVID-19 under Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
Overview
SJW Group’s consolidated net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $61,515, compared to $23,403 for the same period in 2019. This represents an increase of $38,112 or 163%, from 2019. The increase in net income was primarily due to addition of net income from CTWS and an increase in revenue at SJWC due to increased customer usage, cumulative water rate increases, there were no merger related expenses, and a write -off recorded in the prior year for the 2018 and 2019 Water Conservation Memorandum Account as we determined these costs were no longer probable of recovery. The net increase in revenue was partially offset by an increase in productions expenses at SJWC due to a decrease of available surface water supply and an increase in customer usage, higher depreciation expenses due to assets placed in service in 2019, and an increase in interest on long-term debt due to the debt issued to acquire SJWNE LLC and issuance of SJWC’s Series M Note.
Operating Revenue
Operating revenue by segment was as follows:
Operating Revenue
The change in consolidated operating revenues was due to the following factors:
2020 vs. 2019
The revenue increase consists of $143,909 from Water Utility Services and $135 from Real Estate Services.
The revenue increase for Water Utility Services is primarily due to an increase of $111,183 due to higher customer usage, an increase in authorized rates which resulted in $12,234 of additional revenue and an increase from customer rate credits of $4,964. In addition, a write-off of the 2018 and 2019 Water Conservation Memorandum Account balances was recorded in prior year as we determined these costs were no longer probable of recovery.
2019 vs. 2018
The revenue increase consists of $22,868 from Water Utility Services offset by a decrease of $85 from Real Estate Services.
The revenue increase for Water Utility Services is primarily due to the merger with CTWS which generated an increase of $21,660, an increase in authorized rates which resulted in $13,877 of additional revenue, and an increase of $2,673 due to new customers. These increases were partially offset by a net decrease in revenue recognized from certain balancing and memorandum accounts, which included a decrease of $19,841 in WCMA, partially offset by increases of $6,366 from the Tax Act and $1,349 in the Cost of Capital Memorandum Account.
Water Utility Services’ Operating Revenue and Customer Counts
The following tables present operating revenues and number of customers by customer group of Water Utility Services:
Operating Revenue by Customer Group
Number of Customers
Operating Expense
Operating expense by segment was as follows:
Operating Expense
The change in consolidated operating expenses was due to the following factors:
Sources of Water Supply
SJWC’s water supply consists of groundwater from wells, surface water from watershed run-off and diversion, reclaimed water, and imported water purchased from Valley Water under the terms of a master contract with Valley Water expiring in 2051. Surface water, which is the least expensive water supply, is sourced from SJWC’s 7,000 acre of watershed in the Santa Cruz mountains. Changes and variations in quantities from each of these sources affect the overall mix of the water supply, thereby affecting the cost of the water supply. In addition, the water rates for purchased water and the groundwater extraction charge may be increased by Valley Water at any time. If an increase occurs, then SJWC would file an advice letter with the CPUC seeking authorization to increase revenues to offset the rate increase.
The Connecticut water utility services’ infrastructure consisted of 65 noncontiguous water systems in the State of Connecticut. These systems, in total, consist of approximately 1,800 miles of water main and reservoir storage capacity of 2.4 billion gallons. The safe, dependable yield from our 235 active wells and 18 surface water supplies is approximately 65 million gallons per day. Water sources vary among the individual systems, but overall approximately 80% of the total dependable yield comes from surface water supplies and 20% from wells.
CLWSC’s water supply consists of groundwater from wells and purchased treated and raw water from the GBRA. CLWSC has long-term agreements with the GBRA, which expire in 2037, 2040, 2044 and 2050. The agreements, which are take-or-pay contracts, provide CLWSC with an aggregate of 6,900 acre-feet of water per year from Canyon Lake at prices that may be adjusted periodically by GBRA. CLWSC also has raw water supply agreements with the LCRA and WTPUA expiring in 2059 and 2046, respectively, to provide for 250 acre-feet of water per year from Lake Austin and the Colorado River, respectively, at prices that may be adjusted periodically by the agencies.
Maine Water’s infrastructure consisted of 12 noncontiguous water systems in the State of Maine. These systems, in total, consists of approximately 600 miles of water main and reservoir storage capacity of 7.0 billion gallons. The safe, dependable yield from our 14 active wells and 7 surface water supplies is approximately 120 million gallons per day. Water sources vary among the individual systems, but overall approximately 80% of the total dependable yield comes from surface water supplies and 20% from wells.
The following table presents the sources of water supply for water utility services:
Water production in 2020 for water utility services increased 11,388 million gallons from 2019 primarily due to a full year of CTWS operations in 2020. Water production in 2019 for water utility services increased 2,163 million gallons from 2018. The changes are primarily attributable to changes in consumption by customers and are consistent with the changes in the related water production expenses.
The contract water rates for SJWC are determined by Valley Water. These rates are adjusted periodically and coincide with Valley Water’s fiscal year, which ends on June 30. The contract water rate for Valley Water’s fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 was $4.5, $4.5 and $4.3 per million gallons, respectively. The contractual cost of the groundwater extraction charge for water pumped from the ground basin was $4.2, $4.2 and $3.9 per million gallons for Valley Water’s fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. SJWC’s unaccounted-for water for 2020 and 2019 approximated 6.5% and 7.2%, respectively, as a percentage of production. The unaccounted-for water estimate is based on the results of past experience and the impact of flows through the system, partially offset by SJWC’s main replacements and lost water reduction programs.
Connecticut Water has an agreement with the South Central Connecticut Regional Water Authority (“RWA”) to purchase water from RWA. The agreement was signed in April 2006 and became effective upon the receipt of all regulatory approvals in 2008 and will remain in effect for a minimum of fifty years upon becoming effective. Connecticut Water will pay RWA $75 per year as part of a capacity agreement, for a total of 14 years, starting on the effective date of the agreement. In addition, Connecticut Water is able, but under no obligation, to purchase up to one million gallons of water per day at the then current wholesale rates per the agreement. Connecticut Water has an agreement with The Metropolitan District (“MDC”) to purchase water from MDC to serve the Unionville system. The agreement became effective on October 6, 2000 and has a term of fifty years beginning May 19, 2003, the date the water supply facilities related to the agreement were placed in service. Connecticut Water has agreed to purchase 283 million gallons of water annually from MDC.
Maine Water has an agreement with the Kennebec Water District for potable water service. The agreement has been in place for 20 years and was extended on November 7, 2020 for a new term of up to 20 years. Maine Water guarantees a minimum consumption of 50 million gallons of water annually. Water sales to Maine Water are billed at a wholesale discount of $0.20 per hundred cubic feet of water below KWD's tariffed rates.
CTWS’s unaccounted-for water for the period ending December 31, 2020 was approximately 16.2% as a percentage of total production. The unaccounted-for water estimate is based on the results of past experience and the impact of flows through CTWS’s systems, unadjusted for any required system flushing, partially offset by Water Infrastructure Conservation Adjustment (“WICA”) and Water Infrastructure Surcharge (“WISC”) main replacement programs and lost water reduction initiatives.
The various components of operating expenses are discussed below.
Water production expenses
2020 vs. 2019
Water production expenses increased $33,864 due to an increase in customer usage, $18,992 as a result of decreased availability of California surface water in 2020 compared to 2019, and $588 in higher per unit costs paid for purchased water, groundwater extraction and energy charges, offset by a decrease of $3,421 due to changes in water production balancing and memorandum accounts. Valley Water did not increase the unit price of purchased water and groundwater extraction fees for their fiscal year beginning July 1, 2020.
2019 vs. 2018
Water production expenses increased $12,125 due to higher per unit costs paid for purchased water, groundwater extraction and energy charges, $5,850 due to the new CTWS operations and $1,211 due to changes in water production balancing and memorandum accounts, offset by decreases of $11,348 due to an increase in the use of available surface water in 2019 compared to 2018, and $795 due to a decrease in customer usage. Effective July 2019, Valley Water increased the unit price of purchased water by approximately 6.1% and the groundwater extraction charge by approximately 6.6%.
Administrative and General Expense
Administrative and general expenses include payroll related to administrative and general functions, all employee benefits charged to expense accounts, insurance expenses, legal fees, regulatory utility commissions’ expenses, expenses associated with being a public company, and general corporate expenses.
2020 vs. 2019
Administrative and general expense increased $13,440 in 2020, or 4%, in comparison to 2019. The increase consisted primarily of $17,793 due to CTWS operations, partially offset by a decrease of $4,520 in integration costs related to the merger.
2019 vs. 2018
Administrative and general expense increased $17,368 in 2019, or 5%, in comparison to 2018. The increase consisted primarily of: (1) $7,295 due to the new CTWS operations, (2) $4,860 increase in integration costs related to the merger, (3) $1,539 increase in accounting and legal fees, (4) $1,491 increase in contracted work primarily related to the recycled water retrofit program, social media outreach, accounting services and customer service strategy, (5) $677 increase in salaries and wages, and (6) $605 in cost recoveries other than pension costs through balance and memorandum accounts.
Maintenance Expense
Maintenance expense increased $1,653 in 2020, or less than 1%, in comparison to 2019, and increased $2,091 in 2019, or 1%, in comparison to 2018. The increase in 2020 consisted primarily of $3,639 due to CTWS operations, offset by a decrease of $1,745 in SJWC primarily due to a change in the probability assessment of regulatory recovery of a hydro-turbine generator project. The increase in 2019 consisted primarily of $1,128 increase due to the new CTWS operations.
Property Taxes and Other Non-income Taxes
Property taxes and other non-income taxes for 2020 and 2019 increased $10,818 and $4,093 from prior years, respectively. The increase in 2020 was primarily due to $10,603 in CTWS operations. The increase in 2019 was primarily a result of increased utility plant, and $3,096 due to the new CTWS operations. SJW Group anticipates increases in 2021 for property taxes and other non-income taxes due to increases in utility plant.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $23,687 in 2020, or 6%, in comparison to 2019, and increased $10,991 in 2019, or 4%, in comparison to 2018. The increases were primarily due to increases in utility plant. In addition, the increases in 2020 and 2019 also included $16,380 and $4,903 due to the new CTWS operations, respectively. SJW Group anticipates increases in 2021 for depreciation expense due to increases in utility plant.
Other Income and Expense
The change in other (expense) income in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to an increase in interest on long-term debt as a result of the issuance of SJW Group’s Series 2019A, 2019B, 2019C and 2020 notes. In addition, interest income decreased due to the use of previously invested money market funds for the merger with CTWS. The new CTWS operations generated an increase of $5,144 in expense.
The change in other (expense) income in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to an increase in interest on long-term debt as a result a full year of interest recorded on SJWC’s Series M note and SJW Group’s Series 2019A, 2019B and 2019C notes. In addition, interest income increased due to the invested proceeds from our equity offering in December 2018. The new CTWS operations generated an increase of $2,025 in expense.
SJW Group’s consolidated weighted-average cost of long-term debt, including the mortgages and the amortization of debt issuance costs, was 4.3%, 4.4% and 6.0% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and 2018.
Provision for Income Taxes
Income tax expense for 2020 was $8,380, compared to $8,454 in 2019. The effective consolidated income tax rate was 12% for 2020, 26% for 2019 and 21% for 2018. Income tax expense decreased due to flow- through deductions and absence of the write-off of non-deductible merger costs in 2020. The decrease was mostly offset by an increase due to higher pre-tax income.
Please refer to Note 5, “Income Taxes,” of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation of actual to expected income tax expense.
Other Comprehensive (Loss) Income
The change in other comprehensive income in 2020 and 2019 was primarily due to the change in the benefit obligation for Connecticut Water’s supplemental executive retirement agreements as a result of a change in the discount rate.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Water Utility Services’ business derives the majority of its revenue directly from residential and business customers. Water Utility Services bills the majority of its customers on a bi-monthly basis. Payments from customers are impacted by the general economic conditions in the areas where SJW Group operates. Payment delinquencies are mitigated by service interruptions due to non-payment prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. In California, Governor Gavin Newsom signed an executive order suspending water service disconnections due to non-payment by customers retroactive to March 4, 2020 and until June 30, 2021. In Connecticut, the March 12, 2020, PURA moratorium ruling to halt shutoff for nonpayment expired on October 1, 2020. In Maine, MPUC lifted the moratorium on utility disconnections effective November 1, 2020. PUCT in Texas had ordered on March 13, 2020 public utilities to suspend water service disconnections and late fees charged to customers which expired on June 13, 2020. There is no guarantee that the Regulators will extend or reinstate such orders. As of December 31, 2020, the change in allowance for doubtful accounts was due to adjustments made for the effect of COVID-19 on our customers and from the adoption of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-13, “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments,” and subsequent amendments. Impacts to allowance for doubtful accounts related to COVID-19 were recorded to regulatory assets or tracked by regulatory mechanisms as directed by the Regulators. Write-offs for uncollectible accounts remain less than 1% of total revenue consistent with prior year. Management believes that the accounts receivable aging will continue to deteriorate throughout the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic as long as the moratoriums on water service disconnections and non-payment continue in California.
Funds collected from Water Utility Services’ customers are used to pay for water production expenses, in addition to costs associated with general operations. Funds were also generated from borrowings. In 2020, SJW Group and its subsidiaries obtained $89,000 in funds from new long-term debt. From these amounts, SJW Group funded its 2020 capital expenditure programs and working capital. See Note 4 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for discussion on the debt financing activities of SJW Group. In addition, SJW Group paid cash dividends of approximately $36,509 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The condition of the capital and credit markets or the strength of financial institutions could impact SJW Group’s ability to draw on its lines of credit, issue long-term debt, sell its equity or earn interest income. In addition, government policies, the state of the credit markets and other factors could result in increased interest rates, which would increase SJW Group’s cost of capital. While our ability to obtain financing will continue to be a risk, we believe that based on our 2020 activities, we will have access to the external funding sources necessary to implement our on-going capital investment programs in the future. On October 16, 2019, Standard & Poor’s Ratings Service initiated coverage on SJW Group assigning a company rating of A-, with a stable outlook and affirming its company rating of SJWC of A, with a stable outlook. In addition, on October 14, 2019, S&P affirmed its ratings of CTWS and Connecticut Water of A- with a stable outlook.
In 2020, the common dividends declared and paid on SJW Group’s common stock represented 59% of net income. Dividends have been paid on SJW Group’s and its predecessor’s common stock for 309 consecutive quarters and the annual dividend amount has increased in each of the last 53 years. While historically SJW Group has generally paid dividends equal to approximately 50% to 60% of its net income, SJW Group cannot guarantee that this trend will continue in the future.
Cash Flow from Operations
In 2020, SJW Group generated cash flow from operations of approximately $104,051 compared to $130,005 in 2019 and $91,343 in 2018. Cash flow from operations is primarily generated by net income from revenue producing activities, adjusted for non-cash expenses for depreciation and amortization, deferred income taxes, share-based compensation, allowance for equity funds used during construction, gains on the sale of assets, and other changes in working capital items. Cash flow from operations decreased in 2020 by approximately $25,900. The decrease was primarily due to a combination of the following factors: (1) a decrease in collections of the balancing and memorandum accounts by $45,300, (2) a decrease in collections of
previously billed and accrued receivables by $15,000, (3) a decrease in the other noncurrent assets and noncurrent liabilities of $6,700 primarily from an increase in payments for executive and board deferral for retirees and deferred tax changes, and (4) an up-front payment of $5,000 for renewal of the Cupertino service concession agreement, offset by (5) general working capital and net income, adjusted for non-cash items increase by $46,100. Cash flow from operations increased in 2019 by approximately $38,700. The increase was primarily due to a combination of the following factors: (1) an increase in the collection of the balancing and memorandum accounts of $37,300, (2) an increase in accrued groundwater extraction charges, purchased water and power of $3,600, and (3) general working capital and net income, adjusted for non-cash items increased by $9,700, offset by (4) net collection of taxes receivable which was $11,900 less than in prior year.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
In 2020, SJW Group used approximately $195,300 of cash for Company funded capital expenditures, $17,100 for developer funded capital expenditures, $2,600 in utility plant retirement costs, and $400 for real estate investments related to leasehold improvement additions for the properties located in Knoxville, Tennessee. These uses were offset by cash proceeds of $1,200 from the sale of real estate investments and utility property. In 2019, SJW Group used approximately $164,300 of cash for Company funded capital expenditures, $13,600 for developer funded capital expenditures, $5,000 in utility plant retirement costs, $835,500 for the purchase of CTWS, and $100 for real estate investments related to leasehold improvement additions for the properties located in Knoxville, Tennessee. These uses were offset by cash proceeds of $745 from the sale of real estate investments and utility property.
Water Utility Services budgeted capital expenditures for 2021, excluding capital expenditures financed by customer contributions and advances is as follows:
The 2021 capital expenditures budget is concentrated in main replacements. Included in the distribution system budgeted capital expenditures of $125,012 is approximately $87,670 that is planned to be spent to replace Water Utility Services’ pipes and mains.
Water Utility Services’ capital expenditures are incurred in connection with normal upgrading and expansion of existing facilities and to comply with environmental regulations. Over the next five years, Water Utility Services expects to incur approximately $1,384,386 in capital expenditures. A significant portion of this amount is subject to future approval from the Regulators. Capital expenditures have the effect of increasing utility plant rate base on which Water Utility Services earns a return. Water Utility Services’ actual capital expenditures may vary from projections due to changes in the expected demand for services, weather patterns, actions by governmental agencies and general economic conditions. Total additions to utility plant normally exceed company-financed additions as a result of new facilities construction funded with advances from developers and contributions in aid of construction.
The Water Utility Services’ distribution systems were constructed during the period from the early 1900’s through today. Expenditure levels for renewal and modernization will occur as the components reach the end of their useful lives. In most cases, replacement cost will significantly exceed the original installation cost of the retired assets due to increases in the costs of goods and services and increased regulation.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by approximately $383,400 from the same period in the prior year, primarily as a result of decrease in cash proceeds from long-term debt issued in current year and increase in payments of long-term debt that matured, partially offset by an increase in the amount of net borrowings on our lines of credit, increase in receipts of advances and contributions in aid of construction, and a decrease in debt issuance costs. SJW
Group’s cash management policy includes the issuance of long-term debt to pay down borrowings on our lines of credit. As such, during years when long-term borrowings are high, borrowings on our line of credit tend to be low and when long-term borrowings are low, borrowings on our line of credit tend to be high.
SJW Group, SJW Land Company, SJWTX, Inc., SJWC and CTWS have unsecured bank lines of credit totaling $260,000 as of December 31, 2020. Drawdowns on our lines of credit are restricted by our funded debt not exceeding a percent of total capitalization as defined in our debt covenants. SJW Group expects to periodically draw down on its lines of credit as dictated by our funding needs and subsequently repay such borrowings with cash from operations and issuance of long-term debt or equity. See also “Sources of Capital” below.
Sources of Capital
SJW Group’s regulated operations ability to finance future construction programs and sustain dividend payments depends on its ability to maintain or increase internally generated funds and obtain external financing through the issuance of new long-term debt or issuance of equity. The level of future earnings and the related cash flow from operations is dependent, in large part, on the timing and outcome of regulatory proceedings.
Long-term Financing Arrangements
SJW Group has outstanding $610,000 unsecured senior notes as of December 31, 2020. SJW Group’s 2011 unsecured senior note agreement has terms and conditions that restrict SJW Group from issuing additional funded debt if: (1) the funded consolidated debt would exceed 66-2/3% of total capitalization, and (2) the minimum net worth of SJW Group becomes less than $175,000 plus 30% of Water Utility Services’ cumulative net income, since June 30, 2011. On August 11, 2020, SJW Group entered into a note purchase agreement with the purchasers listed in the agreement, pursuant to which SJW Group sold an aggregate principal amount of $50,000 of its 2.47% Senior Notes, Series 2020, due August 1, 2030. The notes are unsecured obligations of the Company. Interest is payable semi-annually in arrears on February 1st and August 1st of each year. The note purchase agreement contains customary representations and warranties. Under the note purchase agreement, SJW Group is required to comply with certain customary affirmative and negative covenants for as long as the notes are outstanding. The notes are also subject to customary events of default, the occurrence of which may result in all of the notes then outstanding becoming immediately due and payable. SJW Group’s 2019 and 2020 unsecured senior note agreements have terms and conditions that restrict SJW Group from issuing additional funded debt if the funded consolidated debt would exceed 70% of total capitalization. As of December 31, 2020, SJW Group was not restricted from issuing future indebtedness as a result of these terms and conditions.
SJWC’s financing activity is designed to achieve a capital structure consistent with regulatory guidelines of approximately 47% debt and 53% equity. As of December 31, 2020, SJWC’s long-term debt and equity were approximately 46% and 54%, respectively. The average borrowing rate of SJWC’s long-term debt was 5.8% as of December 31, 2020.
SJWC has outstanding $320,000 of unsecured senior notes as of December 31, 2020. The senior note agreements of SJWC generally have terms and conditions that restrict SJWC from issuing additional funded debt if: (1) the funded debt would exceed 66-2/3% of total capitalization, and (2) net income available for interest charges for the trailing 12-calendar-month period would be less than 175% of interest charges. In addition, SJWC has a restricted payment clause which prohibits any payment or distribution, including dividends, if it exceeds the sum of (1) cumulative net income since December 31, 1991, (2) the aggregate net proceeds received from the sale of shares of its capital stock since December 31, 1991, and (3) $20,000. On November 2, 2020, SJWC paid in full its $10,000 Series C senior notes that reached maturity. As of December 31, 2020, SJWC was in compliance with all terms and conditions of these unsecured senior notes.
SJWC also has obligations pursuant to loan agreements with the California Pollution Control Financing Activity (“CPCFA”) supporting $120,000 in aggregate principal amount of CPCFA revenue bonds outstanding as of December 31, 2020. The loan agreements contain affirmative and negative covenants customary for loan agreements relating to revenue bonds, containing, among other things, certain disclosure obligations, the tax exempt status of the interest on the bonds and limitations, and prohibitions on the transfer of projects funded by the loan proceeds and assignment of the loan agreements. As of December 31, 2020, SJWC was in compliance with all such covenants.
CTWS has outstanding term loans with a commercial bank in an aggregate amount of $22,169 as of December 31, 2020. Under the master loan agreement, CTWS is required to comply with certain financial ratio and operational covenants. The most restrictive of these covenants is to maintain a consolidated (CTWS and its subsidiaries) debt to capitalization ratio of not more than 60%. As of December 31, 2020, CTWS was in compliance with all covenants under the master loan agreement.
Connecticut Water has outstanding term loans with a commercial bank in an aggregate amount of $111,090 as of December 31, 2020. Under its master loan agreement, Connecticut Water is required to comply with financial and operational covenants substantially identical to those found in CTWS’ master loan agreement. Connecticut Water is required to maintain a debt to
capitalization ratio of not more than 60% and an interest coverage ratio of no less than 3 to 1. As of December 31, 2020, Connecticut Water was in compliance with all covenants under its master loan agreement.
Connecticut Water has outstanding $44,310 of tax exempt and taxable Water Facilities Revenue Bonds issued through Connecticut Innovations (formerly the Connecticut Development Authority). The bond indentures and loan agreements contain customary affirmative and negative covenants and require compliance with financial and operational covenants, and also provide for the acceleration of the Revenue Bonds upon the occurrence of stated events of default. As of December 31, 2020, Connecticut Water was in compliance with all covenants of the bond indentures and loan agreements.
Connecticut Water has a $70,000 unsecured senior note that has terms and conditions that restrict Connecticut Water from issuing additional debt or paying a dividend to CTWS if such debt or distribution would trigger an event of default. The senior note agreement also requires Connecticut Water to maintain a debt to capitalization ratio of not more than 60% and an interest coverage ratio of no less than 3 to 1. As of December 31, 2020, Connecticut Water was in compliance with all financial ratio and operational covenants under this agreement.
On March 12, 2020, Connecticut Water entered into a note purchase agreement with the purchasers listed in the agreement, pursuant to which Connecticut Water sold on the same date an aggregate principal amount of $35,000 of its 3.51% Senior Notes, due March 12, 2050. The notes are unsecured obligations of Connecticut Water. Interest is payable semi-annually in arrears on March 12th and September 12th of each year. The note purchase agreement contains customary representations and warranties. Under the note purchase agreement, Connecticut Water is required to comply with certain customary affirmative and negative covenants for as long as the notes are outstanding. The notes are also subject to customary events of default, the occurrence of which may result in all of the notes then outstanding becoming immediately due and payable. As of December 31, 2020, Connecticut Water was in compliance with all financial ratio and operational covenants under this agreement.
HVWC division had a term loan with a commercial bank, due in 2034. The loan was secured by real property owned by the HVWC division. The note was paid in full on September 24, 2020.
Avon Water had a mortgage loan that was due in 2033. The note was paid in full on September 24, 2020.
SJWTX, Inc. has an outstanding $15,000 senior note as of December 31, 2020. The senior note agreement has terms and conditions that restrict SJWTX, Inc. from issuing additional funded debt if: (1) the funded debt would exceed 66-2/3% of total capitalization, and (2) net income available for interest charges for the trailing 12-calendar-month period would be less than 175% of interest charges. In addition, SJW Group is a guarantor of SJWTX, Inc.’s senior note which has terms and conditions that restrict SJW Group from issuing additional funded debt if: (1) the funded consolidated debt would exceed 66-2/3% of total capitalization, and (2) the minimum net worth of SJW Group becomes less than $125,000 plus 30% of Water Utility Services’ cumulative net income, since December 31, 2005. As of December 31, 2020, SJWTX, Inc. and SJW Group were not restricted from issuing future indebtedness as a result of these terms and conditions.
Maine Water has outstanding $18,651 of First Mortgage Bonds issued to the Maine Municipal Bond Bank through the State Safe Drinking Water Revolving Loan Fund and $3,600 of First Mortgage Bonds issued to One America as of December 31, 2020. The associated bond indentures and loan agreements contain customary affirmative and negative covenants, including a prohibition on the issuance of indebtedness secured by assets or revenue of Maine Water where the lien is senior to the lien of the bond trustee under the above bonds except as permitted by the bond indentures and related loan and security agreements, a requirement to maintain a debt to capitalization ratio of not more than 65%, an interest coverage ratio of no less than 3 to 1, a dividend restriction where cumulative dividends paid since 1993 can not exceed cumulative net income since 1982 plus $120, required compliance with various financial and operational covenants, and a provision for maturity acceleration upon the occurrence of stated events of default. As of December 31, 2020, Maine Water was in compliance with all covenants in its bond indentures and related loan agreements.
On December 23, 2020, Maine Water issued $4,000 of Series T First Mortgage Bonds to the Maine Municipal Bond Bank through the State Safe Drinking Water Revolving Loan Fund. The Series T bonds mature on October 1, 2041 and carry 1% interest. The Series T First Mortgage Bond covenants are the same as all other First Mortgage Bonds. The proceeds of the Series T bond issuance are represented as restricted cash on the Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2020. The restricted cash will be used for pre-approved projects primarily related to preliminary engineering and design work of a water treatment plant in Maine’s Biddeford and Saco division.
Maine Water has outstanding term loans with a commercial bank in an aggregate amount of $17,500 as of December 31, 2020. Under its master loan agreement, Maine Water is required to comply with financial and operational covenants substantially identical to those found in CTWS and Connecticut Water’s master loan agreements. Maine is required to maintain a debt to capitalization ratio of not more than 60%. As of December 31, 2020, Maine Water was in compliance with all covenant under its master loan agreement.
As of December 31, 2020, SJW Group and its subsidiaries are in compliance with all of their debt covenants.
Short-term Financing Arrangements
All of SJW Group’s and subsidiaries lines of credit contain customary representations, warranties and events of default, as well as certain restrictive covenants customary for facilities of this type, including restrictions on indebtedness, liens, acquisitions and investments, restricted payments, asset sales, and fundamental changes. All of the lines of credit also include certain financial covenants that require the Company to maintain a maximum funded debt to capitalization ratio and a minimum interest coverage ratio.
SJWC maintains a Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as the lender (the “Lender”) dated June 1, 2016. The Credit Agreement provides SJWC with an unsecured credit facility with a letter of credit sublimit of $10,000. Proceeds of borrowings under the Credit Agreement may be used to refinance existing debt, for working capital, and for general corporate purposes. The Credit Agreement has a maturity date of June 1, 2021. On May 11, 2020, SJWC amended its unsecured line of credit to increase the lending commitment by $15,000 from $125,000 to $140,000. In addition, on May 11, 2020, SJWC entered into an additional unsecured line of credit allowing borrowings of up to $50,000 for a six month period which had a zero balance at it’s maturity on November 11, 2020.
SJW Group and SJW Land Company (collectively, the “Borrowers”), had a $15,000 credit agreement with the Lender (the “SJW Group Credit Agreement”), which provided an unsecured credit facility to the Borrowers with a letter of credit sublimit of $5,000. On April 24, 2020, SJW Group terminated the SJW Group Credit Agreement effective April 29, 2020.
In addition, SJW Group, as guarantor, and SJWTX, Inc. (the “Borrower”), entered into a $5,000 credit agreement with the Lender (the “SJWTX Credit Agreement”), which provides an unsecured credit facility to the Borrower with a letter of credit sublimit of $1,000. The SJWTX Credit Agreement matures on June 1, 2021.
CTWS had a $15,000 credit agreement with CoBank, ACB which was scheduled to expire on July 1, 2020. On May 29, 2020, CTWS entered into a Second Amendment to the CTWS’s existing $15,000 credit agreement, dated as of August 6, 2014, with CoBank, ACB (“CoBank”), as amended by the First Amendment, dated October 28, 2015. The Second Amendment amends the prior agreement to, among other things, increase the total commitment by $25,000, from $15,000 to $40,000. The $40,000 line of credit expires on May 15, 2025. CTWS also maintained an additional credit agreement of $95,000 with RBS Citizens, N.A., which was reduced to $75,000 on March 1, 2020, with a final maturity on December 14, 2023. Borrowings under this credit agreement bear interest at the daily LIBOR rate, plus 100 basis points as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, SJW Group and its subsidiaries had unsecured bank lines of credit, allowing aggregate short-term borrowings of up to $260,000. At December 31, 2020, the total amount available under these lines of credits was $84,906. The cost of borrowing on SJW Group’s short-term credit facilities has averaged 1.78% as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, SJW Group and its subsidiaries were in compliance with all covenants on their lines of credit.
CTWS Merger Financing Arrangements
In December 2018, SJW Group received net proceeds of approximately $358,256 from the sale of 6,750,000 shares of common stock in a public offering pursuant to an effective shelf registration and received net proceeds of approximately $53,738 from the sale of an additional 1,012,500 shares of common stock, in each case after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by SJW Group. Prior to the close of the merger with CTWS, the company invested the net offering proceeds in money-market funds.
Funding for SJW Group’s all-cash merger with CTWS which closed on October 9, 2019 was provided through proceeds from the company’s equity offering in December 2018 and the debt financing in October 2019, existing cash balances and cash flow from operations. SJW Group had previously received a financing commitment letter from lenders, including JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., Barclays Bank PLC, Royal Bank of Canada and UBS AG, Stamford Branch to provide a senior unsecured bridge loan facility of up to $975 million in the event that SJW Group was unable to secure other financing for the merger at or prior to the time the merger is completed. Subsequent to the net proceeds received by SJW Group from the public offering of common stock in 2018, the facility commitment was reduced to $563 million. On October 9, 2019, the commitment was terminated in connection with the closing of the merger and no amount was funded under such commitment.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangement/Contractual Obligations
SJW Group has no significant contractual obligations not fully recorded on its Consolidated Balance Sheet or not fully disclosed in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
SJW Group’s contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020 are as follows:
___________________________________
(1) As of December 31, 2020, advances for construction was $125,027 of which $29,117 was related to non-refundable advances for construction and $28,456 was related to advances which are refundable based on service connections made.
In regards to uncertain tax positions, we are unable to predict the timing of tax settlements as tax audits can involve complex issues and the resolution of those issues may span multiple years, particularly if subject to negotiation or litigation. For further discussion on uncertain tax positions, please see Note 5 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.”
SJWC purchases water from Valley Water under terms of a master contract expiring in 2051. Delivery schedules for purchased water are based on a contract year beginning July 1, and are negotiated every three years under terms of the master contract with Valley Water. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, SJWC purchased from Valley Water 21,269 million gallons ($96,212), 21,862 million gallons ($96,285) and 21,345 million gallons ($87,702), respectively, of contract water. On June 22, 2020, Valley Water Board of Directors approved treated water deliveries reflecting the contractual delivery schedule reduced by 10% through June 30, 2021. Based on current prices and estimated deliveries, SJWC is committed to purchase from Valley Water a minimum of 90% of the reduced delivery schedule, or 19,794 million gallons ($89,539) of water at the current contract water rate of $4.5 per million gallons in the year ending December 31, 2020. Additionally, SJWC purchases non-contract water from Valley Water on an “as needed” basis if the water supply is available. The contract water rates for SJWC are determined by Valley Water. These rates are adjusted periodically and coincide with Valley Water’s fiscal year, which ends on June 30. The contract water rate for Valley Water’s fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 was $4.5, $4.5 and $4.3 per million gallons, respectively.
SJWC also pumps water from the local groundwater basin. There are no delivery schedules or contractual obligations associated with the purchase of groundwater. Valley Water determines the groundwater extraction charge and it is applied on a per unit basis. In addition to the Valley Water groundwater extraction charge, SJWC also incurs power costs to pump the groundwater from the basin.
Connecticut Water has an agreement with the South Central Connecticut RWA to purchase water from RWA. The agreement was signed in April 2006 and became effective upon the receipt of all regulatory approvals in 2008 and will remain in effect for a minimum of fifty years upon becoming effective. Connecticut Water will pay RWA seventy-five dollars per year as part of a capacity agreement, for a total of 14 years, starting on the effective date of the agreement. In addition, Connecticut Water has the option, but is under no obligation, to purchase up to one million gallons of water per day at the then current wholesale rates per the agreement ($2.621 per million gallons as of December 31, 2020). Connecticut Water has an agreement with the MDC to purchase water from MDC to serve the Unionville system. The agreement became effective on October 6, 2000 and has a term of fifty years beginning May 19, 2003, the date the water supply facilities related to the agreement were placed in service. Connecticut Water has agreed to purchase 283 million gallons of water annually from MDC. The rate charged by the MDC at December 31, 2020 were $3.97 per hundred cubic feet.
Maine Water has an agreement with the Kennebec Water District for potable water service. The agreement has been in place for 20 years and was extended on November 7, 2020 for a new term of up to 20 years. Maine Water guarantees a minimum consumption of 50 million gallons of water annually.Water sales to Maine Water are billed at a wholesale discount of $0.20 per hundred cubic feet of water below KWD's tariffed rates. The current tariff rate was $1.51 per hundred cubic feet as of December 31, 2020.
CLWSC has long-term contracts with the GBRA. The agreements expire in 2037, 2040, 2044 and 2050. The agreements, which are take-or-pay contracts, provide CLWSC with 6,900 acre-feet per year of water supply from Canyon Lake. The water rate may be adjusted by GBRA at any time, provided GBRA gives CLWSC a 60-day written notice on the proposed adjustment. CLWSC also has raw water supply agreements with the LCRA and WTPUA expiring in 2059 and 2046, respectively, for 250 acre-feet of water per each agreement per year from Lake Austin and the Colorado River, respectively, at prices that may be adjusted periodically by the agencies.
SJWC and CTWS sponsor noncontributory defined benefit pension plans and provide health care and life insurance benefits for retired employees. In 2020, SJWC and CTWS contributed $16,609 and $675 to the pension plan and other postretirement benefit plan, respectively. In 2021, SJWC and CTWS expect to make required and discretionary cash contributions of up to $8,481 to the pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans. The amount of required contributions for years thereafter is not actuarially determinable.
SJWC’s other benefit obligations include employees’ and directors’ postretirement benefits, an Executive Supplemental Retirement Plan, Cash Balance Executive Supplemental Retirement Plan, Special Deferral Election Plan and Deferral Election Program for non-employee directors. Under these benefit plans, SJWC is committed to pay approximately $735 annually to former officers and directors. Future payments may fluctuate depending on the life span of the retirees and as current officers and executives retire.
CTWS’s other benefit obligations include employees’ postretirement benefits, supplemental executive retirement agreements and deferred compensation agreements and plan. Future payments may fluctuate depending on the contribution rates of employees into the deferred compensation plan and the life span of the retirees and as current officers and executives retire. Under these benefit plans, CTWS is committed to pay approximately $842 annually to former officers and directors.
444 West Santa Clara Street, L.P.
SJW Land Company owns a 70% limited partnership interest in 444 West Santa Clara Street, L.P., a real estate limited partnership. A real estate development firm owns the remaining 30% limited partnership interest. A commercial building was constructed on the property of 444 West Santa Clara Street, L.P. and was leased to an international real estate firm and was sold in 2017. SJW Land Company consolidates its limited partnership interest in 444 West Santa Clara Street, L.P. as a variable interest entity within the scope of ASC Topic 810. The limited partnership interest is expected to dissolve in 2021.
Recently Adopted Accounting Policies and New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for a discussion of recently adopted accounting policies and new accounting pronouncements for the year ended December 31, 2020.