Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Churchill Capital Corp II. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Forward Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Recent Developments
Skillsoft Merger Agreement
On October 12, 2020, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Skillsoft Merger Agreement”) by and between us and Skillsoft.
Pursuant to the terms of the Skillsoft Merger Agreement, a business combination between us and Skillsoft will be effected through the merger of Skillsoft with and into the Company, with the Company surviving as the surviving company (the “Skillsoft Merger”). At the effective time of the Skillsoft Merger (the “Effective Time”), (a) each Class A share of Skillsoft, with nominal value of $0.01 per share (“Skillsoft Class A Shares”), outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time, will be automatically canceled and we will issue as consideration therefor (i) such number of shares of our Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Churchill Class A Common Stock”) equal to the Class A First Lien Exchange Ratio (as defined in the Skillsoft Merger Agreement), and (ii) the Company’s Class C common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Churchill Class C Common Stock”), equal to the Class C Exchange Ratio (as defined in the Skillsoft Merger Agreement), and (b) each Class B share of Skillsoft, with nominal value of $0.01 per share (“Skillsoft Class B Shares”), will be automatically canceled and the Company will issue as consideration therefor such number of shares of the Company’s Class A common stock equal to the Per Class B Share Merger Consideration (as defined in the Skillsoft Merger Agreement). Pursuant to the terms of the Skillsoft Merger Agreement, the Company is required to use commercially reasonable efforts to cause the Company Class A Common Stock to be issued in connection with the transactions contemplated by the Skillsoft Merger Agreement (the “Skillsoft Transactions”) to be listed on the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) prior to the closing of the Skillsoft Merger (the “Skillsoft Closing”). Immediately following the Effective Time, the Company will redeem all of the shares of Class C Common Stock issued to the holders of Skillsoft Class A Shares for an aggregate redemption price of (i) $505,000,000 in cash and (ii) indebtedness under the Existing Second Out Credit Agreement (as defined in the Skillsoft Merger Agreement), as amended by the Existing Second Out Credit Agreement Amendment (as defined in the Skillsoft Merger Agreement), in the aggregate principal amount equal to the sum of $20,000,000 to be issued by the Surviving Corporation (as defined in the Skillsoft Merger Agreement) or one of its subsidiaries, in each case, pro rata among the holders of Churchill Class C Common Stock issued in connection with the Skillsoft Merger.
The consummation of the proposed Skillsoft Transactions is subject to the receipt of the requisite approval of (i) the stockholders of Churchill (the “Churchill Stockholder Approval”) and (ii) the shareholders of Skillsoft (the “Skillsoft Shareholder Approval”) and the fulfillment of certain other conditions.
In October 2020, the Company was advanced $2,000,000 for expenses incurred with with Skillsoft Merger. If the planned business combination is not completed, the Company would be required to refund any unused amount. For the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company had utilized the advance in connection with the Skillsoft Merger. As of the date of these financial statements, the advance is no longer refundable.
On January 22, 2021, we entered into an amendment (the “Merger Agreement Amendment”), to which amends and restates in its entirety the definition of “Applicable Majority” in the Skillsoft Merger Agreement. The definition of “Applicable Majority” is used in the Skillsoft Merger Agreement.
Global Knowledge Merger Agreement
Concurrently with its entry into the Skillsoft Merger Agreement, Churchill also entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Global Knowledge Merger Agreement”) by and among Churchill, Magnet Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of Churchill (“Merger Sub”), and Albert DE Holdings Inc., a Delaware corporation owned by investment funds affiliated with Rhône Capital L.L.C.
Pursuant to the Global Knowledge Merger Agreement, Merger Sub will merge with and into Global Knowledge, with Global Knowledge surviving the transaction as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Churchill (the “Global Knowledge Merger”). At the effective time (the “Global Knowledge Effective Time”) of the Global Knowledge Merger, as consideration for the Global Knowledge Merger, 100% of the issued and outstanding equity interests of Global Knowledge will be converted, in the aggregate, into the right to receive warrants, each of which shall entitle the holders thereof to purchase one share of Class A Churchill Common Stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share. The aggregate number of warrants to be received by the equity holders of Global Knowledge as consideration in the Global Knowledge Merger will be 5,000,000. The warrants to be issued to the equity holders of Global Knowledge will be non-redeemable and otherwise substantially similar to the private placement warrants issued to the Churchill Sponsor in connection with Churchill’s initial public offering.
The consummation of the proposed Global Knowledge Merger (the “Global Knowledge Closing”) is subject to the consummation of the Skillsoft Merger, among other conditions contained in the Global Knowledge Merger Agreement.
Restructuring Support Agreement
On October 12, 2020, Global Knowledge entered into a Restructuring Support Agreement (the “Global Knowledge RSA”) with (i) 100% of its lenders under that certain Amended and Restated First Lien Credit and Guaranty Agreement, dated as of January 30, 2015, as amended from time to time, by and among, inter alios, GK Holdings, as borrower, the guarantors from time to time party thereto, the lenders from time to time party thereto and Credit Suisse, acting in its capacity as administrative agent and collateral agent (the “First Lien Credit Agreement,” and the lenders thereto, the “First Lien Lenders”); and (ii) 100% of its lenders under that certain Amended and Restated Second Lien Credit and Guaranty Agreement, dated as of January 30, 2015, as amended from time to time, by and among, inter alios, GK Holdings, as borrower, the guarantors from time to time party thereto, the lenders from time to time party thereto and Wilmington Trust, acting in its capacity as administrative agent and collateral agent (the “Second Lien Credit Agreement,” and there lenders thereto, the “Second Lien Lenders,” together with the First Lien Lenders, the “Secured Lenders”). The Global Knowledge RSA contemplates an out-of-court restructuring (the “Restructuring”) that provides meaningful recoveries, funded by Churchill, to all Secured Lenders. Churchill is a third-party beneficiary of the Global Knowledge RSA with respect to enforcement of certain specific provisions and its explicit rights under the Global Knowledge RSA and not a direct party.
Subscription Agreements
Prosus Subscription Agreement
On October 12, 2020, in connection with the execution of the Skillsoft Merger Agreement, MIH Ventures B.V. (“Prosus”) entered into a subscription agreement (the “Prosus Subscription Agreement”) with Churchill and the Sponsor, pursuant to which Prosus subscribed for 10,000,000 newly-issued shares of Churchill Class A common stock, at a purchase price of $10.00 per share, to be issued at the closing (the “First Step Prosus Investment”), and Churchill granted Prosus a 30-day option (the “Option”) to subscribe for up to the lesser of (i) an additional 40,000,000 newly-issued shares of Churchill Class A common stock, at a purchase price of $10.00 per share or (ii) such additional number of shares that would result in Prosus beneficially owning shares of Class A common stock representing 35% of the issued and outstanding shares of Churchill Class A common stock on a fully-diluted and as-converted basis (excluding any warrants issued to Prosus pursuant to the Prosus Subscription Agreement) immediately following the consummation of the Skillsoft Merger (the “Prosus Maximum Ownership Amount”) (the “Second Step Prosus Investment” and together with the First Step Prosus Investment, the “Prosus PIPE Investment”). On November 10, 2020, Prosus exercised the Option to subscribe for an additional 40,000,000 shares of Churchill Class A common stock in the Second Step Prosus Investment (or such number of shares as may be reduced pursuant to the Prosus Subscription Agreement). Churchill and Prosus also agreed that following the consummation of the Skillsoft Merger, to the extent that following the Prosus Second Step Investment, Prosus beneficially owns less than the Prosus Maximum Ownership Amount, Prosus will have the concurrent right to purchase a number of additional shares of Churchill Class A common stock, at $10.00 per share, that would result in Prosus maintaining beneficial ownership of at least, but no more than, the Prosus Maximum Ownership Amount (the “Prosus Top-Up Right”).
SuRo Subscription Agreement
On October 14, 2020, in connection with the execution of the Skillsoft Merger Agreement, Churchill entered into a subscription agreement with SuRo Capital Corp. (“SuRo”) pursuant to which SuRo subscribed for 1,000,000 newly-issued shares of Churchill Class A common stock, at a purchase price of $10.00 per share, to be issued at the closing of the Merger (the “SuRo Subscription Agreement”). The obligations to consummate the transactions contemplated by the SuRo Subscription Agreement are conditioned upon, among other things, customary closing conditions and the consummation of the Skillsoft Merger.
Lodbrok Subscription Agreement
On October 13, 2020, in connection with the execution of the Global Knowledge Merger Agreement, Churchill entered into a subscription agreement with Lodbrok Capital LLP (“Lodbrok”) pursuant to which Lodbrok subscribed for 2,000,000 newly-issued shares of Churchill Class A common stock, at a purchase price of $10.00 per share, to be issued at the closing of the Global Knowledge Merger (the “Lodbrok Subscription Agreement”). The obligations to consummate the transactions contemplated by the Lodbrok Subscription Agreement are conditioned upon, among other things, customary closing conditions and the consummation of the Global Knowledge Merger.
For more information about the Skillsoft merger, Global Knowledge Merger and other recent developments, please see “Item 1. Business - Recent Developments.”
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target for our Business Combination, and activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of Skillsoft. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net income of $1,124,364, which consists of reimbursement of transaction expenses of $2,000,000, interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $2,516,752 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $1,276 offset by operating costs of $2,906,903, and a provision for income taxes of $486,761.
For the period from April 11, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, we had net income of $4,693,042, which consists of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $6,639,430 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $45,988, offset by formation and operating costs of $744,859, and a provision for income taxes of $1,247,517.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On July 1, 2019, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 69,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $690,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 15,800,000 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $15,800,000.
Following the IPO, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $690,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $34,319,807 in transaction costs, including $12,212,000 of underwriting fees, $21,371,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $736,807 of other costs.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $696,957,196 (including approximately $6,957,000 of interest income and unrealized gains) consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2020, we withdrew $2,246,250 of interest earned on the Trust Account to pay our income taxes and for permitted withdrawals, of which $856,250 was withdrawn during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $720,660. Net income of $1,124,364 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $2,516,752, an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $1,276 and a deferred tax benefit of $8,681. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $681,685 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from April 11, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $2,027,918. Net income of $4,693,042 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $6,639,430, an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $45,988 and a deferred tax provision of $9,657. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $45,199 of cash for operating activities.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $3,873,865. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the initial stockholders or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender.
On November 2, 2020, we entered into a convertible promissory note with the Sponsor pursuant to which the Sponsor agreed to loan us up to an aggregate principal amount of $1,500,000 (the “Convertible Promissory Note”). The Convertible Promissory Note is non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of the date on which we consummate a Business Combination or the date that the winding up of the Company is effective. If we do not consummate a Business Combination, we may use a portion of any funds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Promissory Note; however, no proceeds from the Trust Account may be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of the Convertible Promissory Note may be converted into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the Sponsor. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance under the Convertible Promissory Note amounted to an aggregate of $1,500,000.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $20,000 for office space, administrative and support services to the Company. We began incurring these fees on June 26, 2019 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $21,371,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be waived by the underwriters in the event that we do not complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. On July 1, 2019, the underwriters agreed to waive the upfront and deferred underwriting discount on 7,940,000 units, resulting in a reduction of the upfront and deferred underwriting discount of $1,588,000 and $2,779,000, respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A redeemable common stock outstanding for the period. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net loss less income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of shares of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.