ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on July 8, 2020, for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On December 8, 2020, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among us, Merger Sub I, Merger Sub II, LCP Edge Intermediate, Inc., indirect parent of Edge Systems LLC d/b/a The HydraFacial Company (“HydraFacial”), and LCP Edge Holdco, LLC (“LCP” and, in its capacity as the stockholders’ representative, the “Stockholders’ Representative”), which provides for, among other things: (i) the merger of Merger Sub I with and into HydraFacial, with HydraFacial continuing as the surviving corporation (the “First Merger”); and (ii) immediately following the First Merger and as part of the same overall transaction as the First Merger, the merger of HydraFacial with and into Merger Sub II, with Merger Sub II continuing as the surviving entity (the “Second Merger” and, together with the First Merger, the “Mergers”). The transactions set forth in the Merger Agreement, including the Mergers, will constitute a “Business Combination”.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the aggregate merger consideration payable to the stockholders of HydraFacial will be paid in a combination of stock and cash equal to $975,000,000, subject to adjustments, (the “Merger Consideration”). The cash consideration will be an amount equal to our cash and cash equivalents as of the Closing (including proceeds in connection with the Private Placement and the funds in our Trust Account), minus HydraFacial’s outstanding indebtedness at the closing, minus transaction expenses of HydraFacial and the Company, minus $100,000,000. However, cash consideration, together with certain contractual fee payments, will be subject to a maximum of 60% of the aggregate Merger Consideration. The remainder of the Merger Consideration will be paid in a number of shares of our newly issued Class A common stock (“Company Common Stock”) valued at $10.00 per share. In addition, we will pay off, or cause to be paid off, on behalf of HydraFacial and in connection with the Closing, HydraFacial’s outstanding indebtedness under its existing credit facilities.
In addition to the consideration to be paid at the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement (the “Closing”), the stockholders of HydraFacial may be entitled to receive contingent consideration from us of up to $75,000,000, payable in shares of Company Common Stock, based upon revenues of certain identified acquisition targets if such acquisitions are consummated within one year of the Closing.
The Business Combination will be consummated subject to the deliverables and provisions as further described in the Merger Agreement.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, described below, and, after our IPO, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from July 8, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $1,111,338, which consisted of operating costs of $1,209,550, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $90,128 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $8,084.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On October 2, 2020, we consummated the IPO of 46,000,000 Units, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option of 6,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $460,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 9,333,333 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $14,000,000.
Following the IPO, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $460,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $25,777,859 in transaction costs, including $9,200,000 of underwriting fees, $16,100,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $477,859 of other costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $1,094,016. Net loss of $1,111,338 was offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $90,128 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities of $8,804. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $115,534 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $460,098,212. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $3,265,075 of cash held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of our directors and officers may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay affiliate of our Chief Executive Officer a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, administrative and support services. We began incurring these fees on September 30, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $16,100,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be waived by the underwriter in the event that the Company does not complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per share for common shares subject to possible redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per share. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted, for Common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the proportionate share of income or loss on marketable securities held by the Trust Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of Common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding since original issuance.
Net loss per share, basic and diluted, for non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the net income (loss), adjusted for income or loss on marketable securities attributable to Class A common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period.
Non-redeemable common stock includes Founder Shares and non-redeemable Class A shares as these shares do not have any redemption features. Non-redeemable common stock participates in the income or loss on marketable securities based on Class A non-redeemable share’s proportionate interest.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.