ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of Skillz Inc. (for purposes of this section, “Skillz,” “we,” “us” and “our”) should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors”. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Overview
We operate a marketplace that connects the world through competition, serving both developers and users. Our platform enables fair, fun and competitive gaming experiences and the trust we foster with users is the foundation upon which our community is built. We believe our marketplace benefits from a powerful network effect: compelling content attracts users to our platform, while the increasing size of our audience attracts more developers to create new interactive experiences on our platform.
Skillz was founded in 2012 by Andrew Paradise and Casey Chafkin with the vision to make eSports accessible to everyone possible. Today, the platform has 2.4 million MAUs and hosts an average of over 5 million daily tournaments, including 1.4 million paid entry daily tournaments, offering over $100 million in prizes each month. As of December 31, 2020, we had over 9,000 registered game developers on our platform that have launched a game integration. For the year ended December 31, 2020, Solitaire Cube, 21 Blitz and Blackout Bingo accounted for 79% of our revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2019,
Solitaire Cube and 21 Blitz (each developed by Tether) together with Blackout Bingo (developed by Big Run) accounted for 72% of revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2020, Tether and Big Run accounted for 59% and 28%, respectively, of our revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2019, Tether and Big Run accounted for 83% and 0.1%, respectively, of our revenue. Our top titles rotate over time as more games have generated success on the Skillz platform. In 2020, the number of games that generated over $1 million of annualized GMV has grown 57% from 23 to 36.
Our culture is built upon a set of values established by our founders, aligning the company and its employees in a common vision. Our seven values are: Honor; Mission; Collaboration; Productivity; Willingness; Frugality; and Balance. Our approach has focused on trust and fairness for users enabling game developers to focus on what they do best: build great content.
Our technology capabilities are industry-leading and provide the tools necessary for developers to compete with the largest and most sophisticated mobile game developers in the world. Our easy-to-integrate software development kit (“SDK”) and developer console allow our developers to monitor, integrate and update their games seamlessly over the air. We ingest and analyze over 300 data points from each game play session, enhancing our data-driven algorithms and LiveOps systems. Moreover, we have developed a robust platform enabling fun, fair and meaningful competitive gameplay.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we served 2.6 million and 1.6 million monthly active users (“MAUs”), respectively, and had monthly average revenue per user (“ARPU”) of $7.49 and $6.30, respectively. We monitor the conversion of users to paying users based on the ratio of Paying MAU to MAU. For each of fiscal years 2020 and 2019, our Paying MAU to MAU ratio was 13% and 10%, respectively and our Paying MAU was 0.3 million and 0.2 million, respectively and our monthly average revenue per paying user (“ARPPU”) was $58 and $62, respectively. We see a substantial opportunity for our developers to expand beyond casual content into other genres of interactive entertainment, from first-person shooters to racing games. In 2020 and 2019, we generated less than 10% of our revenues from users outside of North America, leaving us with several large untapped international markets. We see a significant opportunity to build partnerships with brands to sponsor tournaments on our platform to both increase our brand awareness and achieve improvements in profitability through advertiser sponsored prizes.
Our Financial Model
Skillz’s financial model aligns the interests of gamers and developers, driving value for our stockholders. By monetizing through competition, our system eliminates friction that exists in traditional monetization models between the developer and the gamer. The more gamers enjoy our platform the longer they play, creating more value for Skillz and our developers. By generating higher player to payor conversion, retention and engagement, we are able to monetize users at more than five times higher what our developers would generate through advertisements or in-game purchases.
Our platform allows users to participate in fair competition, while rewarding developers who create games that keep players engaged. We generate revenue by receiving a percentage of player entry fees in paid contests, after deducting end-user prize money (i.e. winnings from the Competitions), end-user incentives accounted for as reduction of revenue and the profit share paid to developers (the “Take Rate”). GMV represents entry fees that may be paid using cash deposits, prior cash winnings that have not been withdrawn, and end-user incentives. Cash deposits represented approximately 11% of total entry fees for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Prior cash winnings that have not been withdrawn represented approximately 82% of total entry fees for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. End-user incentives represented approximately 7% of total entry fees for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Our model has allowed us to grow users, developers and revenue steadily while driving meaningful operating leverage.
The following are key elements of our financial model:
•The scale, growth and engagement of the users - As we continue to acquire users, our ability to match comparable players, on both skill level and tournament template, in a fair and timely manner improves. Better matching leads to stronger engagement and the ability to create larger tournaments with more profitable take rates. This creates a stickier, more engaging, and continuously improving experience for our players, which in turn attracts more players to our platform, creating a positively reinforcing cycle leading to ever-improving gaming experiences. In the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we estimate that paying users spent an average of 60 and 62 minutes per day in game play on our platform1.
1 Based on the average number of tournament entries per day multiplied by 4 minutes per tournament. Skillz tracks the number of games that end users play but does not monitor end user playing time on its platform, and this estimate is based on the time allowed to complete a tournament in the top three games for paying users featured on our platform. Accordingly, the actual time paying users spend per day on the platform may be less than such estimate.
•The scale, growth and partnership of our developers - We have created a platform that drives economic success for our developers. Our end-to-end platform allows developers to focus on creating games by automating and optimizing integral parts of their businesses - from user acquisition and monetization to game optimization. Our built-in payments, analytics, customer support, and live operations platform enables our developers to consistently learn, grow, earn and share in our success.
•Product-first philosophy and data science capabilities - We have built a culture that puts product first, driving our impact with users and developers and then scaling marketing investment. In 2020, 46% of our salary costs were spent on product development. Our easy-to-integrate SDK contains over 200 features in a 15-MB package which allows for over-the-air upgrades. Our intuitive Developer Console dashboard enables our developers to rapidly integrate and monitor the performance of their games. Our LiveOps system enables us to manage and optimize the user experience across the thousands of games on our platform.
We collect over 300 data points during each gameplay session to feed our big data assets which augment all elements of our platform. Our key data science technologies drive our player rating and matching, anti-cheat and anti-fraud, and user experience personalization engine.
•Our unit economics - Our proprietary and highly scalable software platform produces revenue at a low direct cost, contributing to our gross margins. Once acquired, each user cohort contributes predictably to revenue over its life. A cohort is all the users acquired in the period presented. A user is considered part of a cohort based on the first time they make a deposit and enter a paid tournament. Once a user is considered part of a cohort, they are always counted in that cohort.
For example, our 2016 cohort contributed $6.0 million in revenue in the first year, $5.5 million in the second year, $5.5 million in the third year, $6.6 million in the fourth year, and $7.2 million in the fifth year. Our 2017 cohort contributed $9.9 million in revenue in the first year, $10.3 million in the second year. $9.6 million in the third year and $9.5 million in the fourth year. Our 2018 cohort contributed $33.2 million in revenue in the first year, $36.1 million in the second year, and $31.5 million in the third year. Our 2019 cohort contributed $65.2 million in revenue in the first year and $64.3 million in the second year. Our 2020 cohort contributed $115.8 million in revenue in the first year.
We also complement these stable cohort dynamics with disciplined user acquisition spending. We currently expect that the average Three-Year Lifetime Value of our 2018, 2019 and 2020 cohorts will be 3.8x our total user acquisition costs (and after taking into account the end-user incentives recorded and expected to be recorded in sales and marketing expense is expected to be 2.5x).
Key Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Skillz provides a service to the game developers aimed at improving the monetization of their game content. The monetization service provided by Skillz allows developers to offer multi-player competition to their end-users which increases end-user retention and engagement.
By utilizing the Skillz monetization services, game developers can enhance the player experience by enabling them to compete in head-to-head matches, live tournaments, leagues, and charity tournaments and increase player retention through referral bonus programs, loyalty perks, on-system achievements and rewarding them with prizes, including bonus cash prizes, a promotional incentive that cannot be withdrawn and can only be used by end-users to enter into paid entry fee contests (“Bonus Cash”). Skillz provides developers with a SDK that they can download and integrate with their existing games. The SDK serves as a data interface between Skillz and the game developers that enables Skillz to provide monetization services to the developer. Specifically, these monetization services include end-user registration services, player matching, fraud and fair play monitoring, and billing and settlement services. The SDK and Skillz monetization services provide the following key benefits to the developers:
•Streamlined game and tournament management allowing players to register with the developer to compete in games for prizes while earning Skillz loyalty perks;
•Fair play in each tournament via the Skillz suite of fairness tools, including skill-based player matching and fraud monitoring;
•Improved end-user retention by rewarding the most loyal players with prizes and tickets (“Ticketz”) which can be redeemed in the Skillz virtual store. Ticketz are earned in every match and can be redeemed for prizes or credits to be used towards future paid entry fee tournaments;
•Marketing campaigns through main-stream online advertising networks and social media platforms to drive end-user traffic to developers’ games within the Skillz ecosystem;
•Systematic calls to end-user action via push notifications to users with game results, promotional offers, and time-sensitive actions; and
•Process end-user payments, billings and settlements on behalf of the developer to enable players to connect their preferred payment method to deposit and enter into the game developers’ multi-player competitions for cash prizes.
Generally, end-users are required to deposit funds into their Skillz account in order to be eligible to participate in games for prizes. As part of its monetization services, Skillz is responsible for processing all end-user payments, billings and settlements on behalf of the game developer, such that the game developer does not have to collect directly from or make payments directly to the end-users. When the end-users enter into cash games, the end-users pay an entry fee using cash deposits, prior cash winnings in the end-users’ accounts that have not been withdrawn, and end-user incentives (specifically Bonus Cash). Skillz recognizes revenue related to each game regardless of how entry fees are paid. Skillz is responsible for distributing the prize money to the winner on behalf of the game developer. Skillz typically withholds 16% - 20% of the total entry fees when distributing the prize money as a commission. That commission is shared between Skillz and the game developers; however, the game developers’ share is calculated solely based upon entry fees paid by net cash deposits received from end-users, adjusted for certain costs incurred by Skillz to provide monetization services.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenue
Our cost of revenue consists of variable costs. These include mainly (i) payment processing fees, (ii) customer support costs, (iii) direct software costs, (iv) amortization of internal use software and (v) server costs.
We incur payment processing costs on user deposits. We also incur costs directly related to servicing end-user support tickets on behalf of the game developer that are logged by users directly within the Skillz SDK. These support costs include an allocation of the facilities expense, such as rent, maintenance and utilities costs according to headcount, needed to service these tickets. We use a third party as our cloud computing service; we incur server and software costs as a direct result of running our SDK in our developers’ games.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of software development costs, comprised mainly of product and platform development, server and software costs that support research and development activities, and to a lesser extent, allocation of rent, maintenance and utilities costs according to headcount. Personnel related expenses consist of salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation. We expect research and development expenses will fluctuate both in terms of absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue in the future.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of direct advertising costs and end-user incentives that are not recorded as a reduction of revenue. Sales and marketing also includes allocations of rent, maintenance and utilities costs according to headcount. Personnel related expenses consist of salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation. We expect sales and marketing expenses will fluctuate both in terms of absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue in the future.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel-related expenses for our corporate, executive, finance, and other administrative functions, expenses for outside professional services, and allocation of rent, maintenance and utilities costs according to headcount. Personnel related expenses consist of salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we scale headcount with the growth of our business, and as a result of operating as a public company, including compliance with the rules and regulations of
the SEC, legal, audit, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities, and other administrative and professional services.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth a summary of our results of operations for the periods indicated.
Revenue
2020 Compared to 2019
Revenue increased by $110.2 million, or 92%, to $230.1 million in 2020 from $119.9 million in 2019. The increase was attributable primarily to an increase in paying MAUs, driven by sales and marketing investment to acquire new paying users. ARPU increased 19% over the same period.
2019 Compared to 2018
Revenue increased by $69.1 million, or 136%, to $119.9 million in 2019 from $50.8 million in 2018. The increase was attributable primarily to an increase in paying MAUs, driven by sales and marketing investment to acquire new paying users. ARPU increased 7% over the same period.
Cost of Revenue
2020 Compared to 2019
Cost of revenue increased by $6.6 million, or 115%, to $12.3 million in 2020 from $5.7 million in 2019, growing in line with revenue. The increase in cost of revenue was primarily driven by payment processing and software costs. Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue remained flat at 5% in 2020 and 2019.
2019 Compared to 2018
Cost of revenue increased by $3.6 million, or 171%, to $5.7 million in 2019 from $2.1 million in 2018, growing in line with revenue. The increase in cost of revenue was primarily driven by payment processing and software costs. Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue increased one percentage point to 5% in 2019 from 4% in 2018.
Research and Development
2020 Compared to 2019
Research and development costs increased by $12.0 million, or 107%, to $23.2 million in 2020 from $11.2 million in 2019. The increase was primarily driven by a $11.3 million increase in research and development headcount cost, of which $5.9 million was related to stock based compensation, a $1.7 million increase in server and software costs, and a $0.5 million increase in allocation of related overhead costs, partially offset by a $1.4 million increase in capitalized internal-use software development costs, as certain projects entered the application development stage. Research and development expenses accounted for 10% of revenues in 2020 compared to 9% in 2019.
2019 Compared to 2018
Research and development expenses increased by $3.7 million, or 49%, to $11.2 million in 2019 from $7.5 million in 2018. The increase was driven by a $3.4 million increase in research and development headcount costs and a $1.6 million increase in the allocation of related overhead costs, partially offset by a $1.3 million increase in capitalized internal-use software development costs, as certain projects entered the application development stage. Research and development expenses accounted for 9% of revenues in 2019 compared to 15% in 2018.
Sales and Marketing
2020 Compared to 2019
Sales and marketing costs increased by $140.6 million, or 126%, to $251.9 million in 2020 from $111.4 million in 2019. The increase was attributable primarily to a 160% increase in spend to acquire new paying users and a 97% increase in engagement marketing spend. User acquisition marketing costs were $136.6 million and $52.5 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. This increase reflects higher digital advertising costs that resulted in an increase in our acquisition cost per user in 2020 compared to 2019. Engagement marketing costs were $99.8 million and $50.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Engagement marketing as a percentage of revenue increased to 43% in 2020 from 42% in 2019. This increase reflects investment in marketing programs that resulted in an increase in our engagement marketing cost per user in 2020 compared to 2019.
2019 Compared to 2018
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $59.7 million, or 115%, to $111.4 million in 2019 from $51.7 million in 2018. The increase was attributable primarily to a 113% increase in spend to acquire new paying users and 145% increase in engagement marketing spend. User acquisition marketing costs were $52.5 million and $24.2 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively. Engagement marketing costs were $50.7 million and $20.7 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively. Engagement marketing as a percentage of revenue increased to 42% in 2019 from 41% in 2018.
General and Administrative
2020 Compared to 2019
General and administrative costs increased by $25.9 million, or 158%, to $42.3 million in 2020 from $16.4 million in 2019. The increase was primarily driven by a $12.2 million increase in stock-based compensation expense, a $3.4 million impairment charge related to a lease deposit and prepayment and one-time transaction related expenses. General and administrative expenses accounted for 18% of revenues in 2020 compared to 14% in 2019.
2019 Compared to 2018
General and administrative expenses increased by $1.4 million, or 9%, to $16.4 million in 2019 from $15.0 million in 2018. The increase is attributed to higher personnel expenses driven by growth in headcount and higher general corporate expenses. General and administrative expenses accounted for 14% of revenues in 2019 compared to 29% in 2018.
Interest expense, net
2020 Compared to 2019
Interest expense, net decreased by $1.2 million, or 47%, to $1.3 million in 2020 from $2.5 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by the repayment of our long-term debt in 2020.
2019 Compared to 2018
Interest expense, net increased by $0.3 million, or 14%, to $2.5 million in 2019 from $2.2 million in 2018. The increase was primarily driven by the increase in our long-term debt in 2019.
Other income (expense), net
2020 Compared to 2019
Other income (expense), net decreased by $25.1 million to $21.4 million in other expenses in 2020 from $3.7 million in other income in 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by fair value adjustments of financial instruments.
2019 Compared to 2018
Other income (expense), net increased by $3.8 million to $3.7 million of other income in 2019 from $45.0 thousand of other expense in 2018. The increase was primarily driven by fair value adjustments of financial instruments.
Provision for income taxes
2020 Compared to 2019
Provision for income taxes increased by $0.1 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by accrued state tax liabilities.
2019 Compared to 2018
There was no provision for income taxes in either 2019 or 2018.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP measure is useful in evaluating our operational performance. We use the following non-GAAP financial information to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively with GAAP financial information, may be helpful to investors in assessing our operating performance. These results should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, results reported in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted EBITDA
“Adjusted EBITDA” is defined as net income (loss), excluding interest income (expense); other income (expense), net; income tax provision; depreciation and amortization; stock-based compensation expense and related payroll tax expense; and certain other non-cash or non-recurring items impacting net income (loss) from time to time, including, but not limited to fair value adjustments for certain financial liabilities (including derivatives) associated with debt and equity transactions, and impairment charges as they are not indicative of business operations. Adjusted EBITDA is intended as a supplemental measure of our performance that is neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. We believe that the use of Adjusted EBITDA provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends and in comparing the Company’s financial measures with those of comparable companies, which may present similar non-GAAP financial measures to investors. However, you should be aware that when evaluating Adjusted EBITDA we may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating this measure. In addition, our presentation of this measure should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. Our computation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies, because all companies may not calculate Adjusted EBITDA in the same fashion.
Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA on a supplemental basis. You should review the reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
The following table reconciles net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods indicated (in thousands):
(1)For the year ended December 31, 2020, other non-operating costs (income) is primarily attributed to a $21.7 million adjustment to the fair value of the redeemable convertible Series E preferred stock forward contract liability.
(2)For the year ended 2019, other non-operating costs (income) include a $3.6 million remeasurement gain for the bifurcated derivative liability related to the Company’s convertible promissory notes issued in 2018.
(3)This represents an impairment charge of a lease deposit and prepayment in connection with a lease agreement related to our new corporate facilities in San Francisco.
(4)For the year ended December 31, 2020, amounts represent one-time transaction expenses related to the Business Combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily from the sales of capital stock. As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were our cash and cash equivalents in the amount of $262.7 million, which are primarily invested in money market funds.
In December 2019, we entered into a mezzanine term loan for up to $40.0 million; $30.0 million of which is immediately available and an additional $10.0 million available upon the achievement of certain performance milestones (“2019 Mezzanine Term Loan”). In 2019, we drew $10.0 million of the $30 million immediately available from the 2019 Mezzanine Term Loan. In 2020, we paid the $10.0 million outstanding principal amount related to the 2019 Mezzanine Loan, plus all accrued and unpaid interest. No additional amounts have been drawn since 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had $30.0 million of availability under the 2019 Mezzanine Term Loan.
As of the date of this statement, our existing cash resources are sufficient to continue operating activities for at least one year past the issuance date of the consolidated financial statements.
The following table provides a summary of cash flow data (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operating activities are significantly affected by the growth of our business primarily related to research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative activities. Our operating cash flows are also
affected by our working capital needs to support growth in personnel-related expenditures and fluctuations in accounts payable and other current assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $56.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The most significant component of our cash used during this period was a net loss of $122.5 million, which included non-cash expenses of $21.7 million related to the fair value adjustment to the redeemable convertible Series E preferred stock forward contract liability, $23.8 million related to stock-based compensation, $3.6 million related to impairment charges, and $1.6 million related to depreciation and amortization, accretion of unamortized discounts and amortization of issuance costs, as well as net cash inflows of $15.3 million from changes in operating assets and liabilities. The net cash inflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities were primarily the result of an increase in other liabilities of $12.0 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $21.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The most significant component of our cash used during this period was a net loss of $23.6 million, which included non-cash expenses of $4.1 million related to stock-based compensation, depreciation, amortization, and net cash inflows of $1.2 million from changes in operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by $3.6 million in fair value adjustments of derivatives.
Net cash used in operating activities was $16.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The most significant component of our cash used during this period was a net loss of $27.8 million, which included non-cash expenses of $6.7 million related to stock-based compensation, $1.7 million related to depreciation and accretion of unamortized discount and amortization of issuance costs, and net cash inflows of $2.4 million from changes in operating assets and liabilities. The net cash inflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities were primarily the result of an increase in accounts payable and other liabilities due of $3.4 million, primarily related to an increase in accrued sales and marketing costs.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $3.2 million, $3.2 million, and $0.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. In all periods, the net cash used in investing activities related to purchases of property and equipment, including internal-use software.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $296.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily due to $246.5 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock in connection with the Business Combination, net proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible Series E preferred stock of $76.6 million, partially offset by $13.4 million due to taxes paid related to the net share settlement of equity awards, $10.0 million of debt repayments under our debt facilities, and $2.0 million in payments made towards offering costs.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $31.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was primarily due to $24.9 million in net proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible Series D-1 preferred stock and net proceeds from borrowings of $6.1 million under our debt facilities.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $33.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, which was primarily due to net proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible Series D preferred stock of $18.2 million and net proceeds from borrowings of $14.9 million related to the convertible promissory notes.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and other commitments as of December 31, 2020, and the years in which these obligations are due:
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, including entities sometimes referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
We are exposed to a variety of market and other risks, including the effects of changes in interest rates, inflation, as well as risks to the availability of funding sources.
Interest Rate Risk
The market risk inherent in our financial instruments and our financial position represents the potential loss arising from adverse changes in interest rates. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $262.7 million, which consisted of money market fund accounts for which the fair market value would be affected by changes in the general level of U.S. interest rates. However, due to the low-risk profile of our investments, an immediate 10% change in interest rates would not have a material effect on the fair market value of our cash and cash equivalents.
Foreign Currency Risk
There was no material foreign currency risk for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are most critical to understanding our financial condition and historical and future results of operations:
•revenue recognition
•stock-based compensation and common stock valuation
Revenue Recognition
Skillz provides monetization services to game developers enabling them to offer competitive games to our end-users. These activities are not distinct from each other as we provide an integrated service enabling the game developers to provide the competitive game service to the end-users, and as a result, they do not represent separate performance obligations. We are entitled to a revenue share based on total entry fees for paid Competitions, regardless of how they are paid, net of end-user prizes (i.e., winnings from the Competitions) and other costs to provide the monetization services. The game developers’ revenue share, however, is calculated solely based upon entry fees paid by net cash deposits received from end-users. In addition, we reduce revenue for certain end-user incentives which are determined to be a payment to a customer.
Skillz collects the entry fees and related charges from end-users on behalf of game developers using the end-user’s pre-authorized credit card or PayPal account and withholds its fees before making the remaining disbursement to the game developer; thus, the game developer’s ability and intent to pay is not subject to significant judgment.
Revenue is recognized at the time the performance obligation is satisfied by transferring control of the promised service in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for the Monetization Services. We recognize revenue upon completion of a game, which is when our performance obligation to the game developer is satisfied. We do not have contract assets or contract liabilities as the payment of the transaction price is concurrent with the fulfillment of the
services. At the time of game completion, we have the right to receive payment for the services rendered. Our agreements with game developers can generally be terminated for convenience by either party upon thirty days prior written notice, and in certain of our larger developer agreements, the developer, if required by us, must continue to make its games available on our platform for a period of up to twelve months. As we are able to terminate our developer agreements at our convenience, we have concluded the contract term for revenue recognition does not extend beyond the contractual notification period. We do not have any transaction price allocated to performance obligations that are unsatisfied (or partially satisfied).
End-User Incentive Programs
To drive traffic to the platform, we provide promotions and incentives to end-users in various forms. Evaluating whether a promotion or incentive is a payment to a customer may require significant judgment. Promotions and incentives which are consideration payable to a customer are recognized as a reduction of revenue at the later of when revenue is recognized or when we pay or promise to pay the incentive. Promotions and incentives recorded as sales and marketing expense are recognized when we incur the related cost. In either case, the promotions and incentives are recognized when they are used by end-users to enter into a paid competition.
Marketing promotions and discounts accounted for as a reduction of revenue. These promotions are typically pricing actions in the form of discounts that reduce the end-user entry fees and are offered on behalf of the game developers. Although not required based on our agreement with the game developers, we consider that the game developers have a valid expectation that certain incentives will be offered to end-users. The determination of a valid expectation is based on the evaluation of all information reasonably available to the game developers regarding our customary business practices, published policies and specific statements.
An example of an incentive for which the game developer has a valid expectation is Ticketz, which are a currency earned for every competition played based on the amount of the entry fee. Ticketz can be redeemed for Bonus Cash. Another example is initial deposit Bonus Cash which is a promotional incentive program that can be earned in fixed amounts when an end-user makes an initial deposit on the Skillz platform. Bonus Cash can be used by end-users to enter into future paid entry fee competitions and cannot be withdrawn by end-users.
Marketing promotions accounted for as sales and marketing expense. When we conclude that the game developers do not have a valid expectation that the incentive will be offered, we record the related cost as sales and marketing expense. The Company’s assessment is based on an evaluation of all information reasonably available to the game developers regarding our customary business practices, published policies and specific statements. These promotions are offered to end-users to draw, re-engage, or generally increase end-users’ use of our platform.
An example of this type of incentive is limited-time Bonus Cash offers, which are targeted to specific end-users, typically those who deposit more frequently or have not made a deposit recently, via email or in-app promotions. We target groups of end-users differently, offering specific promotions we think will best stimulate engagement. Similar to Bonus Cash earned from a redemption of Ticketz or an initial deposit, limited-time Bonus Cash can only be used by end-users to enter into future paid entry fee competitions and cannot be withdrawn by end-users. The Company also hosts engagement marketing leagues run over a period of days or weeks, which award league prizes in the form of cash or luxury goods to end-users with the most medals at the end of the league. End-users accumulate medals by winning Skillz enabled paid entry fee competitions. Skillz determines whether or not to run a league, what prizes should be awarded, over what time period the league should run, and to which end-users the prizes should be paid, all at its discretion. The league parameters vary from one league to the next and are not reasonably known to the game developers. League prizes in the form of cash can be withdrawn or used by end-users to enter into future paid entry fee competitions.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize the cost of share-based awards granted to employees and directors based on the estimated grant-date fair value of the awards. For awards that vest solely based on a service condition, the cost is recognized on a straight-line basis over the service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award. For awards that vest based on service, performance and market conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense when the performance conditions are probable of being achieved. The compensation cost related to awards with market conditions is recognized on an accelerated attribution basis over the requisite service period and regardless of whether the market condition is satisfied, if the requisite service is provided. We recognize stock-based compensation costs and reverse previously recognized costs for unvested options in the period forfeitures occur. We determine the fair value of stock options that vest solely based on a service condition using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which is impacted by the following assumptions:
•Expected term - The Company determines the expected term based on the average period the stock options are expected to remain outstanding, generally calculated as the midpoint of the stock options’ vesting term and contractual expiration period, as the Company does not have sufficient historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior.
•Expected volatility - The expected volatility rate is based on an average historical stock price volatility of comparable publicly-traded companies in the industry group as there has been no public market for the Company’s shares to date.
•Risk-free interest rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of the option.
•Expected dividend yield - The Company has not paid and does not expect to pay dividends. Consequently, the Company uses an expected dividend yield of zero.
For awards with market conditions, we determine the grant date fair value utilizing a Monte Carlo valuation model, which incorporates various assumptions such as expected stock price volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rates, expected date of a qualifying event, and expected capital raise percentage. We estimate the volatility of common stock on the date of grant based on the weighted average historical stock price volatility of comparable publicly-traded companies in our industry group. We estimate the expected term based on various exercise scenarios, as these awards are not considered “plain vanilla.” The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant. We estimate the expected date of a qualifying event and the expected capital raise percentage based on management’s expectations at the time of measurement of the award’s value.
Common Stock Valuation
Prior to the Business Combination, the grant date fair value of Skillz common stock was determined by our board of directors with the assistance of management and a third-party valuation specialist. The grant date fair value of Skillz common stock was determined based on valuation methodologies which utilize certain assumptions, including probability weighting of events, recent sales of stock to external investors, volatility, time to liquidity, a risk-free interest rate, and an assumption for a discount for lack of marketability where applicable. We historically used a combination of the Option Pricing Model (“OPM”) and Common-Stock Equivalent (“CSE”) methods, which primarily derived the implied equity value for our common stock from a contemporaneous transaction involving our convertible preferred stock. Application of these methods involves the use of estimates, judgment, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses, and cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies, and the probability of future events.
Following the Business Combination, our stock became publicly traded, following which our board of directors determined the fair value of Skillz common stock based on the closing price of Skillz common stock on the date of grant.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one, of their potential impact on our financial condition and our results of operations.