ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Part II-Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations” and “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” in our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
OVERVIEW
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact various markets and business channels. After we temporarily closed our stores around the world and temporarily furloughed a meaningful portion of our hourly workforce in March 2020, we saw meaningful improvements during the second half of 2020 including a return to growth in many markets. Although the recovery has progressed at a different pace across countries, we remain confident in our actions and strength of the brand. Consumers have gravitated towards comfort in their lives as people are predominately working from home and increasingly focused on their well-being. We believe the actions we have taken and the strength of our brand positions Skechers well as the global recovery continues.
We continue to invest for growth, with a focus on our direct-to-consumer capabilities and global infrastructure.
•
To further enhance our consumer shopping experience, we began implementing a new point of sale system in our domestic retail locations, introduced a new website and mobile application suite, and made enhancements to our omnichannel capabilities, including introducing features like buy online pick up in store and buy online pick up curb-side.
•
We completed the expansion of our European distribution center in July 2020 and opened a new distribution center in Colombia.
•
Our new China distribution center remains on-track and we opened a new United Kingdom based distribution center.
•
Development continued on our North American distribution center expansion.
•
During 2020, we opened 67 company-owned stores, 142 joint venture stores and 430 third-party Skechers stores globally.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
We have three reportable segments - Domestic Wholesale, International Wholesale, and Direct-to-Consumer, which includes results from both our retail store and e-commerce channels. We evaluate segment performance based primarily on sales and gross margin.
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, selected information from our results of operations:
Sales
Sales for 2020 were $4.6 billion, a decrease of $0.6 billion, or 11.9%, compared to sales of $5.2 billion for 2019 reflecting the impact of the global pandemic on our businesses worldwide. The decrease is a result of a 12.9% decrease in our domestic business and an 11.2% decrease internationally. Our Domestic Wholesale segment sales decreased 9.7%, International Wholesale segment sales decreased 8.3% and Direct-to-Consumer segment sales decreased 19.7%.
Gross profit
Gross profit for 2020 decreased $0.3 billion to $2.2 billion as compared to $2.5 billion for 2019 due to the decline in sales. Gross margin remained relatively flat with the prior year at 47.6% with increases of 160 basis points in Domestic Wholesale and 101 basis points in Direct-to-Consumer, offset by a decrease of 71 basis points in International Wholesale.
Selling expenses
Selling expenses decreased by $51.8 million, or 14.0%, to $318.1 million for 2020 from $369.9 million for 2019. As a percentage of sales, selling expenses were 6.9% and 7.1% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in selling expenses was primarily due to lower worldwide spending on advertising and marketing, and trade shows of $48.4 million.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $128.7 million, or 7.9%, primarily driven by increased domestic and international warehouse and distribution expenses of $64.3 million, increased depreciation and amortization expense of $31.7 million from fixed asset additions and the Skechers Mexico acquisition, and increased stock compensation of $24.2 million which included a one-time $18.2 million non-cash, equity compensation charge associated with a legal settlement.
Other income (expense)
Interest income decreased $5.9 million to $5.9 million for 2020 as compared to $11.8 million for 2019. The decrease in interest income was due primarily due to lower average interest rates. Interest expense increased $8.8 million due to additional borrowings under our credit facility. Other income increased $38.2 million primarily due to purchase price adjustments from the acquisition of Skechers Mexico and foreign exchange gains.
Income taxes
Income tax expense and the effective tax rate were as follows:
Our provision for income tax expense and effective income tax rate are significantly impacted by the mix of our domestic and foreign earnings (losses) before income taxes. In the foreign jurisdictions in which we have operations, the applicable statutory rates range from 0.0% to 34.0%, which on average are generally significantly lower than the U.S. federal and state combined statutory rate of approximately 25%. The decrease in the effective tax rate in 2020 was primarily due to changes in the ownership structure of our international operations and related benefits provided by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act.
See Note 10 - Income Taxes of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Noncontrolling interest in net income and loss of consolidated subsidiaries
Net earnings attributable to noncontrolling interest for 2020 decreased $33.0 million to $47.7 million as compared to $80.7 million for 2019 attributable to decreased profitability by our joint ventures due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Noncontrolling interest represents the share of net earnings or loss that is attributable to our joint venture partners.
RESULTS OF SEGMENT OPERATIONS
Domestic Wholesale
Domestic Wholesale sales decreased $0.1 billion, or 9.7%, to $1.1 billion for 2020 from $1.2 billion for 2019. Sales volume decrease was driven by a 12.4% reduction in the number of pairs sold, partially offset by a 1.0% increase in average price per pair. Sales volume decreased to 50.0 million pairs sold from 57.0 million. The average price per pair increased to $21.88 from $21.67.
Domestic Wholesale gross profit decreased $26.3 million, or 5.8%, to $431.6 million for 2020 compared to $457.9 million for 2019. Domestic Wholesale gross margin increased 160 basis points to 38.3% primarily driven by lower product costs and the aforementioned increase in average price per pair.
International Wholesale
International Wholesale sales decreased $0.2 billion, or 8.3%, to $2.3 billion for 2020 compared to sales of $2.5 billion for 2019. Our distributor sales decreased to $239.1 million, a decrease of $176.3 million or 42.4% and direct sales by our foreign subsidiaries and joint ventures, were $2.0 billion, flat to the prior year. The number of units sold decreased 6.7% and the average selling price decreased by 1.8%.
International Wholesale gross profit decreased $0.1 billion, or 9.7%, to $1.0 billion for 2020 as compared to $1.1 billion for 2019. International Wholesale gross margin decreased 71 basis points to 45.3% as a result of higher promotional activity for our joint ventures as well as a non-cash, cost of goods purchase price adjustment related to the acquisition of Skechers Mexico.
Direct-to-Consumer
Direct-to-Consumer sales decreased $0.3 billion, or 19.7%, to $1.2 billion for 2020 as compared to sales of $1.5 billion for 2019. Declines were driven by lower domestic and international retail sales during temporary store closures and reduced operating hours as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a 211.9% increase in domestic e-commerce sales. Direct-to-Consumer comparable same store sales decreased 24.0% for 2020, including decreases of 20.3% domestically and 32.2% internationally. Volume decreased due to a 21.5% reduction in the number of units sold, partially offset by a 2.3% increase in the average selling price.
Direct-to-Consumer gross profit decreased $164.6 million, or 18.3%, to $735.0 million for 2020 as compared to $899.6 million for 2019. Direct-to-Consumer gross margin increased 101 basis points to 60.6% due to a favorable mix of e-commerce sales which have higher overall margins.
Comparable store sales mentioned above includes stores that have been opened for at least thirteen calendar months as well as sales on our company-owned websites. We did not make any adjustments for the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related impacts of store closures and reduced operating hours. Definitions and calculations of comparable store sales differ among companies in the retail industry, and therefore comparable store sales disclosed by us may not be comparable to the metrics disclosed by other companies.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity outlook
Our liquidity remains ample and we believe we are well-positioned to endure the environment associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. We have taken actions to preserve our liquidity and manage our cash flow. As a precautionary measure, in March 2020, we borrowed against our unsecured revolving credit facility. At December 31, 2020, we have unused credit capacity of $8.8 million along with an additional $250.0 million available through an accordion feature on the unsecured revolving credit facility. We continue to partner with our vendors, landlords, and lenders to maximize our liquidity and mitigate cash flow risk. We believe that anticipated cash flows from operations, existing cash and investments balances, available borrowings under our credit agreement, and current financing arrangements will be sufficient to provide us with the liquidity necessary to fund our anticipated working capital and capital requirements for the next twelve months.
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $1.37 billion in cash and cash equivalents, of which $735.1 million, or 53.6%, was held outside the U.S. Of the $735.1 million held by its non-U.S. subsidiaries, approximately $405.2 million is available for repatriation to the U.S. without incurring U.S. income taxes and applicable non-U.S. income and withholding taxes in excess of the amounts accrued in the Company’s consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows
Our working capital at December 31, 2020 was $2.1 billion, an increase of $0.5 billion from working capital of $1.6 billion at December 31, 2019. Our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 were $1.4 billion, compared to $824.9 million at December 31, 2019. Our primary sources of operating cash are collections from customers on wholesale and direct-to-consumer sales. Our primary uses of cash are inventory purchases, selling, general and administrative expenses and capital expenditures.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $331.5 million for 2020 and $426.6 million for 2019. On a comparative year-to-year basis, the $95.1 million decrease in cash flows from operating activities in 2020 primarily resulted from reduced net earnings of $281.0 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $312.5 million for 2020 as compared to $344.1 million for 2019. The $31.6 million decrease was primarily due to the 2019 acquisition of Skechers Mexico of $100.7 million partially offset by an increase in capital expenditures of $73.8 million. Capital expenditures for 2020 were approximately $309.9 million, which consisted of $122.0 million to support our worldwide distribution capabilities, $67.9 million was related to the acquisition of a corporate office building and new retail stores in China, and $59.8 million for retail stores and e-commerce investments worldwide, excluding China. Capital expenditures for 2019 were approximately $236.1 million, of which $72.6 million supported our worldwide distribution capabilities, $51.9 million related to retail stores worldwide, and $33.8 million to support our international wholesale operations. We expect our ongoing capital expenditures for 2021 to be approximately $275.0 million to $325.0 million, which is primarily related to the expansion of our worldwide distribution capabilities, continued investments in retail and e-commerce technologies and stores, and our new corporate offices in California. We expect to fund ongoing capital expenses through a combination of borrowings and available cash.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $533.3 million during 2020 compared to $132.0 million net cash used during 2019. The change of $665.3 million is primarily net long-term borrowings of $616.6 million, which includes $452.5 million on our unsecured revolving credit facility.
Capital Resources and Prospective Capital Requirements
Financing Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, outstanding short-term and long-term borrowings were $735.0 million, of which $452.5 million relates to our unsecured revolving credit facility, $229.2 million relates to loans for our domestic and China distribution centers, $48.7 million relates to our operations in China and the remainder relates to our international operations. Our long-term debt obligations contain both financial and non-financial covenants, including cross-default provisions. We were in compliance with all debt covenants related to our short-term and long-term borrowings as of the date of this annual report. See Note 6 - Financial Commitments of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Disclosure about Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The following table summarizes our material contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Borrowings include anticipated interest payments based on interest rates currently in effect.
(2)
Purchase obligations include the following: (i) accounts payable balances for the purchase of footwear of $210.1 million, (ii) outstanding letters of credit of $38.7 million and (iii) open purchase commitments with our foreign manufacturers for $1.1 billion.
(3)
Obligations to support upgrades for our distribution centers and corporate facilities in Manhattan Beach, California.
(4)
Our consolidated balance sheet, as of December 31, 2020, included $21.5 million in unrecognized tax benefits. Future payments related to these unrecognized tax benefits have not been presented in the table above, due to the uncertainty of the amounts, the potential timing of cash settlements with the tax authorities, and uncertainty whether any settlement would occur.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We are required to provide standby letters of credit to support certain obligations that arise in the ordinary course of business and may choose to provide letters of credit in place of posting cash collateral. Although the letters of credit are off-balance sheet, the majority of the obligations to which they relate are reflected as liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets. Outstanding letters of credit totaled approximately $38.7 million as of December 31, 2020.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND USE OF ESTIMATES
The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, sales and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We believe the following critical accounting estimates are affected by significant judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition. We derive income primarily from the sale of footwear and royalties earned from licensing the Skechers brand. We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to its customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. We recognize revenue on wholesale sales upon shipment. We generate direct-to-consumer revenues primarily from the sale of footwear to customers at retail locations or through our websites. For our in-store sales, we recognize revenue at the point of sale. For sales made through our websites, we recognize revenue upon shipment to the customer. Sales and value added taxes collected from direct-to-consumer customers are excluded from reported revenues.
We accrue a liability for product returns at the time of sale based on our historical experience. We also accrue amounts for goods expected to be returned in salable condition.
We earn royalty income from symbolic licensing arrangements based on third-party sales of Skechers-branded product. Upon signing a new licensing agreement, we receive up-front fees, which are generally characterized as prepaid royalties. These fees are initially deferred and recognized as revenue is earned (i.e., as licensed sales are reported to us or on a straight-line basis over the term of the agreement). The first calculated royalty payment is based on actual sales of the licensed product or, in some cases, minimum royalty payments. We calculate and accrue estimated royalties based on the agreement terms and correspondence with the licensees regarding actual sales.
Allowance for bad debts, returns, sales allowances and customer chargebacks. We provide a reserve against our receivables for estimated losses that may result from our customers’ inability to pay. To minimize the likelihood of uncollectibility, customers’ credit-worthiness is reviewed and adjusted periodically in accordance with external credit reporting services, financial statements issued by the customer and our experience with the account. We determine the amount of the reserve by analyzing known uncollectible accounts, aged receivables, economic conditions in the customers’ countries or industries, historical losses and our customers’ credit-worthiness. Amounts later determined and specifically identified to be uncollectible are charged or written off against this reserve. Allowances for returns, sales allowances and customer chargebacks are recorded against revenue. Allowances for bad debts are recorded to general and administrative expenses. Retail and direct-to-consumer receivables represent amounts due from credit card companies and are generally collected within a few days of the purchase.
We reserve for potential disputed amounts or chargebacks from our customers. Our chargeback reserve is based on a collectability percentage based on factors such as historical trends, current economic conditions, and nature of the chargeback receivables.
The likelihood of a material loss on an uncollectible account would be mainly dependent on deterioration in the overall economic conditions in a particular country or region. Reserves are fully provided for all probable losses of this nature. For receivables that are not specifically identified as high risk, we provide a reserve based upon our historical loss rate as a percentage of sales.
Inventory write-downs. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or market (net realizable value). We review our inventory for excess and slow-moving inventory. Our analysis includes a review of inventory quantities on hand at period-end in relation to year-to-date sales, existing orders from customers and projections for sales in the foreseeable future. The net realizable value is determined based on historical sales experience on a style-by-style basis.
Impairment of long-lived assets. When circumstances warrant, we test for recoverability of the asset groups’ carrying value using estimates of undiscounted future cash flows based on the existing service potential of the applicable asset group in determining the fair value of each asset group.
If the assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment we recognize is the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. We base the useful lives and related amortization or depreciation expense on our estimate of the
period that the assets will generate revenues or otherwise be used by us. We review all of our stores for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances require it. We prepare a summary of cash flows for each of our retail stores, to assess potential impairment of the fixed assets and leasehold improvements. Stores with negative cash flows which have been open in excess of twenty-four months are then reviewed in detail to determine whether impairment exists. Management reviews both quantitative and qualitative factors to assess whether a triggering event occurred. We did not record a material impairment charge for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Goodwill. The Company tests goodwill for impairment annually for each reporting unit in the fourth quarter of the fiscal year, and between annual tests if events occur or circumstances change which suggest that goodwill should be reevaluated. Such events or circumstances include significant changes in historical financial performance, macroeconomic and industry conditions and the legal and regulatory environment. The Domestic Wholesale, International Wholesale and Direct-to-Consumer segments each represent a reporting unit. The Company performed its annual impairment test using a qualitative approach to determine whether conditions existed to indicate that it was more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill was less than its carrying value. Based on this assessment, the Company concluded that it was more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill was greater than its carrying values, and therefore a quantitative analysis, involving the calculation of an estimated fair value of each reporting unit based on projected future cash flows and comparing the estimated fair values of the reporting units to their carrying amounts, was not required.
Litigation reserves. Estimated amounts for claims that are probable and can be reasonably estimated are recorded as liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. The likelihood of a material change in these estimated reserves would depend on additional information or new claims as they may arise as well as the favorable or unfavorable outcome of particular litigation. Both the likelihood and amount (or range of loss) on a large portion of our remaining pending litigation is uncertain. As such, we are unable to make a reasonable estimate of the liability that could result from unfavorable outcomes in our remaining pending litigation. As additional information becomes available, we will assess the potential liability related to our pending litigation and revise our estimates. Such revisions in our estimates of potential liability could materially impact our results of operations and financial position.
Tax estimates and valuation of deferred income taxes. We record a valuation allowance when necessary to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. The likelihood of a material change in our expected realization of our deferred tax assets depends on future taxable income and the effectiveness of our tax planning strategies amongst the various domestic and international tax jurisdictions in which we operate. We evaluate our projections of taxable income to determine the recoverability of our deferred tax assets and the need for a valuation allowance.
EXCHANGE RATES
We receive U.S. dollars for substantially all of our domestic and a portion of our international product sales, as well as our royalty income. Inventory purchases from offshore contract manufacturers are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars. However, purchase prices for our products may be impacted by fluctuations in the exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and the local currencies of the contract manufacturers, which may impact our cost of goods in the future. During 2020 and 2019, exchange rate fluctuations did not have a material impact on our inventory costs. We do not engage in hedging activities with respect to such exchange rate risk.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Refer to Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for recently adopted and recently issued accounting standards.