Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 together with notes thereto. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited, to those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Unless otherwise provided in this Annual Report, references to “we,” “us,” “our” and “Skye Bioscience” in this discussion and analysis refer to Skye Bioscience, Inc., a Nevada corporation formerly known as Emerald Bioscience, Inc., together with its wholly owned subsidiaries, Nemus, a California corporation, and EMBI Australia Pty Ltd., an Australian proprietary limited company.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company targeting the discovery, development, and the commercialization of cannabinoid-based therapeutics, through a number of license agreements with the University of Mississippi (“UM”).
Effective March 25, 2019, we changed our name from Nemus Bioscience, Inc. to Emerald Bioscience, Inc. and effective January 19, 2021, we changed our name to Skye Bioscience, Inc.
In August 2019, we formed a new subsidiary in Australia, EMBI Australia, in order to qualify for the Australian government’s research and development tax credit for research and development dollars spent in Australia. The primary purpose of EMBI Australia is to conduct clinical trials for our product candidates.
Recent Events and Significant Contracts
Expansion of UM 5050 and UM 8930 Licenses from Ocular Delivery Only to All Fields of Use
On May 24, 2019, we executed two restated and amended license agreements with UM which expanded our use of UM 5050, a prodrug of tetrahydrocannabinol (“THC”), and UM 8930, an analog of cannabidiol (“CBD”), this expanded our scope of field of use from ocular delivery only to all fields of use. Pursuant to these license agreements, we have exclusive, perpetual, worldwide licenses related to UM 5050 and UM 8930. Additionally, with the prior written consent of UM, we have the right to sublicense the licensed intellectual property.
The exclusive license for tetrahydrocannabinol-valine-hemisuccinate (“THCVHS”), the proprietary prodrug of THC, is expected to allow us to explore related uses for the active moiety of the prodrug, namely THC. Independent in vitro and in vivo studies have demonstrated the potential use of THC in a variety of potential indications based on the ability of the cannabinoid to act as an anti-inflammatory, anti-fibrotic, and/or inhibitor of neovascularization. The Company has generated data related to these effects using an ex vivo human tissue model of the eye. The prodrug technology employed in THCVHS is designed to enhance the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics of the active part of the molecule, once introduced into the body through various routes of administration being considered by the development team.
The exclusive license of cannabidiol-valine-hemisuccinate (“CBDVHS”), the analog of CBD, is expected to permit us to expand research and development into organ systems outside of the current ocular space. Potential disease targets over time could involve the central nervous system, the gastrointestinal tract, the endocrine/metabolic system, reproductive system diseases, or as yet unrecognized opportunities. This bioengineered version of CBD is expected to enlarge the disease target pool by virtue of new routes of administration into the body, thereby enhancing bioavailability. The determination by the DEA that CBDVHS is not a controlled substance permits us to enlarge the potential pool of clinical test sites and a more diverse patient pool in the study of disease. We expect to develop strategic collaborations to identify and advance these applications.
THCVHS
THCVHS, our lead ocular compound, is a prodrug of THC. We have delayed our first-in-human studies of THCVHS, from the second half of 2020 to the third quarter of 2021. The first-in-human Phase 1 trials are expected to be conducted in both normal subjects and patients with glaucoma or ocular hypertension in Australia (the “Clinical Trial”). We are eligible under the AusIndustry research and development tax incentive program to obtain a cash incentive from the Australian Taxation Office. The tax incentive is available to us based on specific criteria with which we must comply and is based on our eligible research and development spend in Australia. Prior to August 2020, we executed several agreements, and the work underlying those agreements was subsequently delayed. After August 2020, we have been focused on clinical enabling activities, notably:
·
formulation and manufacturing of drug product to supply our GLP toxicology studies and first-in-human Phase 1 clinical trial;
·
initiating and completing GLP toxicology studies to support our first-in-human Phase 1 clinical trial;
·
initiating and completing validation of a pharmacokinetic assay for both animal and human samples to support our pre-clinical and clinical studies; and
·
engaging our vendors and contractors to support the finalization of study-related materials for our Phase 1 study, including the finalization of the clinical study protocol.
The manufacturing of the active pharmaceutical ingredient of THCVHS is conducted in the United States. Formulation of the eye drop for testing is also performed in the United States but can rely on regulatory-accepted excipients that can be sourced from countries outside the United States, such as China. In connection with the recent pandemic of COVID-19 there could possibly be an impact on sourcing materials that are part of the eye drop formulation, as well as impacting volunteer and/or patient recruitment in Australia for clinical studies.
CBDVHS
CBDVHS is our proprietary CBD analog. We have embarked on studies with UM exploring the utility of our drug candidate CBDVHS as a topical formulation for the potential treatment and management of several ocular diseases, including but not limited to, uveitis, dry eye syndrome, macular degeneration and diabetic retinopathy.
In July 2019, we engaged Glauconix to conduct research as to whether CBD or CBDVHS is associated with an increase in IOP and, if so, what the potential mechanism of action would be by exposing the 3D-human trabecular meshwork tissue constructs to these molecules. In December 2019, we announced that data generated by Glauconix Biosciences, Inc. showed significant anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic activity in ocular tissue with CBDVHS when compared to CBD, indicating therapeutic potential as a neuroprotectant, especially in diseases of the retina. Additionally, CBD was associated with biomarkers related to the elevation of IOP while CBDVHS was not associated with elevating IOP at anti-fibrotic concentrations.
In the second quarter of 2019, UM also completed preclinical experiments showing that CBDVHS exhibited an ability to penetrate multiple chambers of the eye and reach the optic nerve. These findings support the therapeutic potential to provide ocular neuroprotection of retinal ganglion cells, an important goal in treating diseases that lead to vision loss. The data were published in the peer-reviewed Journal of Ocular Pharmacology and Therapeutics in a paper entitled, “Analog Derivatization of Cannabidiol for Improved Ocular Permeation” (2019; volume 35 (5): 1-10).
In July 2019, we engaged StemoniX to evaluate CBD and CBDVHS in a human in vitro neural model that has application for epilepsy. The series of experiments are designed to provide insight into how these cannabinoids stabilize neuronal cells. In November and December 2019, we also executed additional preclinical research agreements with StemoniX related to CBDVHS.
In February 2019, we entered into the Purisys Agreement to provide manufacturing and product development services for our analog formulation of CBD. We made an upfront payment and additional payments will be made upon Purisys’s shipment of the active pharmaceutical ingredient.
In December 2019, we announced data generated by StemoniX, that CBDVHS was both pharmacologically and therapeutically distinct from CBD when studied in an in vitro human neural tissue model mimicking chemically induced seizure-like hyperactivity. Additionally, CBDVHS was observed to gain potency in anti-seizure-like activity over the seven-day observation period, whereas the suppressive effect afforded by CBD dissipated by day three. In the assessment of safety parameters of CBDVHS, the molecule was not found to be toxic to the neurologic cells tested in multiple assays, both in acute and longer-term exposure.
We plan to continue to work with UM to explore other potential indications and associated routes of administration based on the expanded UM 8930 exclusive licenses. Our decision to advance a potential therapeutic candidate will be influenced by several criteria, including but not limited to, preclinical data, synthesis and formulation capability as well as prevailing market conditions.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section discusses our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the reporting period. On an on-going basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued expenses, financing operations, and contingencies and litigation. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The most significant accounting estimates inherent in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements include estimates as to the appropriate carrying value of certain assets and liabilities which are not readily apparent from other sources. These accounting policies are described at relevant sections in this discussion and analysis and in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and affect the more significant judgments and estimates that we use in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Fair Value Measurements
Certain assets and liabilities are carried at fair value under U.S. GAAP. Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. Valuation techniques used to measure fair value must maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. A fair value hierarchy based on three levels of inputs, of which the first two are considered observable and the last is considered unobservable, is used to measure fair value:
Level 1: Valuations for assets and liabilities traded in active markets from readily available pricing sources such as quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2: Observable inputs (other than Level 1 quoted prices) such as quoted prices in active markets for similar assets or liabilities, quoted prices in markets that are not active for identical or similar assets or liabilities, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data.
Level 3: Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to determining the fair value of the assets or liabilities, including pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies and similar techniques.
The carrying values of our financial instruments, with the exception of the Credit Agreement (as defined below) and derivative liabilities, including, cash, prepaid expenses, accounts payable, the PPP loan and other current liabilities approximate their fair value due to the short maturities of these financial instruments. The derivative liabilities are valued on a recurring basis utilizing Level 3 inputs.
As of December 31, 2019, the aggregate fair value of the advances under the Amended Credit Agreement was $1,877,938, the carrying amount of the liability on December 31, 2019 was $387,070 and is included in Convertible multi-draw credit agreement - related party, net of discount in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of December 31, 2020, we estimate that the fair value of the Amended Credit Agreement to be materially consistent with the fair value estimate as of December 31, 2019, plus the non-convertible advances made in 2020. This determination was based on the following considerations: (i) we have not experienced any significant change in our credit worthiness or operations year over year, (ii) there have been no repayments or convertible draws (iii) the facility is closer to maturity, and (iv) the embedded conversion feature on the convertible advances is out-of-the-money at the reporting date. Information pertinent to estimating the fair value of the Amended Credit Agreement includes valuing the embedded conversion feature and considering the discounted cash flows of the interest and principal payments through maturity.
Convertible Instruments
We account for hybrid contracts with embedded conversion features in accordance with GAAP. ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging Activities (“ASC 815”) requires companies to bifurcate conversion options from their host instruments and account for them as free-standing derivative financial instruments according to certain criteria. The criteria includes circumstances in which (a) the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative instrument are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract, (b) the hybrid instrument that embodies both the embedded derivative instrument and the host contract is not re-measured at fair value under otherwise applicable generally accepted accounting principles with changes in fair value reported in earnings as they occur and (c) a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative instrument would be considered a derivative instrument.
We account for convertible debt instruments with embedded conversion features in accordance with ASC 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options (“ASC 470-20”) if it is determined that the conversion feature should not be bifurcated from their host instruments. Under ASC 470-20, we record, when necessary, discounts to convertible notes for the intrinsic value of conversion options embedded in debt instruments based upon the difference between the fair value of the underlying common stock at the commitment date and the embedded effective conversion price. When we determine that the embedded conversion option should be bifurcated from its host instrument, the embedded feature is accounted for in accordance with ASC 815. Under ASC 815, a portion of the proceeds received upon the issuance of the hybrid contract is allocated to the fair value of the derivative. The derivative is subsequently marked to market at each reporting date based on current fair value, with the changes in fair value reported in the results of operations.
We also follow ASC 480-10, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480-10”) when evaluating the accounting for our hybrid instruments. A financial instrument that embodies an unconditional obligation, or a financial instrument other than an outstanding share that embodies a conditional obligation, that the issuer must or may settle by issuing a variable number of its equity shares shall be classified as a liability (or an asset in some circumstances) if, at inception, the monetary value of the obligation is based solely or predominantly on any one of the following: (a) a fixed monetary amount known at inception (for example, a payable settled with a variable number of the issuer’s equity shares); (b) variations in something other than the fair value of the issuer’s equity shares (for example, a financial instrument indexed to the Standard and Poor’s S&P 500 Index and settled with a variable number of the issuer’s equity shares); or (c) variations inversely related to changes in the fair value of the issuer’s equity shares (for example, a written put option that could be net share settled). Hybrid instruments meeting these criteria are not further evaluated for any embedded derivatives and are carried as a liability at fair value at each balance sheet date with a re-measurement reported in other expense (income) in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive (Loss) Income.
When determining the short-term vs. long-term classification of derivative liabilities, we first evaluate the instruments’ exercise provisions. Generally, if a derivative is a liability and exercisable within one year, it will be classified as short-term. However, because of the unique provisions and circumstances that may impact the accounting for derivative instruments, we carefully evaluate all factors that could potentially restrict the instrument from being exercised or create a situation where exercise would be considered remote. We evaluate our derivative liabilities at each reporting period end and make updates for any changes in facts and circumstances that may impact classification.
Warrants Issued in Connection with Financings
We generally account for warrants issued in connection with debt and equity financings as a component of equity, unless the warrants include a conditional obligation to issue a variable number of shares or there is a deemed possibility that we may need to settle the warrants in cash. For warrants issued with a conditional obligation to issue a variable number of shares or the deemed possibility of a cash settlement, we record the fair value of the warrants as a liability at each balance sheet date and record changes in fair value in other expense (income) in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive (Loss) Income.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation expense is estimated at the grant date based on the fair value of the award, and the cost is recognized as expense ratably over the vesting period with forfeitures accounted for as they occur. We use the Black-Scholes Merton option pricing model for estimating the grant date fair value of stock options using the following assumptions:
·
Volatility - Stock price volatility is estimated over the expected term based on a blended rate of industry peers and our actual stock volatility adjusted for periods in which significant financial variability is identified.
·
Expected term - The expected term is based on a simplified method which defines the life as the weighted average of the contractual term of the options and the vesting period for each award.
·
Risk-free rate - The risk-free interest rate for the expected term of the option is based on the average market rate on U.S. Treasury securities in effect during the period in which the awards were granted.
·
Dividends - The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of paying no dividends in the foreseeable future.
Net (Loss) Income Per Share of Common Stock
We apply FASB ASC No. 260, Earnings per Share. Basic net (loss) income per share of common stock is computed by dividing (loss) income available to common stockholders by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. The diluted net (loss) income per share of common stock is computed by giving effect to all potential common stock equivalents outstanding for the period determined using the treasury stock method. For purposes of this calculation, options to purchase common stock, restricted stock subject to vesting, warrants to purchase common stock and common shares underlying convertible debt instruments are considered to be common stock equivalents. In periods with a reported net loss, such common stock equivalents are excluded from the calculation of diluted net loss per share of common stock if their effect is anti-dilutive.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10- K for information on recently issued accounting pronouncements and recently adopted accounting pronouncements. While we expect certain recently adopted accounting pronouncements to impact our estimates in future periods, the impact upon adoption was not significant to our current estimates and operations.
Results of Operations
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues. To date, we have not generated any revenues, and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the near future.
Operating expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our total operating expenses were $6,289,013 as compared to $6,632,578 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and development. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1,944,411, which consisted of salaries and benefits and consulting fees for the staff involved in our preclinical and clinical drug development activities, contract research and development fees paid to UM, fees related to contract manufacturing and formulation, a $200,000 license fee incurred under the UM 8930 Analog Agreement for the receipt for the first United States Patent and Trademark Office notice of allowance and the annual license maintenance fee for UM 5070.
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $2,237,956, which consisted of upfront payments for the all fields of use licenses for UM 5050 and UM 8930, the annual license maintenance fee for UM 5070, salaries and benefits and consulting fees for the staff involved in our preclinical and clinical drug development activities, contract research and development fees including fees for manufacturing and formulation, regulatory consulting fees, in preparation of the Clinical Trials.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, research and development expenses decreased by $293,545, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily due to an overall decline in contracted development costs as the Company moved its focus towards exploring new strategic initiatives in 2020. Contracted development costs were lower during 2020 as compared to 2019, due to a lack of cash on hand through the second quarter and the delay of our clinical trials due to COVID-19.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $4,344,602 which primarily consisted of salaries, consulting fees, stock-based compensation expense and professional fees associated with our costs of being a public company. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $4,394,622, which primarily consisted of the same components. General and administrative expenses remained relatively constant year over year.
Other expense (income). For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had non-operating expense of $270,086, which was comprised primarily of the following:
·
$436,270 of other income from the change in fair value of derivative liabilities which represents an overall decrease in the fair value of our derivative liabilities. The derivatives marked-to-market include the Series B and Emerald Health Sciences warrant liabilities and the derivative bifurcated from the Credit Agreement (as defined below). Several assumptions go into the valuations for each of these instruments however the decrease in our stock price, modification of the Credit Agreement and valuation assumptions were all contributing factors to the decrease in the fair value of these instruments during the year ended December 31, 2020;
·
We incurred interest expense of $706,385 during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the amortization of the debt discount and interest payments associated with the outstanding balance under the Credit Agreement. Interest expense declined by $294,328, when comparing the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, due to the partial pre-payment of amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement, which resulted in a lower average outstanding balance during 2020 as compared to 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had non-operating income of $7,686,003, which was comprised primarily of the following:
·
$9,734,759 of other income from the change in fair value of derivative liabilities which represents an overall decrease in the fair value of our derivative liabilities. The derivatives marked-to-market include the Series B and Emerald Health Sciences warrant liabilities and the compound derivative bifurcated from the Credit Agreement (as defined below). Several assumptions go into the third party valuations for each of these instruments however the decrease in our stock price and valuation assumptions were all contributing factors to the decrease in the value of these instruments during the year ended December 31, 2019;
·
$322,644 of other expense was related to drawdowns initiated under the Credit Agreement which required us to bifurcate compound embedded derivatives and record an additional charge for the fair value of such instruments in excess of proceeds;
·
We incurred interest expense of $1,000,713 during the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the amortization of the debt discount and interest payments associated with the outstanding balance under the Credit Agreement which was entered into during the fourth quarter of 2018; and
·
$725,425 loss on extinguishment related to the prepayment of the Credit Agreement.
Net (loss) income. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $6,560,699 as compared to net income of $1,051,825 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net income generated during 2019 was driven by other income primarily related to a non-cash adjustment in derivative liabilities from the decrease in our stock price. We expect to incur net losses for the foreseeable future.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception and as of December 31, 2020, had an accumulated deficit of $38,733,981, stockholders’ equity of $450,786 and working capital of $1,877,186. We anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses into the foreseeable future in order to advance and develop potential drug candidates into preclinical and clinical development activities and support our corporate infrastructure, which includes the costs associated with being a public company. We had unrestricted cash of $2,469,410 as of December 31, 2020, as compared to $1,829,977 as of December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to the proceeds received in the August 2020 Financing. Without additional funding, management believes that we will not have enough funds to meet our obligations beyond one year after the date the Consolidated Financial Statements are issued. These conditions give rise to substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern.
On October 5, 2018, we secured a Credit Agreement with Emerald Health Sciences (the “Credit Agreement”), providing us with a credit facility of up to $20,000,000. Under the Credit Agreement, we may draw a remaining amount of up to $13,550,000 in advances from Emerald Health Sciences from time to time. However, we do not consider the facility available until advance requests are approved, drawn down and funded. Through the third quarter of 2019, we effected three drawdowns under the Credit Agreement, each in the amount of $2,000,000, for an aggregate principal amount of $6,000,000 in advances, and issued Emerald Health Sciences warrants to purchase an aggregate of 7,500,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.50 per share. On December 20, 2019, we entered into a Warrant Exercise Agreement with Emerald Health Sciences, pursuant to which Emerald Health Sciences has exercised 40,800,000 of such warrants and paid the aggregate exercise price of approximately $4,080,000 for the related warrant shares in the form of a reduction of the corresponding amount of obligations outstanding under the Credit Agreement. Upon consummation of the transactions under the Warrant Exercise Agreement, the total outstanding principal amount excluding discounts under the Credit Agreement was $2,014,500.
On April 22, 2020, we entered into a Paycheck Protection Program Promissory Note in the principal amount of $116,700 (the “PPP Loan”) from City National Bank. The PPP Loan was obtained pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. We used the proceeds of the PPP loan for payment of payrolls and rent for our office space.
On April 29, 2020, we entered into an Amended and Restated Multi-Draw Credit Agreement with Emerald Health Sciences, which amends and restates the Credit Agreement, as reported in the current report on the Form 8-K filed with the SEC on April 29, 2020. The Amended Credit Agreement provides for a credit facility to us in the principal amount of up to $20,000,000, which includes, without limitation, the advances totaling $6,000,000 that were granted prior to the amendment. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received the fourth and fifth advances of $150,000 and $300,000 pursuant to the Amended Credit Agreement. The advances bear interest at 7% per annum and mature on October 5, 2022.
On July 28, 2020, we filed a registration statement on Form S-1/A, which has been declared effective as of July 31, 2020, and on July 31, 2020, we filed a related registration statement on a Form S-1MEF that became effective under Rule 462(b). On July 31, 2020, we sold 56,333,334 common stock units each consisting of one share of common stock and one common stock warrant and 60,333,334 pre-funded units each consisting of one pre-funded warrant and one common stock warrant, which securities were registered under the foregoing registration statements under a securities purchase agreement, as reported in our current report on the Form 8-K filed with the SEC on August 5, 2020. The net proceeds from the transaction were $6,085,589. The common stock warrants and prefunded warrants have an exercise price of $0.06 and $0.001, respectively. The term of the common stock warrants is five years, and the pre-funded warrants are exercisable until all the pre-funded warrants have been exercised in full. We are using the net proceeds from the offering for general corporate purposes, including working capital.
During March 2020, we approved a plan to defer up to 50% of the members of senior management’s compensation and 100% of the Board of Director and committee fees indefinitely. In August 2020, subsequent to closing the August 2020 Financing, our Board of Directors determined that we had been sufficiently financed and authorized us to pay the deferred compensation and fee balances together with a retention bonus of 10% of such balance.
From January 1, 2021 through February 23, 2021, we received $3,019,800 in proceeds from the exercise of warrants.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) emerged in Wuhan, China. Since then, it has spread to the United States and infections have been reported around the world. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 as a global pandemic, which continues to spread around the world and throughout the United States and Australia, where we have operations and conduct laboratory research and clinical studies. In response to the outbreak, federal and state authorities in the United States have introduced various recommendations and measures to try to limit the pandemic, including travel restrictions, border closures, nonessential business closures, quarantines, self-isolations, shelters-in-place and social distancing. The COVID-19 outbreak and the response of governmental authorities to try to limit it are having a significant impact on the private sector and individuals, including unprecedented business, employment, and significant economic disruptions to the global financial markets. These disruptions could impact our ability to raise additional capital and obtain the necessary funds.
Notably, we rely on third party manufacturers to produce our product candidates. The manufacturing of the active pharmaceutical ingredient of THCVHS is conducted in the United States. Formulation of the eye drop for testing is also performed in the United States but can rely on regulatory-accepted excipients that can be sourced from countries outside the United States, such as China. In connection with the recent COVID-19 pandemic, there could possibly be an impact on sourcing materials that are part of the eye drop formulation, as well as impacting volunteer and/or patient recruitment in Australia for clinical studies. Therefore, we have shifted the expected start of our first-in-human studies of the lead drug candidate, THCVHS, from the second half of 2020 to the third quarter of 2021.
The ultimate impact on us and overall delay in our drug product research and development is unknown, but our operations and financial condition will suffer in the event of business interruptions, delayed clinical trials, production or a lack of laboratory resources due to the pandemic. As of the date of this filing, we are aware of the impact on our business as a result of COVID-19 but uncertain as to the extent of this impact on our consolidated financial statements. There is uncertainty as to the duration and hence the potential impact. As a result, we are unable to estimate the potential impact on our business as of the date of this filing.
Going Concern
Our independent registered public accounting firm has issued a report on our audited consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 that includes an explanatory paragraph referring to our recurring operating losses and expressing substantial doubt in our ability to continue as a going concern. Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which assumes the realization of assets and settlement of liabilities in the normal course of business. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to generate profitable operations in the future and/or to obtain the necessary financing to meet our obligations and repay our liabilities arising from normal business operations when they become due. The outcome of these matters cannot be predicted with any certainty at this time and raise substantial doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern. Our consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to the amount and classification of assets and liabilities that may be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
There are no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.