Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is BOC Yellowstone LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for our IPO was declared effective on October 21, 2020. On October 26, 2020, we consummated our IPO of 12,500,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $125.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $7.3 million (including $6.9 million in underwriters' fees). The underwriters were granted a 45-day option from the October 21, 2020 IPO to purchase up to 1,875,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per Unit. On December 1, 2020, the underwriters' over-allotment option was exercised resulting in the purchase of an additional 1,098,898 Units.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the private placement of 7,500,000 Private Placement Warrants to our sponsor, each exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common stock at $11.50 per share, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds to us of $7.5 million. In connection with the partial exercise of the underwriter's over-allotment option, our sponsor purchased an additional 219,779 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating additional gross proceeds of $219,779.
Upon the closing of the IPO, $127,500,000 ($10.20 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the IPO, including proceeds of the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, were placed in a trust account located in the United States at JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and are invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund meeting certain conditions of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by us (or our management), until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the funds in the trust account to our stockholders, as described below. Upon the closing of the underwriter's over-allotment option, an additional $11,208,760 in proceeds from the exercise of the over-allotment and the sale of the additional Private Placement Warrants were placed in the trust account, resulting in total funds held in the trust account of $138,716,226.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the IPO and the sale of private placement warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination by January 25, 2022, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but no more than 10 business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the outstanding Class A common stock, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to its obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and marketable securities held after the IPO. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a Business Combination.
For the period from August 25, 2020 (date of inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $444,576, which consists mainly of formation and operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The registration statement for our IPO was declared effective on October 21, 2020. On October 26, 2020, we consummated our IPO of 12,500,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $125.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $7.3 million (including $6.9 million in underwriters' fees). The underwriters were granted a 45-day option from the October 21, 2020 IPO to purchase up to 1,875,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per Unit. On December 1, 2020, the underwriters' over-allotment option was exercised resulting in the purchase of an additional 1,098,898 Units.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the private placement of 7,500,000 Private Placement Warrants to our sponsor, each exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common stock at $11.50 per share, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds to us of $7.5 million. In connection with the partial exercise of the underwriter's over-allotment option, our sponsor purchased an additional 219,779 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating additional gross proceeds of $219,779.
Upon the closing of the IPO, $127,500,000 ($10.20 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the IPO, including proceeds of the sale of the private placement warrants, were placed in a trust account located in the United States at JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and are invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund meeting certain conditions of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by us (or our management), until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the funds in the trust account to our stockholders, as described below. Upon the closing of the underwriter's over-allotment option, an additional $11,208,759.60 in proceeds from the exercise of the over-allotment and the sale of the additional private placement warrants were placed in the trust account, resulting in total funds held in the trust account of $138,716,226, inclusive of earned interest on investments held in the trust account.
As of December 31, 2020, transaction costs amounted to $7,961,119, consisting of $2,719,779 of underwriting fees, $4,759,615 of deferred underwriting fees and $481,725 of other costs and expenses. In addition, $1,115,282 of cash was held outside of the trust account and is available for working capital purposes.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $138,723,137 (including approximately $2,081 of unrealized gains) consisting of U.S. treasury securities with a maturity of 185 days or less. Investment income on the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2020, we did not withdraw any funds from the investment income on the trust account.
For the period from August 25, 2020 (date of inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $708,212, consisting of formation and operating costs. The investment income of $12,297 and unrealized gains of $2,081 earned on cash and marketable securities held in the trust account are not available for operations, except for the payment of taxes.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $1,115,282 held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). The Working Capital Loans would either be paid upon consummation of the initial Business Combination, without interest, or, at the holder’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of the Working Capital Loans may be converted into warrants that would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business through January 25, 2022. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial Business Combination are less than the actual amounts necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our initial Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations. We cannot provide any assurance that additional financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities at December 31, 2020.
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of two percent (2.0%) of the gross proceeds of the IPO of $135,988,980, or $2,719,779. In addition, the underwriters have earned an additional 3.5% on $135,988,980 of the gross proceeds of the IPO, or $4,759,615, that will be paid upon consummation of our initial Business Combination. This commitment of $4,759,615 has been recorded as deferred underwriting fee payable on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. The underwriting agreement provides that the deferred underwriting discount will be waived by the underwriter if the Company does not complete its initial Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. The Company has identified the following critical accounting policy:
Offering Costs
The Company complies with the requirements of the ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering”. Offering costs were $7,961,119 (including $7,479,394 in underwriters’ fees) consisting principally of professional and registration fees incurred through the balance sheet date that are related to the Public Offering and are charged to stockholders’ equity upon the completion of the Public Offering.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
We present our earnings (net loss) per share information in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 260 “Earnings Per Share.” Under the two-class method, net income is adjusted for the portion of income that is attributable to common stock subject to redemption as these shares only participate in the income of the trust account and not the losses of the company. The remaining net income (loss) is then allocated to the weighted average shares outstanding of common stock.
Recently Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements based on current operations of the Company. The impact of any recently issued accounting standards will be re-evaluated on a regular basis or if a Business Combination is completed where the impact could be material.