ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with Item 6. Selected Financial Data, the description of the business appearing in Item 1. Business and the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements, as discussed under "Forward-Looking Statements". These statements are based on current expectations and assumptions and are subject to risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this report, particularly under "Forward-Looking Statements" and in Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Adjusted EBITDA and segment contribution margin as used herein are non-GAAP measures. For a detailed description of Adjusted EBITDA and segment contribution margin and reconciliations to their most comparable GAAP measures, please see the discussion below under “How We Evaluate Our Business.”
Overview
We are a performance materials company and one of the largest domestic producers of commercial silica used in the oil and gas industry and in a wide range of industrial applications. In addition, through our subsidiary EP Minerals, LLC ("EPM") we are an industry leader in the production of industrial minerals, including diatomaceous earth, clay (calcium bentonite and calcium montmorillonite), and perlite.
During our 121-year history, we have developed core competencies in mining, processing, logistics and materials science that enable us to produce and cost-effectively deliver over 400 diversified product types to customers across our end markets. As of December 31, 2020, we operated 23 production facilities across the United States. We control 489 million tons of reserves of commercial silica, which can be processed to make 197 million tons of finished products that meet API frac sand specifications, and 79 million tons of reserves of diatomaceous earth, perlite, and clays.
Our operations are organized into two reportable segments based on end markets served and the manner in which we analyze our operating and financial performance: (1) Oil & Gas Proppants and (2) Industrial & Specialty Products. We believe our segments are complementary because our ability to sell to a wide range of customers across end markets in these segments allows us to maximize recovery rates in our mining operations and optimize our asset utilization.
Acquisitions
For a description of our key business acquisitions during the past three years, see the discussion under Note E - Business Combinations to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recent Trends and Outlook
Oil and gas proppants end market trends
The COVID-19 pandemic and related economic repercussions coupled with an inadequate supply response and exacerbated by the lack of global storage capacity, resulted in a precipitous decline in crude oil prices in 2020. While the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and other oil producing nations ("OPEC+") agreed in April to cut production, downward pressure on commodity prices has remained and could continue for the foreseeable future. These events have negatively affected and are expected to continue to negatively affect our Oil & Gas Proppants segment. Demand for our proppant and logistics services has declined as our customers reduce their capital budgets and drilling operations in response to lower oil prices.
In response to the effects of the pandemic on our Oil & Gas Proppants segment, we took a number of steps to reduce our costs of operations in 2020. We dramatically reduced all discretionary spending, reduced officer salaries for several months, lowered headcount, and closed or idled facilities as appropriate.
The extent to which our business will continue to be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic will depend on various factors and consequences beyond our control, such as the duration and scope of the pandemic, additional actions by businesses and governments in response to the pandemic, the speed and effectiveness of responses to combat the virus, the extent of the resurgence in cases, and the effects of low oil prices on the global economy generally.
During the three months ended December 31, 2020, frac sand demand and tons sold increased sequentially compared to the three months ended September 30, 2020, as summarized below. Average selling price per ton increased
sequentially from the three months ended September 30, 2020 to the three months ended December 31, 2020 in part due to revenue recognized from shortfall penalties assessed to customers, partly offset by increased proppant supply causing decreased sand pricing.
If oil and gas drilling and completion activity does not continue to grow or if frac sand supply remains greater than demand, then we may sell fewer tons, sell tons at lower prices, or both. If we sell less frac sand or sell frac sand at lower prices, our revenue, net income, cash generated from operating activities, and liquidity would be adversely affected, and we could incur material asset impairments. If these events occur, we may evaluate actions to reduce costs and improve liquidity.
Industrial and specialty products end market trends
Demand in the industrial and specialty products end markets has been relatively stable in recent years and is primarily influenced by key macroeconomic drivers such as housing starts, population growth, light vehicle sales, beer and wine production, repair and remodel activity and industrial production. The primary end markets served by our Industrial & Specialty Products segment are building and construction products, fillers and extenders, filtration, glassmaking, absorbents, foundry, and sports and recreation. We have been increasing our value-added product offerings in the industrial and specialty products end markets organically as well as through acquisitions, such as White Armor and EPM. Sales of these new higher margin products have increased our Industrial & Specialty Products segment's profitability in recent periods.
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused, and will likely continue to cause, severe economic, market and other disruptions worldwide, which began to affect our Industrial & Specialty Products segment in the second quarter of 2020. In addition, after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience adverse impacts in this segment as a result of any long-term economic recession or depression that may continue in the future.
Our Business Strategy
The key drivers of our strategy include:
•increasing our presence and product offering in specialty products end markets;
•optimizing our product mix and further developing value-added capabilities to maximize margins;
•effectively positioning our Oil & Gas Proppants facilities to optimally serve our customers;
•optimizing our supply chain network and leveraging our logistics capabilities to meet our customers’ needs;
•evaluating both Greenfield and Brownfield expansion opportunities and other acquisitions; and,
•maintaining financial strength and flexibility.
For additional information about our key business strategies, see the discussion under “Our Company-Our Business Strategy” in Item 1. Business.
How We Generate Our Sales
Products
We derive our product sales by mining and processing minerals that our customers purchase for various uses. Our product sales are primarily a function of the price per ton and the number of tons sold. We primarily sell our products through individual purchase orders executed under short-term price agreements or at prevailing market rates. The amount invoiced reflects the price of the product, transportation, surcharges, and additional handling services as applicable, such as storage,
transloading the product from railcars to trucks and last mile logistics to the customer site. We invoice most of our product customers on a per shipment basis, although for some larger customers, we consolidate invoices weekly or monthly. Standard collection terms are net 30 days, although extended terms are offered in competitive situations.
Services
We derive our service sales primarily through the provision of transportation, equipment rental, and contract labor services to companies in the oil and gas industry. Transportation services typically consist of transporting customer proppant from storage facilities to proximal well-sites and are contracted through work orders executed under established pricing agreements. The amount invoiced reflects transportation services rendered. Equipment rental services provide customers with use of either dedicated or nonspecific wellhead proppant delivery equipment solutions for contractual periods defined either through formal lease agreements or executed work orders under established pricing agreements. The amounts invoiced reflect the length of time the equipment set was utilized in the billing period. Contract labor services provide customers with proppant delivery equipment operators through work orders executed under established pricing agreements. The amounts invoiced reflect the amount of time our labor services were utilized in the billing period. We typically invoice our customers on a weekly or monthly basis; however, some customers receive invoices upon well-site operation completion. Standard collection terms are net 30 days, although extended terms are offered in competitive situations.
Our ten largest customers accounted for approximately 34%, 43% and 48% of total sales during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. No single customer accounted for more than 10% of our total sales during the year ended December 31, 2020. Sales to one of our customers accounted for 11% and 15% of our total sales during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. No other customers accounted for 10% or more of our total sales during the same periods. At December 31, 2020, one of our customers' accounts receivable represented 24% of our total trade accounts receivable, net of allowance. At December 31, 2019, the same customer's accounts receivable represented 12% of our total trade accounts receivable, net of allowance. No other customers accounted for 10% or more of our total trade accounts receivable during the same periods.
For a limited number of customers, we sell under long-term, minimum purchase supply agreements. These agreements define, among other commitments, the volume of product that our customers must purchase, the volume of product that we must provide, and the price that we will charge and that our customers will pay for each product. Prices under these agreements are generally fixed and subject to certain contractual adjustments. Sometimes these agreements may undergo negotiations regarding pricing and volume requirements, particularly in volatile market conditions. When these negotiations occur, we may deliver sand at prices or at volumes below the requirements in our existing supply agreements. We do not consider these agreements solely representative of contracts with customers. An executed order specifying the type and quantity of product to be delivered, in combination with the noted agreements, comprise our contracts in these arrangements. Selling more tons under supply contracts enables us to be more efficient from a production, supply chain, and logistics standpoint. As discussed in Part I, Item 1A., Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, these customers may not continue to purchase the same levels of product in the future due to a variety of reasons, contract requirements notwithstanding.
As of December 31, 2020, we have 11 minimum purchase supply agreements in the Oil & Gas Proppants segment with initial terms expiring between 2021 and 2034. As of December 31, 2019, we had 16 minimum purchase supply agreements in the Oil & Gas Proppants segment with initial terms expiring between 2020 and 2034. Collectively, sales to customers with minimum purchase supply agreements accounted for 61% and 60% of Oil & Gas Proppants segment sales during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In the industrial and specialty products end markets we have not historically entered into long-term minimum purchase supply agreements with our customers because of the high cost to our customers of switching providers. We may periodically do so when capital or other investment is required to meet customer needs. Instead, we often enter into supply agreements with our customers with targeted volumes and terms of one to five years. Prices under these agreements are generally fixed and subject to annual increases.
The Costs of Conducting Our Business
The principal expenses involved in conducting our business are transportation costs, labor costs, electricity and drying fuel costs, and maintenance and repair costs for our mining and processing equipment and facilities. Transportation and related costs include freight charges, fuel surcharges, transloading fees, switching fees, railcar lease costs, demurrage costs, storage fees and labor costs. We believe the majority of our operating costs are relatively stable in price, but they can vary significantly based on the volume of product produced. We benefit from owning the majority of the mineral deposits that we mine and having long-term mineral rights leases or supply agreements for our other primary sources of raw material, which limits royalty payments.
Additionally, we incur expenses related to our corporate operations, including costs for sales and marketing; research and development; and the finance, legal, human resources, information technology, and environmental, health and safety functions of our organization. These costs are principally driven by personnel expenses.
How We Evaluate Our Business
Our management team evaluates our business using a variety of financial and operating metrics. We evaluate the performance of our two segments based on their tons sold, average selling price and contribution margin earned. Additionally, we consider a number of factors in evaluating the performance of our business as a whole, including total tons sold, average selling price, total segment contribution margin, and Adjusted EBITDA. We view these metrics as important factors in evaluating our profitability and review these measurements frequently to analyze trends and make decisions, and we believe the presentation of these metrics provides useful information to our investors regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the same reasons.
Segment Contribution Margin
Segment contribution margin, a non-GAAP measure, is a key metric that management uses to evaluate our operating performance and to determine resource allocation between segments. Segment contribution margin excludes selling, general, and administrative costs, corporate costs, plant capacity expansion expenses, and facility closure costs.
Segment contribution margin is not a measure of our financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered an alternative measure or superior to measures derived in accordance with GAAP. Our measure of segment contribution margin is not necessarily comparable to other similarly titled captions of other companies due to potential inconsistencies in the methods of calculation. For more information about segment contribution margin, including a reconciliation of this measure to its most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, net income (loss), see Note V - Segment Reporting to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP measure, is included in this report because it is a key metric used by management to assess our operating performance and by our lenders to evaluate our covenant compliance. Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain income and/or costs, the removal of which improves comparability of operating results across reporting periods. Our target performance goals under our incentive compensation plan are tied, in part, to our Adjusted EBITDA.
Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure of our financial performance or liquidity under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative or superior to net income (loss) as a measure of operating performance, cash flows from operating activities as a measure of liquidity or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP. Additionally, Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to be a measure of free cash flow for management’s discretionary use, as it does not consider certain cash requirements such as interest payments, tax payments and debt service requirements. Adjusted EBITDA contains certain other limitations, including the failure to reflect our cash expenditures, cash requirements for working capital needs and cash costs to replace assets being depreciated and amortized, and excludes certain charges that may recur in the future. Management compensates for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and by using Adjusted EBITDA only supplementally. Our measure of Adjusted EBITDA is not necessarily comparable to other similarly titled captions of other companies due to potential inconsistencies in the methods of calculation.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of net (loss) income, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, to Adjusted EBITDA.
(1)
Reflects equity-based, non-cash compensation expense.
(2)
Includes net pension cost and net post-retirement cost relating to pension and other post-retirement benefit obligations during the applicable period, but in each case excluding the service cost relating to benefits earned during such period. Non-service net periodic benefit costs are not considered reflective of our operating performance because these costs do not exclusively originate from employee services during the applicable period and may experience periodic fluctuations as a result of changes in non-operating factors, including changes in discount rates, changes in expected returns on benefit plan assets, and other demographic actuarial assumptions. See Note Q - Pension and Post-Retirement Benefits to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
(3)
Merger and acquisition related expenses include legal fees, consulting fees, bank fees, severance costs, purchase-related costs such as the amortization of inventory fair value step-up, information technology integration costs and similar charges. While these costs are not operational in nature and are not expected to continue for any singular transaction on an ongoing basis, similar types of costs, expenses and charges have occurred in prior periods and may recur in the future as we continue to integrate prior acquisitions and pursue any future acquisitions.
(4)
Plant capacity expansion expenses include expenses that are not inventoriable or capitalizable as related to plant expansion projects greater than $5 million in capital expenditures or plant start up projects. While these expenses are not operational in nature and are not expected to continue for any singular project on an ongoing basis, similar types of expenses have occurred in prior periods and may recur in the future.
(5)
Reflects contract termination expenses related to strategically exiting service contracts. While these expenses are not operational in nature and are not expected to continue for any singular event on an ongoing basis, similar types of expenses have occurred in prior periods and may recur in the future as we continue to strategically evaluate our contracts.
(6)
See Note Y - Impairments to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information. While these expenses are not operational in nature and are not expected to continue for any singular event on an ongoing basis, similar types of expenses have occurred in prior periods and may recur in the future.
(7)
Reflects costs incurred related to business optimization projects mainly within our corporate center, which aim to measure and improve the efficiency, productivity and performance of our organization. While these costs are not operational in nature and are not expected to continue for any singular project on an ongoing basis, similar types of expenses may recur in the future.
(8)
Reflects costs incurred mainly related to idled sand facilities and closed corporate offices, including severance costs and remaining contracted costs such as office lease costs, and common area maintenance fees. While these costs are not operational in nature and are not expected to continue for any singular event on an ongoing basis, similar types of expenses may recur in the future.
(9)
Gains on valuation change of royalty note payable due to a change in estimate of future tonnages and sales related to the sand shipped from our Tyler, Texas facility. These gains are not operational in nature and are not expected to continue for any singular event on an ongoing basis. See Note K - Debt to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(10)
Reflects miscellaneous adjustments permitted under the Credit Agreement. For 2020, includes $1.6 million in transload shortfalls and exit fees, $4.6 million in inventory adjustments, $6.0 million in severance costs, and $11.8 million in legal expense due to the unsuccessful defense of a small number of our patents, offset by $15.2 million related to the gain attributable to the bargain purchase of Arrows Up. For 2019, includes $6.2 million of loss contingencies reserve as well as restructuring costs for actions that will provide future savings, storm damage costs, recruiting fees, relocation costs and a loss on sale of assets, partially offset by insurance proceeds of $2.2 million. For 2018, includes storm damage costs, recruiting fees, relocation costs, and a net loss of $0.7 million on divestitures of assets, consisting of $5.2 million of contract termination costs and $1.3 million of divestiture related expenses such as legal fees and consulting fees, partially offset by a $5.8 million gain on sale of assets.
Adjusted EBITDA-Trailing Twelve Months
Our Revolver contains a covenant that we maintain a consolidated total net leverage ratio of no more than 3.75:1.00 that, unless we have the consent of our lenders, we must meet as of the last day of any fiscal quarter whenever usage of the Revolver (other than certain undrawn letters of credit) exceeds 30% of the Revolver commitment. This ratio is calculated based on our Adjusted EBITDA for the trailing twelve months. Noncompliance with this financial ratio covenant could result in the acceleration of our obligations to repay all amounts outstanding under the Revolver and the term loan (the "Term Loan") (collectively the "Credit Facility"). Moreover, the Revolver and the Term Loan contain covenants that restrict, subject to certain exceptions, our ability to make permitted acquisitions, incur additional indebtedness, make restricted payments (including dividends) and retain excess cash flow based, in some cases, on our ability to meet leverage ratios calculated based on our Adjusted EBITDA for the trailing twelve months.
See the description under “Adjusted EBITDA” above for certain important information about Adjusted EBITDA-trailing twelve months, including certain limitations and management’s use of this metric in light of its status as a non-GAAP measure.
As of December 31, 2020, we are in compliance with all covenants under our Credit Facility, and our Revolver usage was $25.0 million (other than certain undrawn letters of credit). Since the Revolver usage did not exceed 30% of the Revolver commitment, the consolidated leverage ratio covenant did not apply. Based on our consolidated leverage ratio of 6.07:1.00 as of December 31, 2020, we may draw up to $30.0 million without the consent of our lenders. With the consent of our lenders, we have access to the full availability of the Revolver. The calculation of the consolidated leverage ratio incorporates the Adjusted EBITDA-trailing twelve months as follows:
(1)
Covenant calculation allows for the Adjusted EBITDA-trailing twelve months to include the impact of acquisitions on a pro forma basis.
(2)
Covenant calculation excludes activity at legal entities above the operating company, which is mainly interest income offset by public company operating expenses.
(3)
Calculated by dividing Total consolidated debt by Total Adjusted EBITDA-trailing twelve months for covenant calculation.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Sales
Total sales decreased 43% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by a 3% decrease in overall average selling price and a 41% decrease in total tons sold.
The decrease in total sales was mainly driven by Oil & Gas Proppants sales, which decreased 59% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Oil & Gas Proppants average selling price decreased 18% and tons sold decreased 50%. These decreases are a result of the shift to in-basin sand, overall decrease in demand due to current economic conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as overall supply being greater than demand.
The decrease in total sales was also partially driven by Industrial & Specialty Products sales, which decreased 7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Industrial & Specialty Products average selling price decreased 5% and tons sold decreased 3%. These decreases were primarily due to current economic conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales decreased by $558.2 million, or 49%, to $575.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.133 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. These changes result from the main components of cost of sales as discussed below. As a percentage of sales, cost of sales represented 68% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 77% for the same period in 2019.
We incurred $191.0 million and $506.3 million of transportation and related costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease was mainly due to an overall decrease in demand in the Oil & Gas Proppants segment, more tons sold from local in-basin plants which have lower logistics costs, carrier rate reductions in our SandBox operations, as well as decreased rail car expense resulting from lease remeasurements in the amount of $24.0 million. See Note R - Leases for more information on the lease remeasurements. As a percentage of sales, transportation and related costs decreased to 23% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 34% for the same period in 2019.
We incurred $117.3 million and $198.6 million of operating labor costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $81.3 million decrease in labor costs incurred was mainly due to idled facilities. As a percentage of sales, operating labor costs represented 14% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 13% for the same period in 2019.
We incurred $33.6 million and $54.8 million of electricity and drying fuel (principally natural gas) costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $21.2 million decrease in electricity and drying fuel costs incurred was mainly due to idled sand facilities. As a percentage of sales, electricity and drying fuel costs represented 4% for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
We incurred $46.3 million and $92.3 million of maintenance and repair costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in maintenance and repair costs incurred was mainly due to idled sand facilities, reduced costs at our SandBox operations due to lower volumes, and a decrease in plant capacity expansion expenses. As a percentage of sales, maintenance and repair costs represented 5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 6% for the same period in 2019.
Segment Contribution Margin
Oil & Gas Proppants contribution margin decreased by $106.6 million to $142.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $248.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by a $595.6 million decrease in sales, partially offset by $489.1 million in lower cost of sales. The decrease in segment contribution margin was mainly driven by an overall decrease in demand and decreased sand pricing as a result of a shift to in-basin sand, partially offset by $48.0 million in shortfall revenue recognized.
Industrial & Specialty Products contribution margin decreased by $19.0 million, or 11%, to $159.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $178.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by a $33.0 million decrease in revenue, partially offset by $13.9 million in lower cost of sales. The decrease in segment contribution margin was due to less tons sold due to current economic conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $26.6 million, or 18%, to $124.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $150.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to cost reduction measures implemented including reducing all discretionary spending, reduced officer salaries and lowered headcount. In total, our selling, general and administrative expenses represented approximately 15% and 10% of our sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization
Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense decreased by $23.8 million, or 13%, to $155.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $179.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was mainly driven by decreased production, a decrease in total depreciable assets due to idled plants and subsequent asset impairments, and reduced capital spending. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense represented approximately 18% and 12% of our sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Goodwill and Other Asset Impairments
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $110.7 million in asset impairments, which primarily related to our Oil & Gas Proppants segment due to an unprecedented drop in global demand combined with the breakdown of the OPEC+ agreement to restrict oil production that led to one of the largest annual crude builds in history, which also led to a sharp reduction in global crude oil prices. Additionally, containment measures and other economic, travel, and business disruptions caused by COVID-19 also affected refinery activity and future demand for crude oil, and consequently, the services and products of our Oil & Gas Proppants segment. During 2019, we recorded $363.8 million in asset impairments in our Oil & Gas Proppants segment due to a sharp decline in customer demand for Northern White frac sand and for regional non-in-basin frac sand as more tons were produced and sold in-basin. Additionally, the price of frac sand decreased significantly.
Operating (Loss) Income
Operating loss decreased by $233.4 million to $119.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $353.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was driven by a decrease in asset impairments as discussed above, an 18% decrease in selling, general and administrative expense, a 13% decrease in depreciation, depletion and amortization expense, and a 49% decrease in cost of sales, offset by a 43% decrease in total sales.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $15.6 million, or 16%, to $79.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $95.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, mainly due to a decrease in interest rates, partially offset by a decrease in interest costs capitalized for property, plant and mine development and interest expense on the outstanding balance of the Revolver.
Other Income (Expense), net, including interest income
Other income increased by $4.9 million to $24.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $19.5 million in other income for the year ended December 31, 2019. The year ended December 31, 2020 included a gain attributable to the bargain purchase of a business of $15.2 million and a gain on the valuation change of a royalty note payable of $8.3 million, partially offset by a decrease of $2.7 million of interest income. The year ended December 31, 2019 included a gain on the valuation change of a royalty note payable of $16.9 million.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our income tax benefit decreased by $39.0 million to $60.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a $99.2 million income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was mainly due to the decreased loss before income tax during the year ended December 31, 2020. The effective tax rate was 34% and 23% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See Note S - Income Taxes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual report on Form 10-K for more information.
Historically, our actual effective tax rates have differed from the statutory effective rate primarily due to the benefit received from statutory percentage depletion allowances. The deduction for statutory percentage depletion does not necessarily change proportionately to changes in income before income taxes. However, for the year ended 2020, we recorded a permanent tax benefit of $22.3 million related to tax legislation enacted during 2020, which represents the largest permanent item in computing our effective tax rate for 2020.
Net (loss) income
Net losses attributable to U.S. Silica Holdings, Inc., were $114.1 million and $329.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The year over year changes were due to the factors noted above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Liquidity and Capital Resources” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, which is incorporated by reference herein.
Overview
Our principal liquidity requirements have historically been to service our debt, to meet our working capital, capital expenditure and mine development expenditure needs, to return cash to our stockholders, and to pay for acquisitions. We have historically met our liquidity and capital investment needs with funds generated through operations. We have historically funded our acquisitions through cash on hand, borrowings under our credit facilities, or equity issuances. Our working capital is the amount by which current assets exceed current liabilities and is a measure of our ability to pay our liabilities as they become due. As of December 31, 2020, our working capital was $291.4 million and we had $52.0 million of availability under the Revolver. Based on our consolidated leverage ratio of 6.07:1.00 as of December 31, 2020, we may draw up to $30.0 million without the consent of our lenders. With the consent of our lenders, we have access to the full availability of the Revolver. Additionally, as of December 31, 2020, other receivables included $37.4 million of refunds related to NOL carryback claims filed for various tax years in accordance with certain provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act ("CARES" Act), which we expect to receive during 2021.
In connection with the EPMH acquisition, on May 1, 2018, we entered into the Credit Agreement with BNP Paribas, as administrative agent, and the lenders named therein. The Credit Agreement increased our existing senior debt by creating a new $1.380 billion senior secured Credit Facility, consisting of a $1.280 billion Term Loan and a $100 million Revolver that may also be used for swingline loans or letters of credit, and we may elect to increase the Term Loan in accordance with the terms of the Credit Agreement. The amounts owed under the Credit Agreement use LIBOR as a benchmark for establishing the rate at which interest accrues. LIBOR is the subject of recent national, international and other regulatory guidance and proposals for reform. These reforms and other pressures may cause LIBOR to disappear entirely or to perform differently than in the past. The consequences of these developments cannot be entirely predicted but could include an increase in the cost to us of this indebtedness.
During the third quarter of 2019, we repurchased outstanding debt under the Term Loan in the amount of $10 million at a rate of 95.5%. Debt issuance costs and original issue discount were recalculated with the reduced future debt payments, and additional costs of approximately $0.4 million were expensed. As a result, we recorded a gain on extinguishment of debt in the amount of $0.1 million. For more information on the Credit Agreement see Note K - Debt to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In response to the effects of the pandemic on our Oil & Gas Proppants segment, we have taken a number of steps to reduce our costs of operations, including dramatically reducing all discretionary spending, reducing officer salaries, lowering headcount, and closing or idling facilities as appropriate. We believe that cash on hand, cash generated through operations and cash generated from financing arrangements will be sufficient to meet our working capital requirements, anticipated capital expenditures, scheduled debt payments and any dividends declared for at least the next 12 months. During the period of economic disruption resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to access capital markets and other sources of liquidity may be impaired. At this time, we do not believe that any limited access to the capital markets and other sources of liquidity will have a material adverse effect on our financial condition.
Management and our Board remain committed to evaluating additional ways of creating shareholder value. Any determination to pay dividends or other distributions in cash, stock, or property in the future or otherwise return capital to our stockholders, including decisions about existing or new share repurchase programs, will be at the discretion of our Board and will be dependent on then-existing conditions, including industry and market conditions, our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and capital requirements, contractual restrictions including restrictive covenants contained in debt agreements, and other factors. Additionally, because we are a holding company, our ability to pay dividends on our common stock may be limited by restrictions on the ability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends or make distributions to us, including restrictions under the terms of the agreements governing our indebtedness. During May 2020, our Board of Directors determined that it was not in the best interest of our shareholders to issue a dividend for the second quarter of 2020 and they subsequently decided not to issue a dividend for the third or fourth quarters of 2020. The Board of Directors will make determinations regarding future dividends on a quarterly basis using the criteria described above.
Cash Flow Analysis
A summary of operating, investing and financing activities (in thousands) is shown in the following table:
Net Cash Used in / Provided by Operating Activities
Operating activities consist primarily of net income adjusted for certain non-cash and working capital items. Adjustments to net income for non-cash items include depreciation, depletion and amortization, deferred revenue, deferred income taxes, equity-based compensation and provision for credit losses. In addition, operating cash flows include the effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities, principally accounts receivable, inventories, prepaid expenses and other current assets, income taxes payable and receivable, accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Net cash used in operating activities was $10.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was mainly due to a $115.1 million net loss adjusted for non-cash items, including $155.6 million in depreciation, depletion and amortization, $110.7 million in goodwill and other asset impairments, $61.8 million in deferred income taxes, $14.9 million in equity-based compensation, $23.6 million in deferred revenue, $8.3 million in gain on valuation of royalty note payable, $24.0 million related to a gain on remeasurement of leases, $2.6 million related to the gain on sales of property, plant and equipment, and $30.8 million in other miscellaneous non-cash items. Also contributing to the change was a $48.4 million decrease in accounts receivable, a $15.2 million decrease in inventories, a $6.2 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, a $0.2 million decrease in income taxes, an $86.7 million decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities, and $57.8 million in other operating assets and liabilities.
Net Cash Used in / Provided by Investing Activities
Investing activities consist primarily of cash consideration paid to acquire businesses and capital expenditures for growth and maintenance.
Net cash used in investing activities was $27.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was mainly due to capital expenditures of $34.5 million and capitalized intellectual property costs of $0.5 million, partially offset by proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment of $7.4 million. Capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily related to growth projects in our Industrial & Specialty Products segment, as well as spending on equipment to expand our SandBox operations and other maintenance and cost improvement capital projects.
Subject to our continuing evaluation of market conditions, we anticipate that our capital expenditures in 2021 will be in the range of approximately $30 million to $40 million, which is primarily associated with maintenance, cost improvement capital projects and near-term payback growth projects. We expect to fund our capital expenditures through cash on our balance sheet, cash generated from our operations and cash generated from financing activities.
Net Cash Provided by / Used in Financing Activities
Financing activities consist primarily of equity issuances, dividend payments, share repurchases, borrowings and repayments related to the Revolver and Term Loan, as well as fees and expenses paid in connection with our credit facilities.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was mainly due to a $25 million draw from our Revolver, offset by $16.0 million of long-term debt payments, $6.2 million of dividends paid, $0.7 million of tax payments related to shares withheld for vested restricted stock and stock units, and a $1.2 million capital contribution from a non-controlling interest.
Share Repurchase Program
We did not make any repurchases of our common stock under our stock repurchase program in 2020. See Purchase of Equity Securities by the Issuer in Part II, Item 5. and Note D - Capital Structure and Accumulated Comprehensive Income (Loss) to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information related to our share repurchase program.
Credit Facilities
See Note K - Debt to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information related to our credit facilities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have a current material effect or are reasonably likely to have a future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, sales, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, the total of our future contractual cash commitments, including the repayment of our debt obligations under the Term Loan, is summarized as follows:
(1)Excludes the unamortized debt issuance costs and original issue discount.
(2)Includes estimated future minimum purchase obligations related to transload service agreements and transportation service agreements. As of December 31, 2020, we accrued $1.3 million in shortfall fees under these service agreements.
(3)The above table excludes discounted asset retirement obligations in the amount of $24.7 million at December 31, 2020, the majority of which have a settlement date beyond 2025, as well as indemnification for surety bonds issued on our behalf discussed in Note P - Commitments and Contingencies to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(4)Estimated interest payment amounts are computed using forecasted three-month LIBOR rates as of December 31, 2020. Estimated interest payments include both the Term Loan and Revolver.
(5)Includes interest and other operating costs. See Note R - Leases for additional information on interest costs.
Environmental Matters
We are subject to various federal, state and local laws and regulations governing, among other things, hazardous materials, air and water emissions, environmental contamination and reclamation and the protection of the environment and natural resources. We have made, and expect to make in the future, expenditures to comply with such laws and regulations, but we cannot estimate or predict the full amount of such future expenditures. As of December 31, 2020, we had $24.7 million accrued for future reclamation costs, as compared to $25.8 million as of December 31, 2019.
We discuss certain environmental matters relating to our various production and other facilities, certain regulatory requirements relating to human exposure to crystalline silica and our mining activity and how such matters may affect our business in the future under Item 1. Business, Item 1A. Risk Factors and Item 3. Legal Proceedings.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the financial statements and the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate these estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis and base our estimates on historical experience, current conditions and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results of these estimates form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities as well as identifying and assessing the accounting treatment with respect to commitments and contingencies. Our actual results may materially differ from these estimates.
A summary of our significant accounting policies is included in Note B - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Management believes that the application of these policies on a consistent basis enables us to provide the users of the Consolidated Financial Statements with useful and reliable information about our operating results and financial condition.
Described below are the accounting policies we believe are critical to our financial statements due to the degree of uncertainty regarding the estimates or assumptions involved, and that we believe are critical to the understanding of our operations and our performance.
Revenue Recognition
Products
We derive our product sales by mining and processing minerals that our customers purchase for various uses. Our product sales are primarily a function of the price per ton and the number of tons sold. We primarily sell our products through individual purchase orders executed under short-term price agreements or at prevailing market rates. The amount invoiced reflects product, transportation and additional handling services as applicable, such as storage, transloading the product from railcars to trucks and last mile logistics to the customer site. We invoice most of our product customers on a per shipment basis, although for some larger customers, we consolidate invoices weekly or monthly. Standard collection terms are net 30 days, although extended terms are offered in competitive situations.
We recognize revenue for products and materials at a point in time following the transfer of control of such items to the customer, which typically occurs upon shipment or delivery depending on the terms of the underlying contracts. We account for shipping and handling activities related to product and material sales contracts with customers as costs to fulfill our promise to transfer the associated products pursuant to the accounting policy election allowed under ASC 606-10-25-10b. Accordingly, we record amounts billed for shipping and handling costs as a component of net sales and accrue and classify related costs as a component of cost of sales at the time revenue is recognized.
For a limited number of customers, we sell under long-term, minimum purchase supply agreements. These agreements define, among other commitments, the volume of product that our customers must purchase, the volume of product that we must provide and the price that we will charge and that our customers will pay for each product. Prices under these agreements are generally fixed and subject to certain contractual adjustments. Sometimes these agreements may undergo negotiations regarding pricing and volume requirements, which may often occur in volatile market conditions. While these negotiations continue, we may deliver sand at prices or at volumes below the requirements in our existing supply agreements. An executed order specifying the type and quantity of product to be delivered, in combination with the noted agreements, comprise our contracts in these arrangements.
Service
We derive our service revenues primarily through the provision of transportation, equipment rental, and contract labor services to companies in the oil and gas industry. Transportation services typically consist of transporting customer proppant from storage facilities to proximal well-sites and are contracted through work orders executed under established pricing agreements. The amount invoiced reflects the transportation services rendered. Equipment rental services provide customers with use of either dedicated or nonspecific wellhead proppant delivery equipment solutions for contractual periods defined either through formal lease agreements or executed work orders under established pricing agreements. The amounts invoiced reflect the length of time the equipment set was utilized in the billing period. Contract labor services provide customers with proppant delivery equipment operators through work orders executed under established pricing agreements. The amounts invoiced reflect the amount of time our labor services were utilized in the billing period.
We typically invoice our customers on a weekly or monthly basis; however, some customers receive invoices upon well-site operation completion. Standard collection terms are net 30 days, although extended terms are offered in competitive situations. We typically recognize revenue for specific, dedicated equipment set rental arrangements under ASC 842, Leases. For the remaining components of service revenue, we have applied the practical expedient allowed under ASC 606-10-55-18 to recognize transportation revenues in proportion to the amount we have the right to invoice.
Contracts with Multiple Performance Obligations
From time to time, we may enter into contracts that contain multiple performance obligations, such as work orders containing a combination of product, transportation, equipment rentals, and contract labor services. For these arrangements, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation identified in the contract based on relative standalone selling prices, or estimates of such prices, and recognize the related revenue as control of each individual product or service is transferred to the customer, in satisfaction of the corresponding performance obligations. We typically invoice our customers on a weekly or monthly basis; however, some customers receive invoices upon well-site operation completion. Standard collection terms are net 30 days, although extended terms are offered in competitive situations.
Taxes Collected from Customers and Remitted to Governmental Authorities
We exclude from our measurement of transaction prices all taxes assessed by governmental authorities that are both (i) imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction and (ii) collected from customers. Accordingly, such tax amounts are not included as a component of net sales or cost of sales.
Deferred Revenues
For a limited number of customers, we enter into supply agreements which give customers the right to make advanced payments toward the purchase of certain products at specified volumes over an average initial period of one to fifteen years. These payments represent consideration that is unconditional and for which we have yet to transfer the related product. These payments are recorded as contract liabilities referred to as “deferred revenues” upon receipt and recognized as revenue upon delivery of the related product.
Unbilled Receivables
Revenues recognized in advance of invoice issuance create assets referred to as “unbilled receivables.” Any portion of our unbilled receivables for which our right to consideration is conditional on a factor other than the passage of time is considered a contract asset. These assets are presented on a combined basis with accounts receivable and are converted to accounts receivable once billed.
Impairment or Disposal of Property, Plant and Mine Development
We periodically evaluate whether current events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of our property, plant and equipment assets may not be recoverable. If circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable, we estimate future undiscounted net cash flows using estimates of proven and probable sand reserves, estimated future sales prices (considering historical and current prices, price trends and related factors) and operating costs and anticipated capital expenditures. If the undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of the assets we recognize an impairment loss equal to the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the assets.
The recoverability of the carrying value of our mineral properties is dependent upon the successful development, start-up and commercial production of our mineral deposit and the related processing facilities. Our evaluation of mineral properties for potential impairment primarily includes assessing the existence or availability of required permits and evaluating changes in our mineral reserves, or the underlying estimates and assumptions, including estimated production costs. Assessing the economic feasibility requires certain estimates including the prices of products to be produced and processing recovery rates, as well as operating and capital costs.
Gains on the sale of property, plant and mine development are included in income when the assets are disposed of provided there is more than reasonable certainty of the collectability of the sales price and any future activities required to be performed by us relating to the disposal of the assets are complete or insignificant. Upon retirement or disposal of assets all costs and related accumulated depreciation or amortization are written-off.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets and Related Impairment
Our intangible assets consist of goodwill, which is not being amortized, indefinite-lived intangibles, which consist of certain trade names that are not subject to amortization, intellectual property and customer relationships.
Intellectual property mainly consists of patents and technology, and it is amortized on a straight-line basis over an average useful life of 15 years. Customer relationships are amortized on a straight-line basis over their useful life of 13 - 20 years.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of business combinations over the fair value of net assets acquired. Goodwill and trade names are reviewed for impairment annually as of October 31, or more frequently when indicators of impairment exist. An impairment exists if the fair value of a reporting unit to which goodwill has been allocated, or the fair value of indefinite-lived intangible assets, is less than their respective carrying values. Prior to conducting a formal impairment test we have an option to assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that is more likely than not (more than 50%) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Such qualitative factors may include the following: macroeconomic conditions; industry and market considerations; cost factors; overall financial performance; and other relevant entity-specific events. If the qualitative assessment determines that an impairment is more likely than not, or if we choose to bypass the qualitative assessment, we perform a quantitative assessment by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount and recognize an impairment charge for the amount by
which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
Income Taxes
Deferred taxes are provided on the liability method whereby deferred tax assets are recognized for deductible temporary differences and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards and deferred tax liabilities are recognized for taxable temporary differences. This approach requires recognition of deferred tax liabilities and assets for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax liabilities and assets are determined based upon the difference between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the expenses are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are provided if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We recognize a tax benefit associated with an uncertain tax position when, in management’s judgment, it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination by a taxing authority. For a tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, we initially and subsequently measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that we judge to have a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority. The liability associated with unrecognized tax benefits is adjusted periodically due to changing circumstances, such as the progress of tax audits, case law developments and new or emerging legislation. Such adjustments are recognized entirely in the period in which they are identified. The effective tax rate includes the net impact of changes in the liability for unrecognized tax benefits and subsequent adjustments as considered appropriate by management.
Generally, the largest permanent item in computing both our effective tax rate and taxable income is the deduction allowed for statutory depletion. The deduction for statutory depletion does not necessarily change proportionately to changes in income before income taxes. However, for the year ended 2020, we recorded a permanent tax benefit related to tax legislation enacted during 2020, which represents the largest permanent item in computing our effective tax rate for 2020.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
New accounting guidance that has been recently issued is described in Note B - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.