ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations together with our financial statements and the notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, whose actual outcomes involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those stated in or implied by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors,” “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Report.
General
Super League Gaming is a leading gaming community and content platform that gives everyday gamers and creators multiple ways to connect and engage with others while enjoying the video games they love. Powered by patented, proprietary technology systems, Super League offers players the ability to create gameplay-driven experiences they can share with friends, the opportunity to watch live streaming broadcasts and gameplay highlights across digital and social channels, and the chance to compete in events and challenges designed to celebrate victories and achievements across multiple skill levels. With gameplay and content offerings featuring more than a dozen of the top video game titles in the world, Super League is building a broadly inclusive, global brand at the intersection of gaming, experiences and entertainment. Whether to access its expanding direct audience of young gamers, creators and esports players, or to leverage the company’s remote video production division, Virtualis Studios, third parties ranging from consumer brands, video game publishers, professional esports teams, traditional sports organizations, video content producers, and more, are turning to Super League to provide integrated solutions that drive business growth.
Executive Summary
We believe Super League is on the leading edge of the rapidly growing competitive video gaming industry, which has become an established and vital part of the entertainment landscape. We believe there is a significant opportunity for the world of mainstream competitive players and creators who want their own esports and entertainment experience. These players and creators enjoy the competition, the social interaction and community, and the entertainment value associated with playing, creating and watching others play.
Super League is a critically important component in providing the infrastructure for mainstream competitive video gaming content and gameplay, that is synergistic and accretive to the greater esports ecosystem. Over the past five years, we believe we have become the preeminent brand for gamers by providing a proprietary software platform that allows them to create, compete, socialize and spectate gameplay and entertainment, both physically and digitally online. Our creator and player platform generates a significant amount of derivative gameplay content for further syndication beyond our own digital channels.
The fundamental driver of our business model and monetization strategy is creating deep community engagement through our highly personalized experiences that, when coupled with the critical mass of our large digital audiences, provides the depth and volume for premium content and offer monetization differentiated from a more traditional, commoditized advertising model. The combination of our physical venue network and digital programming channels, with Super League’s cloud-based, digital products platform technology at the hub, creates the opportunity for not just a share of the player’s wallet, but also the advertiser’s wallet. We do this by offering brand sponsors and advertisers a premium marketing channel to reach elusive Generation Z and Millennial gamers and creators and offering players ways to access exclusive tournaments and programming.
During fiscal year 2020, management continued to focus on monetization with respect to our three primary revenue streams: (1) advertising revenues, (2) content revenues, and (3) direct to consumer revenues. In addition to the significant strong KPI performance described below, we: (i) continued our focus on our premium advertising model for future monetization of our rapidly growing premium advertising inventory, invested in the expansion of our in-house direct sales team to facilitate delivery, and increased revenues generated from programmatic display and video advertising units; (ii) focused on our swift pivot to accelerate the monetization of our original and user generated content library and remote production and broadcast capabilities, which emerged as a significant component of revenue in 2020; (iii) continued to focus on monetization of the gamer and creator through direct-to-consumer offers, including increases in sales of digital goods, primarily with our Minehut digital property, and the launch of the early stages of a micro-transaction marketplace; and, (iv) began to unlock new ways that our content production technology can extend beyond esports into traditional sports and other entertainment formats representing revenue growth opportunities in future periods. We expect to continue to grow our adverting pipeline across various verticals with the capability to provide brands and advertisers with targeted, high quality integrations that warrant premium costs per impressions (“CPM”) advertising rates.
Super League Gaming experienced its strongest period of audience growth during the challenging time of the COVID-19 pandemic, marked by the reaching of a key 2020 milestone in July 2020; reaching one billion video views and impressions. This key milestone at the time, represented more than a 700% increase over the full fiscal year of 2019, during which we achieved a total of 120 million views. More importantly, as of the end of 2020 we generated a total of 2.0 billion views and impressions.
The ability to generate over one billion views year to date in July 2020, on our way to over two billion views for fiscal 2020, was a key proof point of not only the compelling attractiveness of our content, but also to the variety we are able to offer. We have established ourselves as a leading publisher of user generated gaming highlights on Snapchat and within our Framerate social video network. During 2020, we expanded to nine gameplay highlights channels across Instagram and Tik Tok, produced three original series on InstagramTV, and produced seven original shows on Snapchat that, all together, delivered on average more than 169.0 million video views per month.
During the fiscal year 2020, we experienced a significant increase in registered users, gamer and creator engagement, and gameplay hours across all of our platforms. We believe a driver of the increase was, to a certain extent, the general period of social distancing and mandatory shelter in place orders stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic, during which passionate video gamers and creators around the world sought a competitive outlet, seeking to connect with others around the games they love and turned to esports and entertainment and other online gaming communities to fill the void. We also believe that a driver of the increase is the fact that esports and entertainment is mainstream, which was the case prior to COVID-19, and we expect this trend to continue subsequent to the COVID-19 pandemic. These increases are accelerating our growth plans, and are increasing our opportunities for monetization.
Our video content business is also accelerating on an additional path through the advancement of our proprietary, cloud-based, live content capture and broadcast system, which includes patented technology and fully remote, innovative workflows operated by SuperLeagueTV, our completely virtual studio. Endemic and non-endemic brands and partners have sought out Super League to provide premium, TV-quality production services across a multitude of live streamed events. During 2020, within gaming alone, broadcasts have spanned an impressive mix of game titles including Minecraft, APEX Legends, NBA2K, PUBG Mobile, the World Golf Tour and more.
In connection with the advancement of our content capture and broadcast system, in December 2020 we announced the launch of Virtualis Studios, our fully virtual production studio providing proprietary, state-of-the-art, scalable solutions for video, television, and branded content. We believe that production companies in need of experienced teams with a deep understanding of remote production technologies and systems can rely on Virtualis Studios’ expertise, developed through years of broadcasting multi-location esports events. Whether for the creation and broadcast of premium content, or for monitoring productions from remote locations, Virtualis Studios supports a broad spectrum of critical needs in today’s production environment. Born from cloud-based esports broadcast solutions designed to enable thousands of simultaneous gameplay and player cam feeds to be live streamed across dozens of endpoints, Virtualis Studios specializes in integrating multiple technology solutions to ensure any given project can be produced and monitored successfully on a partially or fully-remote basis. The proprietary infrastructure already supports multiple, concurrent virtual control rooms that are fully operational at any given time, with limitless scalability compared to what is possible within a physical studio and on-site control room.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the related uncertainty, advertisers and sponsors across the board inevitably paused to reset their marketing strategies, and as a result, all companies with business models that include sponsorship and advertising revenues felt the impact of the pause in advertising spend industry-wide. In addition, as a result of COVID-19, we also felt the impact of the deferral of some of the programs in our pipeline and related revenues to future periods. We did not experience any cancellations of existing programs. The majority of our gameplay hours and other engagement occurs digitally, online, so while our “in real life” gaming is a premium and important aspect of our brand, the shift away from retail locations is not expected to have a significant impact on our overall business model over time, which is largely digitally focused.
Although we were impacted by the general deferral in advertising spending by brands and sponsors resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic for a significant portion of fiscal year 2020, we reported significant quarter over quarter growth in revenues in the second half of fiscal 2020 and we expect to continue to expand our advertising revenue and revenue from the sale of our proprietary and third-party user generated content in future periods, as we continue to expand our advertising inventory, viewership and related sales activities.
Key Performance Indicators.
The KPIs driving our business model are related to scalable offers across our digital and physical footprint of gaming-centric offers and entertainment. We focus and report on three key performance indicators (“KPIs”), as outlined below, to assess our progress and drive revenue growth, which is also a key performance indicator. As December 31, 2020, we continued to see strong growth in our leading key performance indicators, as follows:
●
Views and Impressions: We generated 2.0 billion views and impressions during fiscal year 2020, compared to our full-year 2019 views of 120.0 million, representing an approximately 17 times, or approximately 1600% increase over full year 2019 views. This continued growth in views results in the exponential growth of our total and monetizable advertising inventory, which can increase the number of brands and advertisers attracted to our audience and platform.
●
Registered Users: During fiscal year 2020, we increased our registered users by approximately three times, or 200%, to 2.9 million registered users. We ended fiscal 2019 with approximately 980,000 registered users. We believe that continuing our trend of significant year over year increases in registered users introduces more gamers and creators into our customer funnel, from whom we can gather higher volumes of quality user generated content and convert into subscribers and/or upsell into other paid offers.
●
Engagement Hours: During fiscal year 2020, including our live gaming experiences and our expanding digital gameplay channels, we generated approximately 72.2 million hours of gameplay and other engagement, as compared to approximately 15.0 million full year 2019 gameplay and other engagement hours, an increase of approximately 5 times, or 381%. We continue to focus on ways we can repackage and distribute this significant derivative content library for further monetization.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
Actions taken around the world to help mitigate the spread of the coronavirus include restrictions on travel, and quarantines in certain areas, and forced closures for certain types of public places and businesses. The novel coronavirus and actions taken to mitigate the spread of it have had and are expected to continue to have an adverse impact on the economies and financial markets of many countries, including the geographical areas in which the Company operates. On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted to amongst other provisions, provide emergency assistance for individuals, families and businesses affected by the coronavirus pandemic. It is unknown how long the adverse conditions associated with the coronavirus will last and what the complete financial effect will be to the Company.
Notwithstanding the growth in revenues and in user engagement metrics discussed herein, the broader impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations and overall financial performance remains uncertain. The COVID-19 pandemic may continue to impact our revenue and revenue growth in future periods, and is likely to continue to adversely impact certain aspects of our business and our partners, including advertising demand, retail expansion plans and our in-person esports experiences. See “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Recent Developments
On March 9, 2021, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “MC Merger Agreement”) by and among Mobcrush Streaming, Inc. (“Mobcrush”), Super League Gaming, Inc., and SLG Merger Sub II, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Super League (“Merger Co”). The MC Merger Agreement provides for the acquisition of Mobcrush by us pursuant to the merger of Merger Co with and into Mobcrush, with Mobcrush as the surviving corporation (the “Merger”). Upon completion of the Merger, Mobcrush will be a wholly-owned subsidiary of Super League Gaming, Inc.
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the MC Merger Agreement: (A) each outstanding share of Mobcrush common stock ("Mobcrush Common Stock") and Mobcrush preferred stock ("Mobcrush Preferred Stock", and with the Mobcrush Common Stock, the "Mobcrush Stock") (other than dissenting shares) will be canceled and converted into the right to receive (i) 0.528 shares of Super League’s common stock ("Company Common Stock"), as determined in the MC Merger Agreement (the “Share Conversion Ratio”), and (ii) any cash in lieu of fractional shares of common stock otherwise issuable under the MC Merger Agreement (the "Merger Consideration"); (B) vested options of Mobcrush will be assumed by Mobcrush and converted into comparable options that are exercisable for shares of Company Common Stock, with a value determined in accordance with the Share Conversion Ratio; and (C) unvested options of Mobcrush will either be (i) assumed by Super League and converted into comparable options that are exercisable for shares of Company Common Stock, with a value as determined by us and Mobcrush prior to the closing of the Merger, or (ii) terminated and re-issued as options that are exercisable for shares of Company Common Stock with a value as determined by us and Mobcrush prior to the closing of the Merger. Subject to certain adjustments and other terms and conditions more specifically set forth in the MC Merger Agreement, we will be issuing 12,582,204 shares of the Company’s Common Stock as the Merger Consideration. The MC Merger Agreement contains representations, warranties and covenants of each of the parties thereto that are customary for transactions of this type.
The obligations of Super League and Mobcrush to consummate the Merger are subject to certain closing conditions, including, but not limited to, (i) the approval of Mobcrush's and our shareholders, (ii) Mobcrush and our reaching an agreement as to the treatment of Mobcrush's unvested options exercisable for shares of Mobcrush Common Stock, (iii) receipt of any necessary regulatory approvals, (iv) the execution and delivery of the Support Agreements by the Voting Stockholders, and (v) the execution and delivery of the Registration Rights Agreement.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparation of our financial statements requires management to make judgments and estimates. Some accounting policies have a significant impact on amounts reported in our financial statements. The SEC has defined a company’s critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and results of operations, and which require a company to make its most difficult and subjective judgments. A summary of significant accounting policies and a description of accounting policies that are considered critical may be found in the audited financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere herein. The following accounting policies were identified during the periods presented, based on activities occurring during the periods presented, as critical and requiring significant judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when we transfer promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods and services. In this regard, revenue is recognized when: (i) the parties to the contract have approved the contract (in writing, orally, or in accordance with other customary business practices) and are committed to perform their respective obligations; (ii) the entity can identify each party’s rights regarding the goods or services to be transferred; (iii) the entity can identify the payment terms for the goods or services to be transferred; (iv) the contract has commercial substance (that is, the risk, timing, or amount of the entity’s future cash flows is expected to change as a result of the contract);and (v) it is probable that the entity will collect substantially all of the consideration to which it will be entitled in exchange for the goods or services that will be transferred to the customer.
Transaction prices are based on the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring promised goods or services to a customer, excluding amounts collected on behalf of third parties, if any. We consider the explicit terms of the revenue contract, which are typically written and executed by the parties, our customary business practices, the nature, timing, and the amount of consideration promised by a customer, in connection with determining the transaction price for our revenue arrangements.
We generate revenues from (i) advertising, serving as a marketing channel for brands and advertisers to reach their target audiences of gamers across our network, (ii) content, curating and distributing esports and entertainment content for our own network of digital channels and media and entertainment partner channels and (iii) direct to consumer offers including digital subscriptions, digital goods, gameplay access fees and merchandise sales.
Revenue billed or collected in advance is recorded as deferred revenue until the event occurs or until applicable performance obligations are satisfied.
Advertising and Sponsorships:
Advertising revenue primarily consists of direct sales activity along with sales of programmatic display and video advertising units to third-party advertisers and exchanges. Advertising arrangements typically include contract terms for time periods ranging from several days to several weeks in length.
For advertising arrangements that include performance obligations satisfied over time, customers typically simultaneously receive and consume the benefits under the arrangement as we satisfy our performance obligations, over the applicable contract term. As such, revenue is recognized over the contract term based upon estimates of progress toward complete satisfaction of the contract performance obligations (typically utilizing a time, effort or delivery-based method of estimation). Revenue from shorter term advertising arrangements that provide for a contractual delivery or performance date is recognized when performance is substantially complete and or delivery occurs. Payments are typically due from customers during the term of the arrangement for longer-term campaigns, and once delivery is complete for shorter-term campaigns.
Sponsorship revenue arrangements may include: exclusive or non-exclusive title sponsorships, marketing benefits, official product status exclusivity, product visibly and additional infrastructure placement, social media rights, rights to on-screen activations and promotions, display material rights, media rights, hospitality and tickets and merchandising rights. Sponsorship revenues also include revenues pursuant to arrangements with brand and media partners, retail venues, game publishers and broadcasters that allow our partners to run amateur esports experiences, and or capture specifically curated gameplay content that is customized for our partners’ distribution channels. Sponsorship arrangements typically include contract terms for time periods ranging from several weeks or months to terms of twelve months in length.
For sponsorship arrangements that include performance obligations satisfied over time, customers typically simultaneously receive and consume the benefits under the agreement as we satisfy our performance obligations, over the applicable contract term. As such, revenue is recognized over the contract term based upon estimates of progress toward complete satisfaction of the contract performance obligations (typically utilizing a time, effort or delivery-based method of estimation). Payments are typically due from customers during the term of the arrangement.
Revenue from sponsorship arrangements for one-off branded experiences and/or the development of content tailored specifically for our partners’ distribution channels that provide for a contractual delivery or performance date, is recognized at a point in time, when performance is substantially complete and or delivery occurs.
Content:
Content related revenues are generated in connection with our curation and distribution of esports and entertainment content for our own network of digital channels and media and entertainment partner channels. We distribute three primary types of content for syndication and licensing, including: (1) our own original programming content, (2) user generated content (“UGC”), including online gameplay and gameplay highlights, and (3) the creation of content for third parties utilizing our remote production and broadcast technology.
For content arrangements that include performance obligations satisfied over time, customers typically simultaneously receive and consume the benefits under the arrangement as we satisfy our performance obligations, over the applicable contract term. As such, revenue is recognized over the contract term based upon estimates of progress toward complete satisfaction of the contract performance obligations (typically utilizing a time, effort or delivery-based method of estimation). Revenue from shorter term content sales arrangements that provide for a contractual delivery or performance date is recognized when performance is substantially complete and or delivery occurs. Payments are typically due from customers during the term of the arrangement for longer-term campaigns, and once delivery is complete for shorter-term campaigns.
Direct to Consumer:
Direct to consumer revenues primarily consist of digital subscription fees, digital goods, gameplay access fees and merchandise sales. Subscription revenue is recognized in the period the services are rendered. Payments are typically due from customers at the point of sale.
We make estimates and judgments when determining whether we will collect substantially all of the consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for the goods or services that will be transferred to the customer. We assess the collectability of receivables based on several factors, including past transaction history and the creditworthiness of our customers. If it is determined that collection is not reasonably assured, amounts due are recognized when collectability becomes reasonably assured, assuming all other revenue recognition criteria have been met, which is generally upon receipt of cash for transactions where collectability may have been an issue. Management’s estimates regarding collectability impact the actual revenues recognized each period and the timing of the recognition of revenues. Our assumptions and judgments regarding future collectability could differ from actual events and thus materially impact our financial position and results of operations.
Depending on the complexity of the underlying revenue arrangement and related terms and conditions, significant judgments, assumptions and estimates may be required to determine each parties rights regarding the goods or services to be transferred, each parties performance obligations, whether performance obligations are satisfied at a point in time or over time, estimates of completion methodologies, the timing of satisfaction of performance obligations, and the appropriate period or periods in which, or during which, the completion of the earnings process occurs. Depending on the magnitude of specific revenue arrangements, if different judgments, assumptions and estimates are made regarding revenue arrangements in any specific period, our periodic financial results may be materially affected.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Compensation expense for stock-based awards is measured at the grant date, based on the estimated fair value of the award, and is recognized as an expense, typically on a straight-line basis over the employee’s requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the equity award), which is generally two to four years. Compensation expense for awards with performance conditions that affect vesting is recorded only for those awards expected to vest or when the performance criteria are met. The fair value of restricted stock and restricted stock unit awards is determined by the product of the number of shares or units granted and the grant date market price of the underlying common stock. The fair value of stock option and common stock purchase warrant awards is estimated on the date of grant utilizing the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model. We account for forfeitures of awards as they occur.
Grants of equity-based awards (including warrants) to non-employees in exchange for consulting or other services are accounted for using the grant date fair value of the equity instruments issued.
Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date requires significant estimates and judgments, including estimating the market price volatility of our common stock, determination of grant dates, future employee stock option exercise behavior, estimates of probabilities of vesting and requisite service periods.
Accounting for Business Combinations
In connection with the application of purchase accounting for the acquisition of Framerate, as described above, we estimated the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. A fair value measurement is determined as the price we would receive to sell an asset or pay to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In the absence of active markets for the identical assets or liabilities, such measurements involve developing assumptions based on market observable data and, in the absence of such data, internal information that is consistent with what market participants would use in a hypothetical transaction that occurs at the measurement date. In the context of purchase accounting, the determination of fair value often involves significant judgments and estimates by management, including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenues, costs and cash flows, discount rates, and selection of comparable companies. The estimated fair values reflected in the purchase accounting rely on management’s judgment and the expertise of a third-party valuation firm engaged to assist in concluding on the fair value measurements.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth a summary of our statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Comparison of the Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2020 and
Revenue
Revenues for fiscal year 2020 increased $980,000 or 90%, compared to fiscal year 2019. For fiscal year 2020 and 2019, four customers accounted for 49% and five customers accounted for 69% of revenue, respectively.
The increase in revenues primarily reflects significant increases in advertising on our owned and operated digital channels and content sales revenues, compared to the prior year, reflecting our continued focus on the monetization of our increasing premium advertising inventory and esports and entertainment content. The increase was partially offset by a decrease in traditional sponsorship revenues due to the industry wide pause in sponsorship spending and resetting of marketing strategies by brand and sponsors in connection with the uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
Advertising and sponsorship revenues for fiscal year 2020 increased $151,000, or 15%, and included revenues from advertising campaigns with Netflix, Inc., or Netflix, in connection with Netflix’s “The Sleepover” movie release, and with Disney+ in connection with their animated musical comedy series Phineas and Ferb. The change reflects an increase in advertising revenues of $502,000, or approximately seven times the fiscal year 2019 level, primarily related to direct sales and programmatic display and video advertising within our Minecraft related digital property, Minehut. Traditional sponsorship revenues decreased $351,000, or 37%, due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic described earlier. The increase in advertising revenues more than offset the decrease in traditional sponsorship revenues.
Content related revenues increased to $703,000, or greater than 300% in fiscal year 2020, as compared to $32,000 in fiscal year 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in sales of our proprietary and user generated content, primarily with Snap Inc., and Cox Media, and live stream broadcast related content sales activities with Topgolf and GenG during fiscal year 2020.
Although we were impacted by the general deferral in advertising spending by brands and sponsors resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic for a significant portion of fiscal year 2020, we reported significant quarter over quarter growth in total revenues in the second half of fiscal 2020 and we expect to continue to expand our advertising revenue and revenue from the sale of our proprietary and user generated content in future periods, as we continue to expand our premium advertising inventory, viewership and related sales activities.
Direct to consumer revenues were primarily comprised of revenues generated from our Minehut digital property, which provides various Minecraft server hosting services on a subscription basis and other digital goods to the Minecraft gaming community. Direct to consumer revenues for fiscal year 2020 increased $126,000, or greater than 300%, compared to fiscal year 2019. The increase in direct to consumer revenues reflects our continued focus on the acceleration of our direct to consumer monetization.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for fiscal year 2020 increased $343,000, or 67% compared to fiscal year 2019, as compared to the 90% increase in related revenues for the same periods. The less than proportionate increase in cost of revenue was driven by a significant increase in lower cost advertising and third party content sales revenues in fiscal year 2020. In addition, as a result of the various shelter in place orders in connection with the global response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we reduced our physical / in-person gaming activities during fiscal year 2020, which typically have higher direct cost profiles, which to a lesser extent, also contributed to the less than proportionate increase in cost of revenue for the periods presented.
Cost of revenues fluctuate period to period based on the specific programs and revenue streams contributing to revenue each period and the related cost profile of our physical and digital experiences, and advertising and content sales activities occurring each period.
Operating Expenses
Noncash stock-based compensation expense for the periods presented was included in the following operating expense line items:
Selling, Marketing and Advertising. The increase in selling, marketing and advertising expense for fiscal year 2020 was primarily due to an increase in personnel costs, including noncash stock compensation, associated with the increase in our in-house direct sales force focused on the monetization of our increasing premium advertising inventory and audience across our digital properties. The increase was partially offset by a reduction in marketing costs related to our traditional physical / in-person activities due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on physical / in-person activities.
Technology Platform and Infrastructure. Technology platform and infrastructure costs include (i) allocated personnel costs, including salaries, noncash stock compensation, taxes and benefits related to our internal software developers and engineers, employed by Super League, engaged in the operation, maintenance, management, administration, testing, development and enhancement of our proprietary gaming and content technology platform, (ii) third-party contract software development and engineering resources engaged in developing and enhancing our proprietary gaming and content technology platform, (iii) the amortization of capitalized internal use software costs, and (iv) technology platform related cloud services, broadband and other technology platform costs. Capitalized internal use software development costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the software’s estimated useful life. The increase in technology platform and infrastructure costs for fiscal year 2020 primarily reflects an increase in cloud services and other technology platform costs totaling $1,592,000, which primarily reflects the impact of the surge in engagement across our digital properties as described earlier, quarterly fees paid to a third party under a licenses and rights agreement, as amended, totaling $175,000, and the acceleration of amortization related to the termination of certain rights and licenses in connection with amendments to our arrangement with a third party, totaling $413,000, as described at Note 4 to our financial statements elsewhere herein. The increase in technology platform and infrastructure costs was partially offset by a decrease in broadband costs totaling $268,000 for fiscal year 2020, as compared to fiscal year 2019.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expense for the periods presented was comprised of the following:
A summary of the main drivers of the net increase in general and administrative expenses for the periods presented is as follows:
●
Office and facilities costs decreased due to the termination of our lease for approximately 75% of our office space in Santa Monica, California, and converting to a fully remote work structure, resulting in significant rent and facilities costs savings commencing in the third quarter of 2020 and going forward.
●
Professional fees expense decreased primarily due to a reduction in IPO and acquisition related professional fees in fiscal year 2020.
●
Noncash stock compensation expense included in general and administrative expense decreased 83%, primarily due to certain performance options and warrants previously granted to certain executives, which vested upon the achievement of certain performance-based milestones in fiscal year 2019. Performance targets included the completion of our IPO in February 2019 and other 2019 operational performance targets. During fiscal year 2019, approximately 300,000 of performance-based stock options and warrants vested with grant date fair values ranging from $8.28 to $8.50, resulting in noncash stock compensation expense of $2,617,000. The decrease also reflects a reduction of the average fair value of options and restricted shares expensed in fiscal year 2020 to approximately $3.34, from approximately $8.34 for fiscal year 2019.
●
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased due primarily to a decrease in scheduled amortization related to fully depreciated assets with useful lives that expired during fiscal 2020 or prior, and the acceleration of depreciation related to certain networking and related equipment disposed of during fiscal 2019.
●
Other general and administrative expenses increased primarily due to an increase in public company related directors and officer's (“D&O”) insurance premiums and a full fiscal year of D&O insurance and other public company costs, partially offset by a decrease in travel related expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other Income (expense)
Other income (expense), net, for fiscal year 2020 and 2019, was $11,000 and ($9,909,000), respectively. Other income and expense, net for fiscal year 2019 was primarily comprised of interest expense related to convertible notes outstanding as of the IPO Closing Date, as follows:
Interest Expense. Interest expense for fiscal year 2019 primarily relates to the issuance of 9.00% secured convertible promissory notes, commencing in February 2018 through August 2018, as described below under Liquidity and Capital Resources. Principal and interest as of February 27, 2019, the IPO Closing Date totaled $13,793,000. Concurrent with the closing of the IPO on February 27, 2019, in accordance with the related agreements, all outstanding principal and interest for the 9.00% convertible notes outstanding was automatically converted into 1,475,164 shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price of $9.35. As a result of the automatic conversion of the 2018 Notes (defined below) and the application of conversion accounting, the Company recorded an immediate charge to interest expense of $1,384,000, representing the write-off of the unamortized balance of debt discounts associated with the 2018 warrants and cash commissions and warrants issued to third parties. Unamortized debt discounts at December 31, 2018 totaled $2,684,000, respectively.
The non-detachable conversion feature embedded in the 2018 Notes provides for a conversion rate that was below market value at the commitment date, and therefore, represented a beneficial conversion feature (“BCF”). The BCF is generally recognized separately at issuance by allocating a portion of the debt proceeds equal to the intrinsic value of the BCF to additional paid-in capital. The resulting convertible debt discount is recognized as interest expense using the effective yield method. However, the conversion feature associated with the 2018 Notes was not exercisable until the consummation of an initial public offering by the Company of its common stock, and therefore, was not required to be recognized in earnings until the IPO related contingency was resolved, which occurred on the IPO Closing Date. The commitment date is the IPO Closing Date and the commitment date stock price was $11.00 per share. The intrinsic value of the BCF on the IPO Closing Date, which was limited to the net proceeds allocated to the debt on a relative fair value basis, was approximately $7,067,000, and is reflected as additional interest expense in the statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
Cash and cash equivalents totaled $7.9 million and $8.4 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
To date, our principal sources of capital used to fund our operations have been the net proceeds we received from sales of equity securities, including our IPO, and proceeds received from the issuance of convertible debt (2018 and prior), as described elsewhere herein. Our management believes that our cash balances will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements through at least March 2022. We may, however, encounter unforeseen difficulties that may deplete our capital resources more rapidly than anticipated, including those set forth under the heading “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Report.
We are focused on expanding our service offerings and revenue growth opportunities through internal development, collaborations, and through one or more strategic acquisitions. We continue to evaluate potential strategic acquisitions. To finance such strategic acquisitions, we may find it necessary to raise additional equity capital, incur additional debt, or both. Any efforts to seek additional funding could be made through issuances of equity or debt, or other external financing. However, additional funding may not be available on favorable terms, or at all. The capital and credit markets have experienced extreme volatility and disruption periodically and such volatility and disruption may occur in the future. If we fail to obtain additional financing when needed, we may not be able to execute our business plans which, in turn, would have a material adverse impact on our financial condition, our ability to meet our obligations, and our ability to pursue our business strategies.
Recent Activities
As described above, on March 9, 2021, we entered into the MC Merger Agreement by and among Mobcrush, Super League Gaming, Inc., and Merger Co. The MC Merger Agreement provides for the acquisition of Mobcrush by us pursuant to the merger of Merger Co with and into Mobcrush, with Mobcrush as the surviving corporation. Upon completion of the Merger, Mobcrush will be a wholly-owned subsidiary of Super League Gaming, Inc. In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the MC Merger Agreement, each outstanding share of Mobcrush Stock will be canceled and converted into the right to receive 0.528 shares of Super League’s common stock, as determined in the MC Merger Agreement. Subject to certain adjustments and other terms and conditions more specifically set forth in the MC Merger Agreement, we will be issuing 12,582,204 shares of our common stock as the merger consideration. The obligations of Super League and Mobcrush to consummate the Merger are subject to certain closing conditions, including, but not limited to the approval of Mobcrush's and our shareholders,
In February 2021, we entered into securities purchase agreements with institutional investors for the registered direct offering of an aggregate of 2,926,830 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share, at a purchase price of $4.10 per share. The offering closed on February 11, 2021, and resulted in gross proceeds to the Company of $12.0 million. The shares were offered pursuant to an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3, which was originally filed with the SEC on April 10, 2020 (File No. 333-237626).
In January 2021, we entered into securities purchase agreements with institutional investors for the registered direct offering of an aggregate of 3,076,924 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $2.60 per share. The offering closed on January 13, 2021, and resulted in gross proceeds to the Company of $8.0 million. The offering was conducted pursuant to an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3, which was originally filed with the SEC on April 10, 2020 (File No. 333-237626).
Cash Flows for Fiscal Years 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes the change in cash balances for the periods presented:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities during fiscal year 2020 was $14,876,000, which primarily reflected our net GAAP loss for fiscal year 2020 of $18,732,000, net of adjustments to reconcile net GAAP loss to net cash used in operating activities of $3,856,000, which included $2,004,000 of noncash stock compensation charges and depreciation and amortization of $1,368,000. Changes in working capital primarily reflected the impact of the settlement of receivables and payables in the ordinary course. Net cash used in operating activities during fiscal year 2019 was $13,646,000, which primarily reflected our net GAAP loss of $30,679,000, net of adjustments to reconcile net GAAP loss to net cash used in operating activities of $17,033,000, which included $6,217,000 of noncash stock compensation charges, $2,871,000 of noncash accrued interest and accretion of debt discount, $7,067,0000 of noncash interest expense related to the recognition of the beneficial conversion feature upon the automatic conversion of the 2018 Notes upon close of the IPO, and depreciation and amortization of $862,000. Changes in working capital primarily reflected the impact of the prepayment of increased directors and officer’s insurance premiums in connection with the consummation of our IPO and the settlement of payables in the ordinary course.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities. Cash flows from investing activities were comprised of the following for the periods presented:
Acquisition of Framerate, Inc. On June 3, 2019, Super League Gaming, Inc. and SLG Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”), entered into an agreement and plan of merger (the “Merger Agreement”) with Framerate, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Framerate”), pursuant to which Framerate merged with and into Merger Sub, with Merger Sub continuing as the surviving corporation (the “Acquisition”). The Acquisition was consummated on June 6, 2019 when the certificate of merger of Merger Sub and Framerate was filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware (the “Effective Date”). As consideration for the Acquisition, the Company ratably paid and/or issued to the former shareholders of Framerate an aggregate of (i) $1.5 million paid in cash and (ii) $1.0 million paid by the issuance of a total of 134,422 shares of the Company’s common stock, at a price per share of $7.4395 (the “Closing Shares”). The Merger Sub was dissolved subsequent to the consummation of the Acquisition.
In addition to the issuance of the Closing Shares, the Merger Agreement provided for the issuance of up to an additional $980,000 worth of shares of the Company’s common stock at the same price per share as the Closing Shares (the “Earn-Out Shares”) in the event Framerate achieves certain performance-based milestones during the two-year period following the closing of the Acquisition, or June 6, 2021 (the “Earn-Out”). One-half of the Earn-Out Shares are issuable on the one-year anniversary of the Effective Date, and the remaining one-half are issuable on the second anniversary of the Effective Date. In June 2020, we issued an additional 32,936 shares of our common stock to the former shareholders of Framerate in connection with the achievement of certain components of the year-one earn-out related performance milestones.
Expanded Agreement with Third Party. In September 2019, the Company and a third party entered into an expanded commercial partnership agreement (the “Expanded Agreement”) pursuant to which Super League became the primary consumer-facing brand within the third party’s B2B gaming center software platform. In consideration for the rights granted by the third party to Super League, Super League paid an upfront fee of $340,000. The upfront fee was included as "Licenses" in intangible assets and other assets, net, in the accompanying balance sheet (2019 only) and was being amortized over the initial term of the Expanded Agreement of five years, commencing October 1, 2019.
In April 2020, we amended our arrangement with the third party terminating certain rights and licenses from the prior agreement, as amended, focused on in-person play in gaming centers, and securing other rights and licenses from the third party, focused on online play at home. As a result of the termination of the rights and licenses related to the prior arrangement, the Company accelerated the amortization of the remaining balance related to the prior rights and licenses included in “Licenses” above, totaling $306,000, and certain capitalized internal use software development costs totaling $107,000, which are included in technology platform and infrastructure expense in the accompanying statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Capitalized Internal Use Software Costs. Software development costs incurred to develop internal-use software during the application development stage are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the software’s estimated useful life, which is generally three years. Software development costs incurred during the preliminary stages of development are charged to expense as incurred. Maintenance and training costs are charged to expense as incurred. Upgrades or enhancements to existing internal-use software that result in additional functionality are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the applicable estimated useful life.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities. Cash flows from financing activities were comprised of the following for the periods presented:
Equity Financings
In August 2020, the Company issued 4,540,541 shares of common stock at a price of $1.85 per share, raising aggregate net proceeds of approximately $7.6 million, after deducting placement agent fees of $588,000 and other offering expenses totaling $180,000. The offering was conducted pursuant to the Company’s effective Registration Statements on Form S-1 (File No. 333-248248), and a related registration statement filed pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act. In addition, pursuant to the terms of the related underwriting agreement, the Company granted to the underwriter a 30-day over-allotment option to purchase up to an additional 681,081 Shares at the same public offering price per share, less discounts and commissions, which was partially exercised in September 2020, resulting in the issuance of 448,440 shares and net proceeds of $771,000, after deducting placement agent fees of $58,000. The net proceeds from this offering were for working capital and other general corporate purposes, including sales and marketing activities, product development and capital expenditures. Net proceeds from this offering were also available for use in connection with the acquisition of, or investment in, technologies, solutions or businesses that may complement our business and or accelerate our growth.
In May 2020, the Company issued 1,825,000 shares of common stock at a price of $3.50 per share, raising aggregate net proceeds of approximately $6.0 million, after deducting placement agent fees of $319,000 and other offering expenses totaling $116,000, pursuant to a registered direct offering. The net proceeds are for working capital and other general corporate purposes, including sales and marketing activities, product development and capital expenditures. Net proceeds from this offering were also available for use in connection with the acquisition of, or investment in, technologies, solutions or businesses that may complement our business and or accelerate our growth.
On February 27, 2019, we completed our IPO, pursuant to which we issued and sold an aggregate of 2,272,727 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $11.00 per share pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1, declared effective by the SEC on February 25, 2019 (File No. 333-229144). We raised net proceeds of approximately $22,458,000 after underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering costs of $2,542,000.
Concurrent with the closing of the IPO on February 27, 2019, in accordance with the underlying agreements, all outstanding principal and interest for the 9.00% convertible notes outstanding, totaling $13,793,000, was automatically converted into 1,475,164 shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price of $9.35.
CARES Act
As noted above, on May 4, 2020, we entered into the potentially forgivable PPP Loan from the SBA, pursuant to the PPP program enacted under the CARES Act, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $1.2 million. To facilitate the PPP Loan, we entered into the PPP Loan Agreement with a third-party lender.
The PPP Loan matures on May 4, 2022. However, under the CARES Act and the PPP Loan Agreement, all payments of both principal and interest will be deferred until at least December 4, 2020. The PPP Loan accrues interest at a rate of 1.00% per annum, and interest will continue to accrue throughout the period the PPP Loan is outstanding, or until it is forgiven. We are eligible to apply for forgiveness of all loan proceeds used to pay payroll costs and other qualifying expenses during the 24-week period following receipt of the loan, provided that the Company maintains its employment and compensation within certain parameters during such period. Any amounts forgiven will not be included in the Company’s taxable income. As specifically intended under the program, the PPP Loan, together with our cost savings initiatives, helped us to continue operations without salary reductions, layoffs or furloughs, during this challenging and uncertain economic environment created by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The PPP Loan is accounted for as a financial liability in accordance with FASB ASC 470, “Debt” and interest is accrued in accordance with the interest method. Additional interest is not imputed at a market rate pursuant to a scope exception for interest rates prescribed by governmental agencies under the applicable guidance.
The proceeds from the PPP Loan are recorded as a long-term liability on the balance sheet until either (1) the loan is, in part or wholly, forgiven and the company has been “legally released” or (2) the Company pays off the loan to the creditor. Once the loan is, in part or wholly, forgiven, and legal release is received, the Company will reduce the liability by the amount forgiven and record a gain on extinguishment in the statement of operations in the period of extinguishment.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, except as described below, we had no significant commitments for capital expenditures, nor do we have any committed lines of credit, noncancelable operating leases obligations, other committed funding or long-term debt, and no guarantees.
Off-Balance Sheet Commitments and Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financial guarantees or other off-balance sheet commitments to guarantee the payment obligations of any third parties. We have not entered into any derivative contracts that are indexed to our shares and classified as stockholder’s equity or that are not reflected in our financial statements included elsewhere herein. Furthermore, we do not have any retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support to such entity. We do not have any variable interest in any unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit support to us or engages in leasing, hedging or product development services with us.
Contingencies
Certain conditions may exist as of the date the financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss to the Company, but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. The Company’s management, in consultation with its legal counsel as appropriate, assesses such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment. In assessing loss contingencies related to legal proceedings that are pending against the Company or unasserted claims that may result in such proceedings, the Company, in consultation with legal counsel, evaluates the perceived merits of any legal proceedings or unasserted claims, as well as the perceived merits of the amount of relief sought or expected to be sought therein. If the assessment of a contingency indicates it is probable that a material loss has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be estimated, then the estimated liability would be accrued in the Company’s financial statements. If the assessment indicates a potentially material loss contingency is not probable, but is reasonably possible, or is probable, but cannot be estimated, then the nature of the contingent liability, together with an estimate of the range of possible loss, if determinable and material, would be disclosed. Loss contingencies considered remote are generally not disclosed unless they involve guarantees, in which case the guarantees would be disclosed.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 to the financial statements included elsewhere herein.
Relaxed Ongoing Reporting Requirements
Upon the completion of our IPO, we elected to report as an “emerging growth company” (as defined in the JOBS Act) under the reporting rules set forth under the Exchange Act. For so long as we remain an “emerging growth company,” we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other Exchange Act reporting companies that are not “emerging growth companies,” including but not limited to:
●
not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
●
taking advantage of extensions of time to comply with certain new or revised financial accounting standards;
●
being permitted to comply with reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements; and
●
being exempt from the requirement to hold a non-binding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
We are subject to ongoing public reporting requirements that are less rigorous than Exchange Act rules for companies that are not “emerging growth companies,” and our stockholders could receive less information than they might expect to receive from more mature public companies.
We expect to take advantage of these reporting exemptions until we are no longer an emerging growth company. We will remain an “emerging growth company” for up to five years, although if the market value of our Common Stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of any June 30 before that time, we would cease to be an “emerging growth company” as of the following December 31.