Item 7: Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, which involve risk and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those discussed in Item 1A: "Risk Factors" and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Prior to 2020 we conducted our sole business through our wholly-owned subsidiary MTI Instruments, a supplier of vibration measurement and system balancing solutions, precision linear displacement sensors, instruments and system solutions, and wafer inspection tools. We earn revenue through the sale of these products and the provision of related maintenance and repair services. Revenue from MTI Instruments' business constituted 93.8% of our total revenue during 2020, and we expect that we will continue to earn most of our revenues through this business in the foreseeable future. We continue to work on ways to increase our sales reach, including expanded worldwide sales coverage and enhanced internet marketing, with respect to this business.
During 2020 we formed our EcoChain wholly-owned subsidiary, through which we conduct our second core business, cryptocurrency mining powered by renewable energy. In this regard, the Company also invested in Soluna, a Canadian company that develops vertically-integrated, utility-scale computing facilities focused on cryptocurrency mining and cutting-edge blockchain applications. We earn revenue from this business as the mined cryptocurrencies are converted into U.S. dollars.
Recent Developments and Trends
In response to the COVID-19 global pandemic, the Company has implemented procedures to support flexible working arrangements for its workforce based on business needs. While these measures have been necessary and appropriate, they may result in additional costs and may adversely impact the Company's business and financial performance. As the Company's response to the pandemic evolves, the Company may incur additional costs and will potentially experience adverse impacts to its business, each of which are uncertain at this time.
We expect to use the net proceeds of our anticipated common stock offering primarily for the acquisition, development, and growth of two cryptocurrency mining facilities, which will expand EcoChain's cryptocurrency business, which should have the effect of lowering, though probably not significantly, the percentage of our total revenues derived from MTI Instruments' business. We may also use a portion of the proceeds to acquire other entities or businesses to expand the business operations of both MTI Instruments and EcoChain.
Results of Operations
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019.
The following table summarizes changes in the various components of our net income during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Product Revenue: Product revenue consists of revenue recognized from sales of MTI Instruments' products and the provision of related maintenance and repair services.
Product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $2.4 million from 2019. The primary reason for the increase was a $2.7 million increase in overall shipments to the U.S. Air Force, which offset a $360 thousand decline in instrumentation sales, primarily from a $190 thousand decrease in shipments of our semi-automated wafer metrology tools, as well as a $130 thousand decrease in our laser sales due to our customers' more conservative spending policies during the 2020 period resulting primarily from COVID-19-related challenges. The percentage of our product revenue attributable to the U.S. Air Force, which continues to be our largest government and overall customer, increased to 42.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 20.8% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
As further discussed in "Item 1. Business," we are dependent on a limited number of customers for a significant portion of our sales, including the U.S. Air Force, as described in the preceding paragraph. This can cause significant fluctuations in our product sales and, as a result, revenues, from one fiscal period to the next. We may sell a significant amount of our products to one or a few customers for various short-term projects in one period and then have markedly decreased sales in following periods as these projects end or customers have the products they require for the foreseeable future.
Information regarding government contracts included in product revenue is as follows:
(Dollars in thousands)
		
Revenues for the
Year Ended
Contract Revenues
to Date
Date
Total Contract
Orders Received
To Date
		
December 31,
December 31,
December 31,
Contract(1)
		
Expiration
		
$9.35 million U.S. Air Force Systems, Accessories
		and Maintenance
		
06/30/2021
(2)
$
3,878
		$
1,286
$
9,196
$
9,738
____________________
(1)
Contract values represent maximum potential values at time of contract placement and may not be representative of actual results.
(2)
Date represents expiration of contract, including the exercise of option extensions.
We are in discussions with the U.S. Air Force regarding renewing their current contract, which is set to expire on June 30, 2021. The Company does not anticipate any issues with the renewal and expects to enter into a renewed contract with the U.S. Air Force on or prior to the expiration of the current contract. As a result, we do not expect that there will be any material impact on our results of operations, cash flows, liquidity, or financial condition as a result of the pending expiration of our current contract with the U.S. Air Force.
Cryptocurrency Revenue: Cryptocurrency revenue consists of revenue recognized from EcoChain's cryptocurrency mining facility.
Cryptocurrency revenue was $595 thousand, for the year ended December 31, 2020. As discussed in "Item 1, Business," EcoChain's cryptocurrency mining facility did not begin operations until the second quarter of 2020, and therefore there was no cryptocurrency revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019. This revenue represents the cash received upon the daily sale of the various cryptocurrencies mined at EcoChain's mining facility during 2020.
Cost of Product Revenue; Gross Margin: Cost of product revenue includes the direct material and labor cost as well as an allocation of overhead costs that relate to the manufacturing of products we sell. Cost of product revenue also includes the labor and material costs incurred for product maintenance, replacement parts and service under our contractual obligations.
Cost of product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $464 thousand, or 21.0%, to $2.7 million from $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Gross profit, as a percentage of product revenue, increased to 70.4% during 2020 compared to 66.4% for 2019.
The primary reason for the increase in the cost of product revenue during 2020 was the increase in U.S. Air Force shipments, as discussed above in "Product Revenue." The improvement in gross profit during 2020 was primarily attributable to changes in the product mix as the proportion of our most profitable product line made up an increased percentage of overall sales during 2020, and efficiencies gained with an increased amount of sales of new engine vibration balancing systems during 2020 compared to greater sales of repaired systems, accessories, and wafer metrology tools, which have higher labor and material components, during 2019.
Cost of Cryptocurrency Revenue: Cost of cryptocurrency revenue includes direct utility costs as well as overhead costs that relate to the operations of EcoChain's cryptocurrency mining facility.
Cost of cryptocurrency revenue was $405 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. As noted above, EcoChain's cryptocurrency mining facility did not begin operations until the second quarter of 2020, and therefore there was no cryptocurrency revenue or associated costs for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and Product Development Expenses: Research and product development expenses includes the costs of materials to build development and prototype units, cash and non-cash compensation and benefits for the engineering and related staff, expenses for contract engineers, fees paid to outside suppliers for subcontracted components and services, fees paid to consultants for services provided, materials and supplies consumed, facility-related costs such as computer and network services, and other general overhead costs associated with our research and development activities, to the extent not reimbursed by our customers.
Research and product development expenses increased $110 thousand, or 8.0%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. This increase was primarily due to the addition of one full-time employee to the engineering staff during the first quarter of 2020 in connection with the development of our next-generation engine vibration balancing systems and capacitance products, slightly offset by the movement of a highly-compensated employee from full-time to part-time status during the third quarter. This work is expected to continue at similar spending levels into 2021 as we introduce these next-generation products to the market.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses: Selling, general and administrative expenses includes cash and non-cash compensation, benefits and related costs in support of our general corporate functions, including general management, finance and accounting, human resources, selling and marketing, information technology, and legal services.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $858 thousand, or 31.5%, to $3.6 million from $2.7 million in 2019. This increase was a result of both expenses incurred in 2020 for which there was no comparable expense in 2019 as well as from changes in a number of our traditional selling, general and administrative expenses. Expenses for which there was no comparable outlay in 2019 consisted primarily of $195 thousand related to the salary and benefits of the new President of MTI Instruments, who was originally hired as Director of Marketing late in the third quarter of 2019 and promoted to President of MTI Instruments in September 2020, $272 thousand in legal fees associated with the Company's investment in Soluna and its March 2020 and September 2020 Form 10 filings, $281 thousand in spending associated with EcoChain's operations, including management fees paid to Soluna in 2020, and $215 thousand related to the salary, benefits, and recruitment of our new Chief Financial Officer (hired in July 2020) and Compliance Manager (hired in November 2020). In addition, compared to 2019 we experienced increases of $85 thousand in audit fees related to the audit of the Company's financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was required in connection with our September 2020 Form 10 filing, $52 thousand in other expenses in connection with the Form 10 filing, including fees paid to third parties for completing the electronic filings, $30 thousand in employee bonuses corresponding to the increase in product sales, and $71 thousand in additional insurance expense as a result of adjusting our coverage limits after a review of our current policies conducted last year as well as new insurance policies that we purchased to cover EcoChain. These increases were partially offset by a $188 thousand decrease in spending on travel for customer visits and trade shows due to COVID-19 restrictions in place since March 2020 and a decrease of $140 thousand in salary and benefits due to not replacing a sales employee that left the Company in March 2020. Like most companies, we are evaluating our position with respect to travel and considering how to optimize the use of a virtual environment going forward, but we do expect at least some travel related to in-person meetings with clients and potential clients to resume once it is considered safe to do so. As a result, based on current information about the status of the pandemic and the related vaccination effort, we expect travel-related spending to increase from current levels beginning in the third quarter of 2021, although the actual time that travel will resume, and the amount thereof, will be subject to a number of uncertainties related to the course of the pandemic over the next several months. In addition, due to travel restrictions during 2020 our other primary salesperson was able to cover the work of the open sales position during the past year, and while the other sales position remained open during 2020, we did not actively pursue retaining a replacement. That will no longer be the case, however, once travel is deemed safe as we expect our salespersons to conduct in-person meetings with clients and potential clients as had been the case prior to the onset of the pandemic, although the level of travel may not be as high as it was prior to the pandemic. Once travel restrictions are lifted, we intend to retain a salesperson to replace the one that left, so we expect employee salaries and benefits will be higher in 2021 and for the foreseeable future than they were in 2020. We also expect a 17.0% to 20.0% increase in insurance expense in 2021, primarily related to insurance policies for EcoChain's business.
The Company also expects selling, general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in 2021 and generally going forward as a result of its resumption of filing periodic reports, annual proxy statements, and other filings with the SEC following the effectiveness of its Form 10 registration statement in November.
Operating Income: Operating income increased to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $259 thousand during the prior year. This $1.2 million improvement was the result of the factors noted above, that is, the increased sales, specifically delivering the majority of the PBS units for the U.S. Air Force and the improvement in the profit margin, partially offset by increased selling, general and administrative expenses.
Other Income: Other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $104 thousand and was primarily related to income from the sale of EcoChain's excess equipment and interest income on operating cash balances. Other income for the year ended December 31, 2109 was $36 thousand and was primarily related to the disposal of the tensile product line and related royalty payments and interest income on operating cash balances.
Income Tax Benefit: Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $392 thousand and was primarily related to the increase of the tax asset based on projected future taxable earnings, giving the Company the ability to use prior tax losses. Our effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was (25)%. Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $28 thousand and was primarily a result of a $33 thousand income tax benefit due to a refund associated with the repeal of the federal alternative minimum tax for C corporations. Our effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was (9)%.
Net Income: Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.9 million compared to net income of $323 thousand in 2019. These improvements were the result of the factors noted above, that is, the increased sales and improvement in the profit margin in each period, partially offset by increases in general and administrative expenses, cost of product revenue, and cost of cryptocurrency revenue.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Several key indicators of our liquidity are summarized in the following table:
The Company has historically incurred significant losses primarily due to its past efforts to fund direct methanol fuel cell product development and commercialization programs and had a consolidated accumulated deficit of approximately $117.8 million as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had working capital of approximately $3.1 million, no debt, no outstanding commitments for capital expenditures and approximately $2.6 million of cash available to fund its operations.
Based on business developments, including changes in production levels, staffing requirements, and network infrastructure improvements, we may require additional capital equipment in the foreseeable future. With respect to MTI and MTI Instruments, we expect to spend a total of approximately $300 thousand on computer equipment and software and $1.6 million on research and development during 2021. As we have done historically, we expect to finance these expenditures and continue funding their operations from our current cash position and our projected 2021 cash flows pursuant to management's plans. If necessary, we may also seek to supplement our resources by increasing credit facilities to fund operational working capital and capital expenditure requirements. Any additional financing, if required, may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all.
As discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the Company expects to use the net proceeds of our pending common stock offering to fund EcoChain's acquisition and development of two additional mining facilities. The Company also expects to look for acquisition opportunities that meet certain strategic requirements of the Company, which we expect will be funded by the proceeds of the offering and/or bank financing to the extent available on acceptable terms.
While it cannot be assured, management believes that, due in part to our current working capital level and projected cash requirements for operations and capital expenditures, its current available cash of approximately $2.6 million, and its projected 2021 cash flow pursuant to management's plans, the Company will have adequate resources to fund operations and capital expenditures for the year ending December 31, 2021 and through at least the end of the first quarter of 2022.
If our revenue estimates are off either in timing or amount, or if cash generated from operations is insufficient to satisfy the Company's operational working capital and capital expenditure requirements, however, the Company may need to implement additional steps to ensure liquidity including, but not limited to, the deferral of planned capital spending and/or delaying existing or pending product development initiatives, or the Company may be required to obtain credit facilities or other loans, if available, to fund these initiatives. The Company has no other formal commitments for funding its future needs at this time and any additional financing we may require during the year ending December 31, 2021, may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. Such steps, if required, could potentially have a material and adverse effect on our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
Debt
On May 7, 2020, in connection with receipt of a $3.3 million U.S. Air Force delivery order, MTI Instruments obtained a $300 thousand secured line of credit from Pioneer Bank. The line of credit may be drawn in the discretion of MTI Instruments and bears interest at a rate of Prime +1% per annum. Accrued interest is due monthly, and principal is payable over a period of 30 days following the lender's demand. The line of credit is secured by the assets of MTI Instruments and is guaranteed by the Company. As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under the line of credit.
We had no additional credit facilities available or debt outstanding at either December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019.
Backlog, Inventory and Accounts Receivable
At December 31, 2020, the Company's order backlog was $555 thousand, compared to $721 thousand at December 31, 2019. The decrease in backlog was primarily due to a few large orders placed in late 2019 in the capacitance line with deliveries in 2020.
Our inventory turnover ratios and average accounts receivable days outstanding for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and their changes are as follows:
The increase in inventory turns is due to the U.S Air Force contract driving increased inventory balances and a quicker turn to shipment.
The average accounts receivable days' outstanding decreased seven days during 2020 compared to the prior year due to the increased volume of sales to the U.S. Air Force during 2020 compared to 2019, as the U.S. Air Force generally pays for its purchases within 15 days of delivery, compared to an average of approximately 30 days for non-government customers.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The prior discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K includes a summary of our most significant accounting policies. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and related disclosure of assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, inventories, income taxes and share-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Periodically, our management reviews our critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
The significant accounting policies that we believe are most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial statements include the following:
Revenue Recognition, Accounts Receivable, and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. Product revenue consists of revenue recognized from MTI Instruments' product lines. Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. We enter into contracts that can include various combinations of products and services, which are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations. Revenue is recognized net of allowances for returns and any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
If a customer requires that that we provide installation of a purchased product, all revenue related to the product is deferred and recognized upon the completion of the installation. If the terms of our contract with the customer or the customer's purchase order requires specific customer acceptance criteria with respect to a product, such as on-site customer acceptance and/or acceptance after install, then revenue is deferred until customer acceptance occurs or the acceptance provisions lapse, unless we can objectively and reliably demonstrate that the criteria specified in the acceptance provisions is satisfied. We may also record unearned revenues, which include payments for other offerings for which we have been paid in advance. The resulting revenue would be earned when we transfer control of the product or service.
MTI Instruments currently has distributor agreements in place for the international sale of general instrument and semiconductor products in certain global regions. Such agreements grant a distributor the right of first refusal to act as distributor for such products in the distributor's territory. In return, the distributor agrees to not market products that are considered by MTI Instruments to be in direct competition with MTI Instruments' products. The distributor is allowed to purchase MTI Instruments' equipment at a price that is discounted off the published domestic/international list prices. Such list prices can be adjusted by MTI Instruments during the term of the distributor agreement. Generally, payment terms with the distributor are standard net 30 days, but, on occasion, we have granted extended payment terms. Title and risk of loss of the product passes to the distributor upon delivery to the independent carrier (standard "free-on-board" factory), and the distributor is responsible for any required training and/or service with the end-user. The sale of products to our distributors (and their subsequent payment to us) is completed upon delivery and is not contingent upon the distributors' resale of the products. Distributor sales are covered by MTI Instruments' standard one-year warranty and there are no special return policies for distributors.
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment. We determine the standalone selling price ("SSP") for each distinct performance obligation. Since we sell products and services separately, the SSP is directly observable.
Trade accounts receivable are stated at the invoiced amount billed to customers and do not bear interest. An allowance for doubtful accounts, if necessary, represents our best estimate of the amount of probable credit losses in our existing accounts receivable. We determine the allowance based on historical write-off experience and current exposures identified. We review our allowance for doubtful accounts monthly. We review past due balances over 90 days and over a specified amount individually for collectability. We review all other balances on a pooled basis by type of receivable. We charge off account balances against the allowance when we believe it is probable the receivable will not be recovered. We do not have any off-balance-sheet credit exposure related to our customers.
Cryptocurrency revenue consists of revenue recognized from EcoChain's cryptocurrency mining facility. Revenue is recognized at the cryptocurrency's realized cash value based upon the rates at cryptocurrency exchanges where we are registered. Cryptocurrencies are earned when the miners solve complex computations and cryptocurrency is issued as a result. The mined cryptocurrency is immediately paid to the Coinbase wallet. Cryptocurrency is converted to U.S. dollars on a daily basis.
Inventory. We value inventories at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or net realizable value. We periodically review inventory quantities on hand and record a provision for excess, slow moving, and obsolete inventory based primarily on our estimated forecast of product demand, as well as based on historical usage. We also provide estimated inventory allowances for inventory whose carrying value is in excess of net realizable value. Demand and usage for products and materials can fluctuate significantly. A significant decrease in demand for our products could result in a short-term increase in the cost of inventory purchases and an increase of excess inventory quantities on hand. Although we make every effort to assure the accuracy of our forecasts of future product demand, any significant unanticipated changes in demand could have a significant impact on the value of our inventory and our reported operating results. If changes in market conditions result in reductions in the estimated net realizable value of our inventory below our previous estimate, we would increase our reserve in the period in which we made such a determination and record a charge to cost of product revenue.
Share-Based Payments. We grant options to purchase our common stock and award restricted stock to our employees and directors under our equity incentive plans. The benefits provided under these plans are share-based payments and we account for stock-based awards exchanged for employee service in accordance with the appropriate share-based payment accounting guidance. Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock-based awards granted to employees and directors. We measure stock-based compensation cost at grant date based on the estimated fair value of the award and recognize the cost as expense on a straight-line basis in accordance with the vesting of the options (net of estimated forfeitures) over the option's requisite service period. We estimate the fair value of stock-based awards on the grant date using a Black-Scholes valuation model. We use the fair value method of accounting with the modified prospective application, which provides for certain changes to the method for valuing share-based compensation. The valuation provisions apply to new awards and to awards that are outstanding on the effective date and subsequently modified.
The determination of the fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. These variables include our expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards, actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors, risk-free interest rate, and expected dividends.
Theoretical valuation models and market-based methods are evolving and may result in lower or higher fair value estimates for share-based compensation. The timing, readiness, adoption, general acceptance, reliability, and testing of these methods is uncertain. Sophisticated mathematical models may require voluminous historical information, modeling expertise, financial analyses, correlation analyses, integrated software and databases, consulting fees, customization, and testing for adequacy of internal controls.
For purposes of estimating the fair value of stock options granted using the Black-Scholes model, we use the historical volatility of our stock for the expected volatility assumption input to the Black-Scholes model, consistent with the accounting guidance. The risk-free interest rate is based on the risk-free zero-coupon rate for a period consistent with the expected option term at the time of grant. We paid a special dividend during the year ended December 31, 2019 and did not pay any dividends during the year ended December 31, 2020. We are required to assume a dividend yield as an input to the Black-Scholes model. Since the 2019 dividend was a special dividend and we do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future, we therefore use an expected dividend yield of zero in the option valuation model. The expected option term is calculated based on our historical forfeitures and cancellation rates.
Income Taxes. We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. (federal and state). As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we calculate income taxes for each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This involves estimating actual current taxes due together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment for tax and accounting purposes that are recorded as deferred tax assets and liabilities, loss carryforwards, and tax credit carryforwards, for which income tax benefits are expected to be realized in future years. Deferred tax assets are reported net of a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will not be realized. The effect on deferred taxes of a change in tax rates is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date.
Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets. We considered all available evidence, both positive and negative, such as historical levels of income and future forecasts of taxable income amongst other items in determining our valuation allowance. In addition, our assessment requires us to schedule future taxable income in accordance with accounting standards that address income taxes to assess the appropriateness of a valuation allowance, which further requires the exercise of significant management judgment.
We account for taxes in accordance with the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, we must recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. The impact of our reassessment of our tax positions for these standards did not have a material impact on its results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity.
We are also currently subject to audit in various jurisdictions, and these jurisdictions may assess additional income tax liabilities against us. Developments in an audit, litigation, or in applicable laws, regulations, administrative practices, principles, and interpretations could have a material effect on our operating results or cash flows in the period or periods in which such developments occur, as well as for prior and in subsequent periods.
Tax laws, regulations, and administrative practices in various jurisdictions may be subject to significant change, with or without notice, due to economic, political, and other conditions, and significant judgment is required in evaluating and estimating our provision and accruals for these taxes. There are many transactions that occur during the ordinary course of business for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Our effective tax rates could be affected by numerous factors, such as intercompany transactions, earnings being lower than anticipated in jurisdictions where we have lower statutory rates and higher than anticipated in jurisdictions where we have higher statutory rates, the applicability of special tax regimes, losses incurred in jurisdictions for which we are not able to realize the related tax benefit, changes in foreign currency exchange rates, entry into new businesses and geographies, changes to our existing businesses and operations, acquisitions and investments and how they are financed, changes in our stock price, changes in our deferred tax assets and liabilities and their valuation, and changes in the relevant tax, accounting, and other laws, regulations, administrative practices, principles, and interpretations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A discussion of recently-adopted and new accounting pronouncements is included in Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.