ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the Exchange Act). These statements are often identified by the use of words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “could,” “should,” “estimate,” “plan,” or “continue,” and similar expressions or variations. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results and the timing of certain events to differ materially from future results expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors,” set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and elsewhere in this report. The forward-looking statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K represent our views as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We anticipate that subsequent events and developments will cause our views to change. However, while we may elect to update these forward-looking statements at some point in the future, we have no current intention of doing so except to the extent required by applicable law. You should, therefore, not rely on these forward-looking statements as representing our views as of any date subsequent to the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Overview
We are focused on the development and commercialization of novel therapeutics for the treatment of rare diseases. Our lead candidate is Diazoxide Choline Controlled Release tablets (DCCR), a once-daily oral tablet for the treatment of Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS). DCCR has orphan designation for the treatment of PWS in the United States (U.S.) as well as in the European Union (E.U.).
We were incorporated in the State of Delaware on August 25, 1999, and are located in Redwood City, California. We initially established our operations as Capnia, Inc., a diversified healthcare company that developed and commercialized innovative diagnostics, devices and therapeutics addressing unmet medical needs. In March 2017, we merged with Essentialis, Inc. and subsequently changed our name from “Capnia, Inc.” to “Soleno Therapeutics, Inc.” Essentialis was a privately held clinical-stage company focused on the development of breakthrough medicines for the treatment of rare diseases where this is increased mortality and risk of cardiovascular and endocrine complications. After the merger, our primary focus has been the development and commercialization of novel therapeutics for the treatment of rare diseases and we subsequently divested or discontinued all prior businesses.
DCCR has been evaluated in a Phase 3 study (C601 or DESTINY PWS), a 3-month randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled study, which completed enrollment in January 2020, with 127 patients at 29 sites in the U.S. and U.K. Patients who complete treatment in DESTINY PWS are eligible to receive DCCR for up to 36 months in C602, an open-label extension study. Top line results from DESTINY PWS were announced in June 2020. Although the trial did not meet its primary endpoint of change from baseline in hyperphagia, significant improvements were observed in two of three key secondary endpoints. In February 2021 we announced analysis limited to data collected before the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. The analysis of the data through March 1, 2020 showed statistical significance in the primary, all key secondary and several other efficacy endpoints. We are evaluating the data and are in communication with the regulatory authorities to determine next steps.
The spread of the COVID-19 virus during 2020 caused an economic downturn on a global scale, as well as significant volatility in the financial markets. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the spread of the COVID-19 virus a pandemic. Due to stay at home orders both in the U.S. and U.K., we instituted a work from home policy for all of our employees to protect their health and well-being. We have ensured that all of our employees have essential materials to work comfortably and efficiently from home during this time.
We have not experienced a significant financial impact directly related to the COVID-19 pandemic. In June 2020, subsequent to the announcement of top line results from DESTINY PWS, we completed a public offering of shares of our common stock and raised $53.7 million in net proceeds. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $49.2 million, which management believes is sufficient to enable us to meet our obligations for at least the next twelve months from the date of this filing. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $182.4 million, primarily as a result of research and development and general and administrative expenses. We
may never be successful in commercializing our novel therapeutic-lead candidate DCCR. Accordingly, we expect to incur significant losses from operations for the foreseeable future, and there can be no assurance that we will ever generate significant revenue or profits.
Recent Financings
2017 PIPE Offering
On December 11, 2017, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain purchasers, pursuant to which we sold and issued 8,141,116 immediately separable units at a price per unit of $1.84, for aggregate gross proceeds of $15.0 million. Each unit consisted of one share of our common stock and a warrant to purchase 0.74 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $2.00 per share, for an aggregate of 8,141,116 shares of common stock and corresponding warrants to purchase an aggregate of 6,024,425 shares of common stock, together the shares of common stock are referred to as the 2017 Resale Shares. We also granted certain registration rights to these stockholders, pursuant to which, among other things, we prepared and filed a registration statement with the SEC to register for resale the 2017 Resale Shares. The registration statement was declared effective in February 2018.
2018 PIPE Offering
On December 19, 2018, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain purchasers, pursuant to which we sold and issued 10,272,375 units at a price per unit of $1.61, for aggregate gross proceeds of $16.5 million. Each unit consisted of one share of our common stock and a warrant to purchase 0.05 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $2.00 per share, for an aggregate of 10,272,375 shares of common stock and corresponding warrants to purchase an aggregate of 513,617 shares of common stock, together with the shares of common stock are referred to as the 2018 Resale Shares. We also granted certain registration rights to these stockholders, pursuant to which, among other things, we prepared and filed a registration statement with the SEC to register for resale the 2018 Resale Shares. The registration statement was declared effective in April 2019.
2019 Public Offering
On October 25, 2019, we sold 12,841,667 shares of common stock in an underwritten public offering at a price of $1.20 per share for net proceeds of $14.5 million.
2020 Public Offering
On June 26, 2020, we sold 34,848,484 shares of common stock in an underwritten public offering at a price of $1.65 per share for net proceeds of $53.7 million.
Financial overview
Summary
We have not generated net income from operations to date, and at December 31, 2020 we had an accumulated deficit of $182.4 million, primarily as a result of research and development and general and administrative expenses. We may never be successful in commercializing our novel therapeutics products for the treatment of rare diseases. Accordingly, we expect to incur significant losses from operations for the foreseeable future, and there can be no assurance that we will ever generate significant revenue or profits.
Revenue recognition
To date, we have earned no revenue from the commercial development and sale of novel therapeutic products.
Research and development expenses
Research and development costs consist primarily of salaries and benefits, professional consultant fees, prototype expenses, certain facility costs and other costs associated with clinical trials, net of reimbursed amounts.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and benefits, professional fees for legal, consulting, audit and tax services, insurance, rent, and other general operating expenses not otherwise included in research and development. We anticipate general and administrative expenses will increase in future periods, reflecting an expanding infrastructure, other administrative expenses and increased professional fees associated with being a public reporting company.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
Change in fair value of contingent consideration represents the change in the fair value of the additional consideration that we expect to pay to the former Essentialis stockholders based on our assessment of the expected likelihood of achieving two commercial sales milestones of $100.0 million in revenue and $200.0 million in revenue in future years.
Other income (expense)
Other income (expense) is primarily comprised of the changes in the fair value of the 2017 and 2018 PIPE common stock warrant liabilities, and to a much lesser extent, interest income. In 2019 other income (expense) also includes the loss from recording our minority interest investment in Capnia.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our audited financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our critical accounting policies and estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable in the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 to our audited financial statements contained herein.
Series A, Series C, 2017 PIPE Warrants, and the 2018 PIPE Warrants
We account for the Series A, Series C, 2017 PIPE warrants, and 2018 PIPE warrants, collectively referred to as the Warrants, in accordance with the guidance in ASC 815 Derivatives and Hedging. The Warrants contain standard anti-dilution provisions for stock dividends, stock splits, subdivisions, combinations and similar types of recapitalization events. The Warrants also contain a fundamental transactions provision that permits their settlement in cash at fair value at the option of the holder upon the occurrence of a change in control. Such change in control events include tender offers or hostile takeovers, which are not within our sole control as the issuer of these warrants. Accordingly, the warrants are considered to have a cash settlement feature that precludes their classification as equity instruments. Settlement at fair value upon the occurrence of a fundamental transaction would be computed using the Black Scholes Option Pricing Model, which approximates the binomial lattice model.
We classified the Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and re-measure the warrants at each balance sheet date until they are exercised or expire. Any change in the fair value is recognized as other income (expense) in the statements of operations. The Series A warrants expired in November 2019; the Series C warrants expired in March 2020; and the 2017 PIPE warrants expired in December 2020.
Research and development expense
Research and development costs are charged to operations as incurred. Research and development costs consist primarily of salaries, benefits, bonus, share-based compensation, consultant fees, certain facility costs and other costs associated with clinical trials. Clinical trial costs are a significant component of research and development expenses and include costs associated with third-party contractors and other vendors. Invoicing from third-party contractors for services performed can often occur several months later. We accrue the costs of service rendered in connection with third-party contractor activities based on our estimate of fees and costs associate with the contract that were rendered during the period and they are expensed as incurred.
Costs to acquire technologies to be used in research and development that have not reached technological feasibility and have no alternative future use are expensed to research and development costs when incurred.
Stock-based compensation expense
Stock-based compensation costs related to stock options and restricted stock units granted to employees, nonemployees and directors are measured at the date of grant based on the estimated fair value of the award. For restricted stock units this fair value is based on our common stock price on the grant date. We estimate the grant date fair value of stock options, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The grant date fair value of stock-based awards is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award. Stock options generally vest over four years.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions to estimate the fair value of stock-based awards. If we had made different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense, net loss and net loss per share of common stock could have been significantly different. These assumptions include:
•
Expected volatility: We calculate the estimated volatility rate based on the volatility of our common stock together with comparable companies in our industry.
•
Expected term: We do not believe we are able to rely on our historical exercise and post-vesting termination activity to provide accurate data for estimating the expected term for use in estimating the fair value-based measurement of our options. Therefore, we have opted to use the “simplified method” for estimating the expected term of options.
•
Risk-free rate: The risk-free interest rate is based on the yields of U.S. Treasury securities with maturities similar to the expected time to liquidity.
•
Expected dividend yield: We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not presently plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future. Consequently, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Contingent consideration
Contingent consideration elements of a business combination are recorded in accordance with ASC 805 which provides that, when contingent consideration terms provide for future payment obligations, the obligation is measured at its fair value on the acquisition date, and the subsequent increase or decrease of the value of the estimated amounts of contingent consideration to be paid is be recognized as expense or income, respectively, in the statements of operations.
Our agreement to pay the former Essentialis stockholders for achieving certain commercial milestones resulted in the recognition of contingent consideration, which was recorded at the inception of the transaction, and subsequent changes to estimate the amount of contingent consideration to be paid is recognized as expenses or income in the statements of operations. The fair value of the contingent consideration is based on our analysis of the likelihood of the drug indication moving from Phase 2 through approval by the FDA and then reaching the cumulative revenue milestones.
Common Stock Purchase Warrants and Other Derivative Financial Instruments
We account for the warrants in accordance with the guidance in ASC 815 Derivatives and Hedging. We classify common stock purchase warrants and other free standing derivative financial instruments as equity if the contracts (i) require physical settlement or net-share settlement or (ii) give us a choice of net-cash settlement or
settlement in its own shares (physical settlement or net-share settlement). We classify any contracts that (i) require net-cash settlement (including a requirement to net cash settle the contract if an event occurs and if that event is outside our control), (ii) give the counterparty a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in shares (physical settlement or net-share settlement), or (iii) contain reset provisions as either an asset or a liability. We assess classification of freestanding derivatives at each reporting date to determine whether a change in classification between equity and liabilities is required. We determined that certain freestanding derivatives, which principally consist of Series A, Series C, the 2017 PIPE Warrants and 2018 PIPE Warrants, do not satisfy the criteria for classification as equity instruments due to the existence of certain cash settlement features that are not within our sole control or variable settlement provision that cause them to not be indexed to our stock. The Series A Warrants expired during November 2019, the Series C warrants expired in March 2020, and the 2017 PIPE warrants expired in December 2020.
Income Taxes
We use the liability method of accounting for income taxes, whereby deferred tax assets or liability account balances are calculated at the balance sheet date using current tax laws and rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. We have provided a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that will more likely than not be realized.
We make certain estimates and judgments in determining income tax expense for financial statement purposes. These estimates and judgments occur in the calculation of tax credits, benefits and deductions and in the calculation of certain tax assets and liabilities, which arise from differences in the timing of recognition of revenues and expenses for tax and financial statement purposes. Significant changes to these estimates may result in an increase or decrease to our tax provision in a subsequent period.
We make estimates and judgments about our future taxable income that are based on assumptions that are consistent with our plans and estimates. Should the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the amount of our valuation allowance could be materially impacted. Any adjustment to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance would be recorded in the income statement for the periods in which the adjustment is determined to be required.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes as required by the provisions of ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, which clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to estimate and measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. It is inherently difficult and subjective to estimate such amounts, as this requires us to determine the probability of various possible outcomes. We consider many factors when evaluating and estimating our tax positions and tax benefits, which may require periodic adjustments and may not accurately anticipate actual outcomes.
In addition, the use of net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards may be limited under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code in certain situations where changes occur in the stock ownership of a company. In the event that we have had a change in ownership, utilization of the carryforwards could be restricted. For more information, see the section titled “Risk Factors-Our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards and certain other tax attributes will be limited.”
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
We have not commenced commercialization of DCCR, our current sole novel therapeutic product, and accordingly, through December 31, 2020, have generated no revenue.
Research and development expense
Research and development expense of $23.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $6.9 million over 2019. In January 2020, we announced the completion of target enrollment in DESTINY PWS trial with 29 sites and over 100 subjects, and in June 2020, we announced top line results. As of December 31, 2020, 28 sites remained active with 99 patients still actively participating in the study and continuing to receive DCCR. During 2019, not all clinical trial sites had been initiated, with 9 starting in the second half of the year. As a result, we have incurred increased clinical site costs, consulting costs and lab costs during 2020. In addition, we are increasing our investment in clinical manufacturing costs to continue to supply DCCR to the patients in the trial and to prepare for the next phase in the regulatory approval process.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expense of $8.8 million during 2020 increased by $1.8 million from 2019. The increase was primarily related to increased compensation costs, costs for intellectual property, and corporate business development expenses.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
We are obligated to make cash payments of up to a maximum of $30 million to the former Essentialis stockholders upon the achievement of certain future commercial milestones associated with the sale of DCCR in accordance with the terms of our merger agreement with Essentialis. The fair value of the liability for the contingent consideration payable by us achieving two commercial sales milestones of $100 million in revenue and $200 million in revenue, respectively, in future years was estimated to be $10.3 million as of December 31, 2020, a $4.3 million increase from the estimate as of December 31, 2019. The step up in value is largely attributable to us announcing top-line results from our DESTINY PWS trial in June 2020. During 2019 the estimate increased $0.3 million from the liability of $5.6 million estimated at December 31, 2018.
Other income (expense)
Other income of $11.7 million in 2020 increased $18.9 million from other expense of $7.3 million during 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $11.6 million decrease in the fair value of our outstanding warrants during
2020, compared to an increase of $7.0 during 2019. In addition, during 2019 we recorded a $0.5 million loss from our minority interest investment in Capnia, our former subsidiary, which includes $0.5 million for our share of Capnia’s net losses during the period, partially offset by a gain of approximately $33,000 recognized upon the sale of the investment. These increases were slightly offset by a decrease of $0.1 million in interest income recorded during 2020 compared to 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had a net loss of $24.6 million during 2020 and an accumulated deficit of $182.4 million at December 31, 2020 as a result of having incurred losses since our inception. We had $49.2 million in cash and cash equivalents and $41.6 million of working capital at December 31, 2020, and used $25.2 million of cash in operating activities during 2020. We have financed our operations principally through issuances of equity securities. On June 26, 2020, we sold 34,848,484 shares of common stock in an underwritten public offering at a price of $1.65 per share for net proceeds of $53.7 million. We expect to continue incurring losses for the foreseeable future. However, we expect that our current cash and cash equivalents balance are sufficient to enable us to meet our obligations for at least the next twelve months from the date of this filing.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for each of the periods presented below:
Cash used in operating activities
During 2020, operating activities used net cash of $25.2 million, which was primarily due to the loss of $24.6 million plus non-cash income of $7.3 million for the change in fair value of common stock warrants and contingent consideration, adjusted for non-cash expense of $2.0 million for depreciation and amortization, $1.5 million of stock-based compensation expense, and $0.3 million for non-cash lease expense. Additionally, the usage of cash during 2020 was reduced by $3.0 million due to changes in operating assets and liabilities.
During 2019, operating activities used net cash of $17.4 million, which was primarily due to the loss of $30.8 million, adjusted for non-cash expense of $2.0 million for depreciation and amortization, $7.3 million for the change in fair value of common stock warrants and contingent consideration, $0.8 million of stock-based compensation expense, $0.4 million for non-cash lease expense, and a $0.5 million operating loss on minority interest investment. Additionally, the usage of cash during 2019 was reduced by $2.5 million due to changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Cash used in investing activities
During 2019, investing activities provided cash of $0.5 million, primarily a result of the $0.5 million that we received for the sale of our 47% investment in Capnia to Sinon in September 2019 and a security deposit of $0.1 million received at the expiration of our facility operating leases that expired in August 2019. This cash inflow was partially offset by cash that was used for a deposit of approximately $59,000 related to the lease that we entered into in July 2019 for 6,368 square feet of new space in Redwood City, California. There was minimal cash used during 2020 and 2019 for the costs of acquiring property and equipment.
Cash provided by financing activities
During 2020, we obtained $53.7 million of cash from the sale of shares of our common stock in a public offering, net of underwriting discounts and other offering expenses. During 2019, we obtained $14.5 million of cash from the sale of common stock in a public offering, net of underwriting discounts and other offering expenses.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As of December 31, 2020, we had lease obligations totaling $0.2 million , consisting of an operating lease for office space in Redwood City, California, and a finance lease for office furniture.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands).
We are obligated to make cash earnout payments of up to a maximum of $30.0 million to the former Essentialis stockholders upon the achievement of certain commercial milestones associated with the sale of Essentialis’ product in accordance with the terms of our merger agreement with Essentialis.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K as promulgated by the SEC.
Accounting Guidance Update
Recently Issued Accounting Guidance
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), or other standard setting bodies and adopted by us as of the specified effective date (see Note 3).