ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and result of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and footnotes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. The forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates, assumptions and projections about our industry, business and future financial results. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A above.
Company Overview
We are a leading technology-enabled, direct-to-consumer (“DTC”) distribution platform that provides consumers with a transparent and convenient venue to shop for complex senior health, life, and auto & home insurance policies from a curated panel of the nation’s leading insurance carriers. As an insurance distributor, we do not insure the consumer, but rather identify consumers looking to acquire insurance products and place these consumers with insurance carrier partners that provide these products and, in return, earn commissions from our insurance carrier partners for the policies we sell on their behalf. Because we are not the issuer of the insurance policy to the consumer, we bear no underwriting risks. Our proprietary technology allows us to take a broad funnel approach to marketing by analyzing and identifying high quality consumer leads sourced from a wide variety of online and offline marketing channels. Our primary sources of leads include search engine marketing, radio, television, and third-party marketing partners. We monitor our acquisition costs to dynamically allocate our marketing spend to the most attractive channel, benefiting from over thirty years of data accumulated through our proprietary, purpose-built technologies. Our advanced workflow processing system scores each acquired lead in real-time, matching it with an agent whom we determine is best suited to meet the consumer’s need. Our platform then captures and utilizes our experience to further build upon the millions of data points that feed our marketing algorithms, which further enhances our ability to deploy subsequent marketing dollars efficiently and target more high-quality consumer leads. We have built our business model to maximize commissions collected over the life of an approved policy less the cost of acquiring the business, a metric we refer to as policyholder lifetime value and which is a key component to our overall profitability. In addition, our proprietary technology allows us to quickly adapt to offer new products and services like our newest initiative, Population Health.
We evaluate our business using the following three segments:
SelectQuote Senior (“Senior”), our fastest growing and largest segment, was launched in 2010 and provides unbiased comparison shopping for Medicare Advantage (“MA”) and Medicare Supplement (“MS”) insurance plans as well as prescription drug and dental, vision and hearing ("DVH") plans, and critical illness products. We represent approximately 20 leading, nationally-recognized insurance carrier partners, including Humana, UnitedHealthcare, Aetna, and Wellcare. MA and MS plans accounted for 78%, 77%, and 74% of our approved Senior policies for the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, with ancillary policies, including DVH plans, accounting for the majority of the remainder. Additionally, InsideResponse and Population Health are included in the Senior segment for segment reporting purposes.
SelectQuote Life (“Life”) is one of the country’s largest and most established DTC insurance distributors for term life insurance, having sold over 2.0 million policies nationwide since our founding in 1985. Our platform provides unbiased comparison shopping for life insurance products such as term and permanent life policies (together referred to as "core"), final expense policies, and other ancillary products such as critical illness, accidental death, and juvenile insurance policies (together referred to as "ancillary"). We represent approximately 18 leading, nationally-recognized insurance carrier partners, with many of these relationships exceeding 15 years. Core life policies accounted for 45%, 67%, and 84% of new premium within the Life segment for the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, with final expense policies accounting for 53%, 31%, and 14% for the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
SelectQuote Auto & Home (“Auto & Home”) was founded in 2011 as an unbiased comparison shopping platform for auto, home, and specialty insurance lines. We offer insurance products, including homeowners, auto, dwelling fire, and other ancillary insurance products underwritten by approximately 27 leading, nationally-recognized insurance carrier partners. Homeowners and 12-month auto products accounted for 79%, 78%, and 75% of new premium within the Auto & Home segment for years ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, with six-month auto, dwelling, and other products accounting for the majority of the remainder.
Industry Trends
We estimate that the total addressable market for the insurance products we distribute is greater than $180 billion. Further, while these markets are already substantial, they are also growing, in part due to a number of highly attractive demographic trends. Our Senior segment serves consumers predominantly in the over 65 age category. The over 65 age category grew at a 3.4% CAGR from 2010 to 2016, and grew from 12.9% of the total population to 15.2% of the total population according to the United States Census Bureau. The over 65 age category, growing at a 3.2% CAGR from 2016 to 2025, accounted for 15.6% of the population in 2020 and is expected to account for 18.9% of the population by 2025 according to the United States Census Bureau. On average, 10,000 “Baby Boomers” are expected to turn 65 every day or nearly 4 million per year, for the next 10 years. As a result, Medicare enrollment is growing steadily, with the number of Medicare enrollees expected to grow from 59.9 million in 2018 (up from 45.5 million in 2008 and 52.5 million in 2013), to approximately 68.4 million in 2023 then rising to 76.7 million by 2028, according to CSG Actuarial. Of this, Medicare Advantage plans are representing an increasing share of the Medicare market. At the end of 2017, there were approximately 20 million Medicare Advantage enrollees, representing approximately 35% penetration of the Medicare market. By 2025, the number of Medicare Advantage enrollees is expected to swell to approximately 38 million, representing a 50% penetration rate of the Medicare market. Medicare Advantage is expected to reach 60% to 70% penetration between 2030 and 2040, according to LEK Consulting, highlighting the pace with which this already large segment of the Medicare market is growing. The degree to which we will realize a corresponding increase in revenue will be determined by our ability to continue to successfully place new Medicare policies for this enlarged potential consumer base.
Our Life segment is one of the country’s largest DTC insurance distributors for term life insurance and provides unbiased comparison shopping for core, final expense, and ancillary products. The U.S. life insurance market is mature and has experienced annual premium growth of 1.4% since 2013, according to S&P Global. Growth in the life insurance sector is driven by a number of macro-economic factors including population growth, general economic growth and individual wealth accumulation.
Our Auto & Home segment predominantly sells automobile and homeowners insurance. The auto insurance industry has grown at an annual rate of 6.3% from 2013-2018 based on Statutory Direct Premiums Written, according to S&P Global, with 2018 written premium totaling $247 billion. Industry growth is driven by growth in the number of registered vehicles, increases in insurance premium rates and general economic growth. The homeowners insurance industry has grown at an annual rate of 3.8% from 2013-2018 based on Statutory Direct Premiums Written, according to S&P Global, with 2018 written premium totaling $99 billion. Industry growth is driven by growth in housing supply, increases in insurance premium rates and general economic growth.
Recent technological innovations, including the development of machine learning for business applications and the proliferation of smart mobile devices as a means of consumer purchasing, are changing the insurance distribution landscape. As the composition of the U.S. population gradually shifts to the mobile-first generation, consumers are becoming more tech-savvy and comfortable shopping online. The internet plays a role in 8 out of 10 life insurance purchases, according to LIMRA. Additionally, 71% of U.S. auto insurance shoppers obtain online quotes annually, according to Comscore. We believe our proprietary technology platform, vast datasets and use of machine learning in all aspects of our business put us in an excellent position to take advantage of these consumer trends.
Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
Our primary source of revenue is commission revenue from selling policies in the senior health, life, and auto and home markets on behalf of our insurance carrier partners, the majority of which compensate us through first year and renewal commissions. We use our proprietary technology and processes to generate and obtain consumer leads and allocate those leads to agents who are best suited for those consumers. As a result, one of the primary factors affecting our growth is our total number of agents, comprised of both existing core agents and the number of new flex agents that we hire and train to sell new policies. We view agents as a critical component of helping consumers through the purchasing process to enable them to identify the most appropriate coverage that suits their needs. Through our years of experience, we have expanded our recruiting efforts and enhanced our training programs, both of which have allowed us to expand our agent force. We have also developed proprietary technologies and processes that enable us to expand our lead acquisition efforts to keep pace with our expanding sales force and maintain agent productivity despite the significant growth in number of agents.
The amount of revenue we expect to recognize per policy is based on multiple factors, including our commission rates with our insurance carrier partners and the expected retention rates of different types of policies. The higher our retention rates, the more revenue we expect to generate pursuant to our carrier agreements, which generally entitle us to receive annual renewal commissions for so long as the policyholder renews their policy. Additionally, we earn certain volume-based bonuses from some carriers on first-year policies sold, which we refer to as production bonuses and marketing development funds, based on attaining various predetermined target sales levels or other agreed upon objectives, as presented in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income as production bonus and other revenue. These commissions that we expect to generate over the life of an approved policy less the cost of acquiring the business is a key component to our overall profitability. Our goal is to maximize policyholder lifetime value by increasing retention rates, which starts by providing consumers with a transparent, valuable and best-in-class consumer experience and making sure consumers are buying a policy that meets their specific needs.
Recent Events
Population Health
The Population Health platform went live in April 2021 and is designed to offer a one-stop shop for consumers to meet a variety of their healthcare needs. Population Health focuses on providing awareness and education for seniors to ensure the full utilization of their health benefits. We want to educate seniors not only on the benefits they already receive from their current health plans, but also to help them manage their overall healthcare needs with regular check-ins from our CSAs. We believe this creates a deeper relationship with our insurance carrier customers by improving consumer health outcomes and increasing persistency; thus, reducing their overall costs.
When talking with our eligible MA patients, CSAs can perform an HRA, providing our insurance carrier customers with valuable data points and providing a baseline for our CSAs to determine the individual needs of that consumer and how our Population Health ecosystem can best work for them. We have partnered with leading VBC providers such as ChenMed, Conviva, Heal, Iora Health, and Oak Street Health to serve as key partners to achieve improved patient outcomes and best-in-class service. Additionally, we have partnered with Lyft to provide seniors and other Medicare beneficiaries with access to non-emergency medical transportation.
Through SelectRx, we can provide simple solutions for prescription drug management and support with a personalized approach to streamline the process of managing multiple medications for seniors with chronic conditions. SelectRx uses a high-touch, technology-driven approach to achieve improved medication adherence and superior customer service. SelectRx has developed an innovative pill pack solution that is customized to the unique needs of each patient, focusing on individual multi-dosages by day and time.
In order to strategically evaluate potential partnerships and acquisitions to benefit the Population Health patient ecosystem, we have formed SVI. SVI focuses on innovative, market-leading, consumer-oriented healthcare
businesses with high growth potential. SVI's first acquisition was Express Med Pharmaceutical Inc., as discussed in more detail below.
Acquisitions
•InsideResponse, LLC-On May 1, 2020, we acquired 100% of the outstanding membership units of InsideResponse for an aggregate purchase price of up to $65.0 million.
•Lead distribution company-On February 1, 2021, we acquired substantially all of the assets of a lead distribution company for an aggregate purchase price of up to $33.5 million.
•Express Med Pharmaceutical Inc.-On April 30, 2021, through SVI, we acquired 100% of the outstanding shares of Express Med Pharmaceutical Inc. (doing business under the name "SelectRx"), a leading specialty pharmaceutical distributor, for an aggregate purchase price of up to $24.0 million.
Refer to Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for further details on our recent acquisitions.
COVID-19
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, was reported in Wuhan, China. COVID-19 spread rapidly to other countries, including the United States, and the World Health Organization formally declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic in March 2020. With social distancing measures implemented to curtail the spread of the virus, we enacted a robust business continuity plan, including a work-from-home policy for all of our agents and other employees. Our technology platform and pre-existing remote agent capabilities have allowed for a seamless transition to a remote working environment without any material impacts to our business, financial or otherwise, highlighting the resilience of our business model. We believe that a business like ours is well-suited to navigate and to continue to navigate an environment in which consumers are particularly focused on healthcare issues and mortality and social distancing requirements push consumers to conduct business remotely, while the underlying demand dynamics for our core products remained unchanged. We further believe that our remote agent platform and our commission-based agent compensation model continue to provide agents with productivity incentives and a stable and attractive source of income, thereby allowing us to continue to retain and attract agents. Further, as consumers have continued to become more comfortable with conducting business remotely, we believe consumer adoption of distribution models such as ours may continue to accelerate long after the COVID-19 pandemic ends.
Key Business and Operating Metrics by Segment
In addition to traditional financial metrics, we rely upon certain business and operating metrics to estimate and recognize commission revenue, evaluate our business performance and facilitate our operations. In our Senior segment, our primary product, Medicare Advantage, pays us flat commission rates based on the number of policies we sell on behalf of our insurance carrier partners. Therefore, we have determined that units and unit metrics are the most appropriate measures to evaluate the performance of the Senior segment. In our Life and Auto & Home segments, we are typically paid a commission that is a percent of the premium that we generate for our insurance carrier partners. Therefore, we have determined that premium-based metrics are the most relevant measures to evaluate the performance of these segments. Below are the most relevant business and operating metrics for each segment:
Senior
Submitted Policies
Submitted policies are counted when an individual completes an application with our licensed agent and provides authorization to them to submit it to the insurance carrier partner. The applicant may have additional
actions to take before the application will be reviewed by the insurance carrier, such as providing additional information.
The following table shows the number of submitted policies for the years ended June 30:
2021 compared to 2020-Total submitted policies increased by 95% for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was driven primarily by a 108% increase in MA submitted policies and an 89% increase in DVH submitted policies. The overall increase in submitted policies for Senior products was primarily due to an increase in the number of agents we employ and an increase in productivity per agent. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we increased the number of average productive agents by approximately 75% and increased the productivity per productive agent by 16% from the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in productivity was driven by improvements in agent close rates and enhancements to our agent workflow and desktop.
2020 compared to 2019-Total submitted policies increased by 91% for the year ended June 30, 2020, compared to the year ended June 30, 2019. The increase was driven primarily by a 121% increase in MA submitted policies and a 91% increase in dental, vision and hearing submitted policies. The increase in submitted policies was primarily due to the increase in the number of agents we employ and an increase in productivity per agent. During the year ended June 30, 2020, we increased the number of average productive agents by 64% and increased the productivity per productive agent by 24% from the year ended June 30, 2019. The increase in productivity was driven by keeping flex agents selling for six months during the AEP and OEP period in 2020 compared to just the three months of AEP during 2019.
Approved Policies
Approved policies represents the number of submitted policies that were approved by our insurance carrier partners for the identified product during the indicated period. Not all approved policies will go in force.
The following table shows the number of approved policies for the years ended June 30:
In general, the relationship between submitted policies and approved policies has been steady over time. Therefore, factors impacting the number of submitted policies also impact the number of approved policies.
2021 compared to 2020-Total approved policies increased by 97% for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was driven primarily by a 107% increase in MA approved policies, 100% increase in DVH approved policies, and a 21% increase in MS approved policies. Fluctuations in approved policies are in direct correlation to submitted policies; therefore, the increases in the number of core and flex productive agents and the increased agent productivity noted above also resulted in the increase in approved policies compared to the year ended June 30, 2020.
2020 compared to 2019-Total approved policies increased by 88% for the year ended June 30, 2020, compared to the year ended June 30, 2019. The increase was driven primarily by a 109% increase in MA approved policies, 94% increase in dental, vision and hearing approved policies and a 9% increase in Medicare Supplement approved policies. Fluctuations in approved policies are in direct correlation to submitted policies; therefore, the increases in the number of core and flex productive agents and the increased agent productivity noted above, also resulted in the increase in approved policies compared to the year ended June 30, 2019.
Lifetime Value of Commissions per Approved Policy
The lifetime value of commissions (the “LTV”) per approved policy represents commissions estimated to be collected over the estimated life of an approved policy based on multiple factors, including but not limited to, contracted commission rates, carrier mix and expected policy persistency with applied constraints. The LTV per approved policy is equal to the sum of the commission revenue due upon the initial sale of a policy, and when applicable, an estimate of future renewal commissions. The estimate of the future renewal commissions is determined using contracted renewal commission rates constrained by a persistency-adjusted 10-year renewal period based on a combination of our historical experience and available insurance carrier historical experience to estimate renewal revenue only to the extent probable that a material reversal in revenue would not be expected to occur. These factors may result in varying values from period to period. The LTV per approved policy represents commissions only from policies sold during the period. That figure excludes renewals during the period from policies originally sold in a prior period with insurance carrier partners whose contracts preclude us from recognizing variable consideration for estimated renewal commissions and updated estimates of prior period variable consideration based on actual policy renewals in the current period.
The following table shows the LTV per approved policy for the years ended June 30:
2021 compared to 2020-The LTV per MA and MS approved policy decreased 2% and 8%, respectively, for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. The LTV per MA approved policy was negatively impacted by lower MA persistency rates, higher intra-year lapse rates and carrier mix somewhat offset by higher commission rates. The LTV per MS approved policy was negatively impacted by a carrier mix shift of policies to a direct carrier pod that pays us lower commissions but has lower marketing costs.
2020 compared to 2019-The LTV per MA approved policy increased 1% for the year ended June 30, 2020, compared to the year ended June 30, 2019, due to higher commission rates somewhat offset by lower MA persistency. The LTV per MS approved policy increased 5% for the year ended June 30, 2020, compared to the year ended June 30, 2019, due to a carrier mix shift of policies to carriers that pay us higher commissions.
Per Unit Economics
Per unit economics represents total MA and MS commissions, other product commissions, other revenues, and costs associated with the Senior segment, each shown as per number of approved MA and MS approved policies over a given time period. Management assesses the business on a per unit basis to help ensure that the revenue opportunity associated with a successful policy sale is attractive relative to the marketing acquisition cost. All per policy metrics are based on approved policies which is a measure that triggers revenue recognition.
The MA and MS commission per MA/MS policy represents the LTV for policies sold in the period. Other commission per MA/MS policy represents the LTV for other products sold in the period, including DVH prescription drug plan, and other products, which management views as additional commission revenue on our agents’ core function of MA/MS policy sales. Other per MA/MS policy represents the production bonuses, marketing development funds, lead sales revenue from InsideResponse, revenue generated through the Population Health platform, and updated estimates of prior period variable consideration based on actual policy renewals in the current period. Total operating expenses per MA/MS policy represent all of the operating expenses within the Senior segment. The Revenue to customer acquisition cost (“CAC”) multiple represents total revenue per MA/MS policy as a multiple of total marketing acquisition cost, which represents the direct costs of acquiring leads which is included in marketing and advertising expense within the total operating expenses per MA/MS policy.
The following table shows per unit economics for the periods presented. Based on the seasonality of the Senior segment and the fluctuations between quarters, we believe that the most relevant view of per unit economics is on a rolling 12-month basis. All per MA/MS policy metrics below are based on the sum of approved MA/MS policies, as both products have similar commission profiles. These metrics are the basis on which management assesses the business.
(1) These financial measures are not calculated in accordance with GAAP. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for information regarding our use of these non-GAAP financial measures and a reconciliation of such measures to their nearest comparable financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
2021 compared to 2020-Total revenue per MA/MS policy stayed flat for the twelve months ended June 30, 2021, compared to the twelve months ended June 30, 2020, due to lower MA/MS commissions driven by lower persistency, a decrease in the amount of other ancillary insurance policies sold as a percent of MA/MS policies, and lower marketing development funds received per approved MA/MS policy due to a shift in mix towards carriers that do not pay us marketing development funds, offset by higher advertising revenue associated with InsideResponse. Total operating expenses per MA/MS policy increased 12% for the twelve months ended June 30, 2021, compared to the twelve months ended June 30, 2020, due to an increase in our marketing and advertising expense consistent with our strategy to drive higher absolute revenue and Adjusted EBITDA with slightly lower Adjusted EBITDA margin.
2020 compared to 2019-Total revenue per MA/MS policy decreased 4% for the year ended June 30, 2020, compared to the year ended June 30, 2019, due to a decrease in the amount of other ancillary insurance policies sold as a percent of MA/MS policies and lower marketing development funds received per approved MA/MS policy due to a shift in mix towards carriers that do not pay us marketing development funds. These decreases were partially offset by higher commissions on MS policies due to carrier mix and a one-time positive adjustment for estimated renewal commissions related to an amendment to a carrier contract that previously precluded us from recognizing variable consideration. Total operating expenses per MA/MS policy increased 8% for the year ended June 30, 2020, compared to the year ended June 30, 2019, due to an increase in our marketing and advertising expense, including an increase in marketing spend intended to drive growth during OEP. Sales and fulfillment expense per approved policy also increased as a result of our employing flex agents during both AEP and OEP, instead of employing flex agents just during AEP, as in prior years.
Life
Life premium represents the total premium value for all policies that were approved by the relevant insurance carrier partner and for which the policy document was sent to the policyholder and payment information was received by the relevant insurance carrier partner during the indicated period. Because our commissions are earned based on a percentage of total premium, total premium volume for a given period is the key driver of revenue for our Life segment.
The following table shows core, final expense, and ancillary premiums for years ended June 30:
2021 compared to 2020-Total core premiums increased 1% for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. The number of policies sold declined 4%, which was somewhat offset by a 6% increase in the average premium per policy sold. Final expense premiums increased 153% for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020, due to a significant increase in the number of agents selling final expense policies.
2020 compared to 2019-Total core premiums were flat for the year ended June 30, 2020, compared to the year ended June 30, 2019. The number of policies sold declined 4%, however, this was offset by a 4% increase in the average premium per policy sold. Final expense premiums increased 179% for the year ended June 30, 2020, compared to the year ended June 30, 2019, due to a 161% increase in the number of policies sold as a result of more agents selling final expense policies and a 7% increase in average premium per product.
Auto & Home
Auto & Home premium represents the total premium value of all new policies that were approved by our insurance carrier partners during the indicated period. Because our commissions are earned based on a percentage of total premium, total premium volume for a given period is the key driver of revenue for our Auto & Home segment.
The following table shows premiums for the years ended June 30:
2021 compared to 2020-Total premiums decreased 21% for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the year ended June 30, 2020, primarily due to our strategic shift of agents from Auto & Home to our Senior and Life divisions (see Segment Information below for further details).
2020 compared to 2019-Total premiums increased 24% for the year ended June 30, 2020 compared to the year ended June 30, 2019, primarily due to hiring more agents for the Auto & Home segment which resulted in an increase in the number of policies sold.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our financial statements presented in accordance with GAAP and to provide investors with additional information regarding our GAAP financial results, we have presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, which are non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures are not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by GAAP and are not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA. We define Adjusted EBITDA as income before interest expense, income tax expense, depreciation and amortization, and certain add-backs for non-cash or non-recurring expenses, including restructuring and share-based compensation expenses. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is net income. We monitor and have presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K Adjusted EBITDA because it is a key measure used by our management and Board of Directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance, to establish budgets, and to develop operational goals for managing our business. In particular, we believe that excluding the impact of these expenses in calculating Adjusted EBITDA can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our core operating performance.
We believe that this non-GAAP financial measure helps identify underlying trends in our business that could otherwise be masked by the effect of the expenses that we exclude in the calculations of this non-GAAP financial measure. Accordingly, we believe that this financial measure provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects.
Adjusted EBITDA is not prepared in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of this non-GAAP financial measure rather than net income, which is the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. These limitations include the fact that Adjusted EBITDA excludes interest expense, depreciation and amortization expense, share-based compensation expense, income tax expense, and other non-recurring expenses that are one-time in nature. In addition, other companies may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of our non-GAAP financial measures as tools for comparison.
The following tables reconcile Adjusted EBITDA and net income, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, for the periods presented:
Year Ended June 30, 2021:
(1) These expenses primarily consist of costs incurred for the First Amendment, recent acquisitions, re-designation of the hedge, and the Secondary Offering (as defined in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements).
Year Ended June 30, 2020:
(1) These expenses consist primarily of non-restructuring severance expenses, non-recurring compensation to certain former board members, costs related to our IPO, and expenses related to business continuity in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Year Ended June 30, 2019:
(1) These expenses consist primarily of one-time consulting expenses associated with adopting ASC 606, non-recurring compensation to certain board members, and non-restructuring severance expenses.
(2) Restructuring expenses consist primarily of expenses associated with initiatives to reduce costs and consolidate leadership and back office functions from San Francisco to Kansas City.
Key Components of our Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our operating results and related percentage of total revenues for the years ended June 30:
Revenue
Our primary source of revenue are the commissions earned for the sale of first year and renewal policies from our insurance carrier partners, which are presented in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income as commission revenue. Additionally, we earn certain volume-based bonuses from some carriers on first-year policies sold, which we refer to as production bonuses and marketing development funds, based on attaining various predetermined target sales levels or other agreed upon objectives, as presented in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income as production bonus and other revenue (“other revenue”). Furthermore, the production bonus and other revenue also includes the lead generation revenue from InsideResponse and the revenue generated through the Population Health platform.
Our commission contracts with our insurance carrier partners contain a single performance obligation satisfied at the point in time to which we allocate the total transaction price. The transaction price is identified as the first year commission due upon the initial sale of a policy as well as an estimate of future renewal commissions and other revenue when applicable. After a policy is sold, we have no material additional or recurring obligations to the policyholder or the insurance carrier partner. Therefore, we do not incur any additional expense related to our receipt of future renewal commissions or other revenue. All of the costs associated with the sale of an individual policy are incurred prior to or at the time of the initial sale of an individual policy. Commission and other revenue are recognized at different milestones for each segment based on the contractual enforceable rights, our historical experience, and established customer business practices. Refer to Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for further details by segment. InsideResponse's lead sales revenue is recognized when the generated lead is accepted by our customers, which is the point of sale, and we have no performance obligation after the delivery. Revenues generated from SelectRx are recognized upon shipment. At the time of shipment, we have performed substantially all of our performance obligations and do not experience a significant level of returns or re-shipments. There are no
future revenue streams associated as patients have the option to cancel their service at any time with no further payments due.
The following table presents our commission revenue, production bonus and other revenue, and total revenue for the years ended June 30 and the percentage changes from the prior year:
2021 compared to 2020-Commission revenue increased $350.0 million, or 73%, which included increases in Senior and Life commission revenues of $307.1 million and $54.8 million, respectively, offset by a decrease in Auto & Home commission revenue of $10.4 million. For Senior, the revenue growth was driven by the significant increase in our agent count that led to a 108% increase in Medicare Advantage commission revenue. Life’s $54.8 million revenue growth was driven by $48.2 million growth in final expense revenue which was a result of the investment we have made in agents to grow sales of these policies, and a slight increase in core term life revenue. The revenue decline for Auto & Home was driven by our strategic shift in agents from Auto & Home to our Senior and Life divisions. The $56.3 million increase in production bonus and other revenue was primarily driven by $35.8 million of advertising revenue associated with InsideResponse and $19.5 million in marketing development funds received for Senior.
2020 compared to 2019-Commission revenue increased $180.6 million, or 61%, which included increases in Senior, Life, and Auto & Home commission revenues of $157.4 million, $18.6 million and $4.8 million, respectively. For Senior, the revenue growth was driven by the significant increase in our agent count that led to a 106% increase in Medicare Advantage commission revenue. Life’s $18.6 million revenue growth was driven by $19.5 million growth in final expense revenue which was a result of the investment we've made in agents to grow sales of these policies offset by a slight reduction in core term life revenue. The revenue growth for Auto & Home was driven by a $3.4 million increase in the sale of home insurance policies. The $13.4 million increase in production bonus and other revenue was primarily driven by the $6.6 million increase in marketing development funds received for Senior and $4.6 million of revenue earned by InsideResponse since the May 1, 2020, acquisition date.
Operating Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue represents the direct costs associated with fulfilling our obligations to our insurance carrier partners for the sale of insurance policies. Such costs primarily consist of compensation and related benefit costs for agents, fulfillment specialists and others directly engaged in servicing policy holders. It also includes licensing costs for our agents and allocations for facilities, telecommunications and software maintenance costs, which are all based on headcount. Facilities costs include rent and utilities expenses and other costs to maintain our office locations. Telecommunications and software maintenance costs includes costs related to the internal phone systems and various software applications that our agents use to make sales. These costs directly correlate to the number of agents we have as we are primarily charged based on per person usage for the phone systems and software applications. For SelectRx specifically, cost of revenue represents the direct costs associated with inventory used to fulfill prescriptions for senior medication management.
The following table presents our cost of revenue for the years ended June 30 and the percentage changes from the prior year:
2021 compared to 2020-Cost of revenue increased $103.3 million, or 62%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a $86.0 million increase in compensation costs driven by the growth in the number of agents within the Senior segment and to a lesser extent the Life segment to support the sale of final expense policies. The increase in headcount also drove increases in the allocations of $10.1 million for facilities, telecommunications, and software maintenance costs, and $4.3 million for licensing costs.
2020 compared to 2019-Cost of revenue increased $63.0 million, or 60%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a $51.0 million increase in compensation expense driven by the growth in the number of agents, mostly within the Senior segment. The increase in headcount also drove increases in the allocations of $6.2 million for facilities, telecommunications, and software maintenance costs, and $2.6 million for licensing costs.
Marketing and Advertising
Marketing and advertising expenses consist primarily of the direct costs associated with marketing and advertising of our services, such as television and radio commercials and online advertising. These direct costs generally represent over 90% of our marketing and advertising expenses. Other costs consist of compensation and other expenses related to marketing, business development, partner management, public relations, carrier relations personnel who support our offerings, and allocations for facilities, telecommunications, and software maintenance costs. Our marketing and advertising costs increase during AEP and OEP to generate more leads during these high-volume periods.
The following table presents our marketing and advertising expenses for the years ended June 30 and the percentage changes from the prior year:
2021 compared to 2020-Marketing and advertising expenses increased $201.1 million, or 109%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a $138.6 million increase in Senior marketing and advertising costs associated with generating more leads for our larger agent base to consume. Marketing and advertising costs also increased $32.9 million in our Life segment driven by an increase in leads specifically for our final expense policies. Additionally, compensation costs related to our marketing personnel increased $30.4 million as we increased the number of people supporting our marketing organization to produce more leads to support the growth of the business.
2020 compared to 2019-Marketing and advertising expenses increased $73.9 million, or 67%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a $56.3 million increase in Senior marketing and advertising costs associated with generating more leads for our larger agent base to consume, especially during AEP and OEP. Marketing and advertising costs also increased $7.6 million in our Life segment driven by an increase in leads specifically for our final expense policies. Compensation costs related to our marketing personnel increased $6.5 million as we increased the number of people supporting our marketing organization to produce more leads.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses include compensation and benefits costs for staff working in our executive, finance, accounting, recruiting, human resources, administrative, business intelligence and data science departments. These expenses also include fees paid for outside professional services, including audit, tax and legal fees and allocations for facilities, telecommunications and software maintenance costs.
The following table presents our general and administrative expenses for the years ended June 30 and the percentage changes from the prior year:
2021 compared to 2020-General and administrative expenses increased $27.8 million, or 79%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to $10.2 million in higher compensation costs due to additional headcount to support the growth of the business; $4.2 million in corporate development charges, primarily related to the First Amendment, the recent acquisitions, and the Secondary Offering; and $7.1 million in higher professional fees and insurance premiums.
2020 compared to 2019-General and administrative expenses increased $17.1 million, or 94%, 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the Distribution to our stock option holders of $9.2 million. We also incurred $4.2 million in higher compensation costs due to growth in the number of general & administrative employees required to support the continued growth of our business and $3.2 million in higher professional fees driven by higher audit costs and outside recruiting fees. This was offset by a decrease in restructuring costs of $2.2 million as the majority of our restructuring activities took place in 2017 and 2018.
Technical Development
Technical development expenses consist primarily of compensation and benefits costs for internal and external personnel associated with developing, maintaining and enhancing our applications, infrastructure and other IT-related functions as well as allocations for facilities, telecommunications and software maintenance costs.
The following table presents our technical development expenses for the years ended June 30 and the percentage changes from the prior year:
2021 compared to 2020-Technical development expenses increased $6.3 million, or 51%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a $7.2 million increase in compensation costs related to our technology personnel as we increased the number of people in our desktop support and development efforts to support the increase in total headcount and the growth in the business, offset by a $2.3 million decrease in professional fees as we decreased our cost of external application developers.
2020 compared to 2019-Technical development expenses increased $4.0 million, or 48%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a $1.9 million increase in compensation costs related to our technology personnel as we increased the number of people in our desktop support and development efforts to support the increase in total headcount and the growth in the company. In addition, professional fees increased $1.9 million as we increased our use of external application developers to work on our growing technology platforms.
Interest Expense, Net
The following table presents our interest expense, net for the years ended June 30 and the percentage changes from the prior year:
2021 compared to 2020-Interest expense increased $4.7 million, or 19%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily as a result of increases in interest incurred on the 2019 Term Loan prior to the First Amendment, partially offset by interest related to our non-recourse debt, which was terminated on June 8, 2020.
2020 compared to 2019-Interest expense increased $22.9 million, or 1,382%, in 2020 compared to 2019, as a result of interest incurred on the 2019 Term Loan.
Income Tax Expense
The following table presents our provision for income taxes for the years ended June 30 and the percentage changes from the prior year:
2021 compared to 2020-For the year ended June 30, 2021, we recognized income tax expense of $34.8 million, representing an effective tax rate of 21.0%. The differences from our federal statutory tax rate to the effective tax rate for the year ended June 30, 2021, were primarily due to the net effects of state income taxes partially offset by Kansas High Performance Incentive Program (“HPIP”) tax credits and the exercise of non-qualified stock options.
2020 compared to 2019-For the year ended June 30, 2020, we recognized income tax expense of $25.0 million, representing an effective tax rate of 23.6%. The differences from our federal statutory tax rate to the effective tax rate for the year ended June 30, 2020, were primarily due to the net effects of state income taxes partially offset by HPIP tax credits and the exercise of non-qualified stock options.
Segment Information
We currently have three reportable segments: 1) Senior, 2) Life, and 3) Auto & Home. InsideResponse and Population Health are also included in Senior. The performance measures of the segments include total revenue and Adjusted EBITDA because management believes that such information is the most relevant in evaluating the results of the respective segments relative to other entities that operate in the same industries.
In addition, we account for non-operating activity, share-based compensation expense, certain intersegment eliminations and the costs of providing corporate and other administrative services in our administrative division, Corporate & Eliminations. These services are not directly identifiable with our reportable segments and are shown in the tables below to reconcile the reportable segments to the consolidated financial statements.
Costs of revenue, marketing and advertising and technical development operating costs and expenses that are directly attributable to a segment are reported within the applicable segment. Indirect costs of revenue, marketing and advertising and technical development operating costs and expenses are allocated to each segment based on varying metrics such as headcount. Adjusted EBITDA is calculated as total revenue for the applicable segment less direct and allocated costs of revenue, marketing and advertising, technical development and general and administrative operating costs and expenses, excluding depreciation and amortization expense; loss on disposal of property, equipment, and software; share-based compensation expense; restructuring expenses; and non-recurring
expenses such as severance payments and transaction costs. Our CODM does not separately evaluate assets by segment; therefore, assets by segment are not presented.
The following tables present information about the reportable segments for the periods presented:
Year Ended June 30, 2021
(1) Operating expenses in the Corp & Elims division primarily include $34.0 million in salaries and benefits for certain general, administrative, and IT related departments, and $13.4 million in professional services fees.
(2) These expenses primarily consist of costs incurred for the First Amendment, recent acquisitions, re-designation of the hedge, and the Secondary Offering.
Year Ended June 30, 2020
(1) Operating expenses in the Corp & Elims division primarily include $17.2 million in salaries and benefits for certain general, administrative, and IT related departments, and $8.7 million in professional services fees.
(2) These expenses consist of one-time consulting expenses associated with adopting ASC 606, non-recurring compensation to certain former board members, non-restructuring severance expenses, employer payroll taxes on the one-time Distribution to stock option holders, costs related to our IPO, cost related to the acquisition of InsideResponse, and expenses related to business continuity in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Year Ended June 30, 2019
(1) Operating expenses in the Corp & Elims division primarily include $12.2 million in salaries and benefits for certain general, administrative, and IT related departments and $4.2 million in professional services fees.
(2) These expenses consist primarily of one-time consulting expenses associated with adopting ASC 606, nonrecurring compensation to certain board members and non-restructuring severance expenses.
The following table depicts the disaggregation of revenue by segment and product for the years ended June 30:
(1) Not meaningful
Revenue by Segment
2021 compared to 2020-Revenue from our Senior segment was $728.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, a $367.0 million, or 101%, increase compared to revenue of $361.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $309.2 million, or 108%, increase in MA commission revenue, $19.5 million in marketing development funds received, and $35.8 million of advertising revenue associated with InsideResponse included in production bonus and other revenue. This was partially offset by a $10.9 million, or 32%, decrease in MS commission revenue primarily due to the recognition of $9.0 million of renewal year revenue from a certain MS carrier whose contract was amended during the year ended June 30, 2020.
Revenue from our Life segment was $185.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, a $55.5 million, or 43%, increase compared to revenue of $130.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $48.2 million, or 157%, increase in final expense revenue which was the result of our increased focus on selling final expense policies.
Revenue from our Auto & Home segment was $30.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, a $10.3 million, or 25%, decrease compared to revenue of $41.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a 21% decrease in premium sold.
2020 compared to 2019-Revenue from our Senior segment was $361.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, a $169.4 million, or 88%, increase compared to revenue of $192.3 million for the year ended June 30, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $147.4 million, or 106%, increase in MA commission revenue, a $9.2 million, or 37%, increase in MS commission revenue, and an $4.6 million increase in revenue from InsideResponse.
Revenue from our Life segment was $130.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, a $19.5 million, or 18%, increase compared to revenue of $110.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $19.5 million, or 177%, increase in final expense revenue which was the result of our focus on selling more final expense polices.
Revenue from our Auto & Home segment was $41.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, a $6.1 million, or 18%, increase compared to revenue of $35.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a 24% increase in premium sold.
Adjusted EBITDA by Segment
2021 compared to 2020--Adjusted EBITDA from our Senior segment was $243.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, a $98.0 million, or 67%, increase compared to Adjusted EBITDA of $145.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA was due to a $367.0 million increase in revenue partially offset by a $269.0 million increase in operating costs and expenses primarily attributable to an increase in variable marketing expenses and personnel costs associated with higher headcount that was driven by a significant increase in policies submitted and approved and an increase in the number of licensed agents.
Adjusted EBITDA from our Life segment was $30.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, a $2.6 million, or 9%, increase compared to Adjusted EBITDA of $27.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to a $55.5 million increase in revenue offset by a $53.0 million increase in operating costs and expenses primarily attributable to an increase in variable marketing expenses and variable sales commission expenses to agents driven by an increase in the amount of premium sold for final expense policies. Adjusted EBITDA was also impacted by flexing a significant amount of our Life and Health Advisor ("LHA") agents that sell final expense policies into Senior to sell during AEP as we incurred expense to hire and train some of these agents but didn't realize the full benefit of revenue within our Life business for the quarter.
Adjusted EBITDA from our Auto & Home segment was $8.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, a $0.5 million, or 6%, decrease compared to Adjusted EBITDA of $8.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to a $10.3 million decrease in revenue partially offset by a $9.8 million decrease in operating costs and expenses. Revenue was negatively impacted by our shift of agents to 1) the Senior segment to maximize the opportunity of the AEP and OEP seasonal increase in demand and 2) the Life segment to sell final expense policies.
2020 compared to 2019-Adjusted EBITDA from our Senior segment was $145.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, a $55.6 million, or 62%, increase compared to Adjusted EBITDA of $90.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2019. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to a $169.4 million increase in revenue partially offset by a $113.9 million increase in operating costs and expenses primarily attributable to an increase in variable marketing expenses and personnel costs associated with higher headcount that was driven by a significant increase in policies submitted and approved and an increase in the number of licensed agents.
Adjusted EBITDA from our Life segment was $27.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, a $2.0 million, or 8%, increase compared to Adjusted EBITDA of $25.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2019. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to a $19.5 million increase in revenue partially offset by a $17.5 million increase in operating costs and expenses primarily attributable to an increase in variable marketing expenses and variable sales commission expenses to agents driven by an increase in the amount of premium sold for final expense policies. Revenue and Adjusted EBITDA were also negatively impacted by our temporarily shifting some of our Life agents into the Senior segment to maximize the opportunity of the AEP and OEP seasonal increase in demand for Senior products.
Adjusted EBITDA from our Auto & Home segment was $8.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, a $0.9 million, or 11%, increase compared to Adjusted EBITDA of $7.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2019. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to a $6.1 million increase in revenue partially offset by a $5.3 million increase in operating costs and expenses primarily attributable to an increase in variable marketing expenses and variable sales commission expenses to agents driven by an increase in premium sold and an increase in the number of licensed agents. Revenue and Adjusted EBITDA were also negatively impacted by our temporarily shifting some of our Auto & Home agents into the Senior segment to maximize the opportunity of the AEP and OEP seasonal increase in demand for Senior products.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs primarily include working capital and debt service requirements. We believe that our current sources of liquidity, which include the proceeds from the IPO and cash and funds available under the Senior Secured Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet our projected operating and debt service requirements for at least the next 12 months. To the extent that our current liquidity is insufficient to fund future activities, we may need to raise additional funds. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, the ownership of our existing stockholders will be diluted. The incurrence of additional debt financing would result in debt service obligations, and any future instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that could restrict our operations. Further, while COVID-19 has caused disruptions to the economy both domestically and globally, we have maintained our financial flexibility under current market conditions. However, there is inherent difficulty in assessing the possibility of future changes that could materially alter this judgment. As such, we will continue to monitor our liquidity and capital resources through the disruption caused by COVID-19 and will continue to evaluate our financial position and liquidity needs.
As of June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, our cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash totaled $286.5 million and $368.9 million, respectively. Additionally, the following table presents a summary of our cash flows for the years ended June 30:
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities primarily consists of net income, adjusted for certain non-cash items including depreciation; amortization of intangible assets and internally developed software; deferred income taxes; share-based compensation expense and the effect of changes in working capital and other activities.
Collection of commissions receivable depends upon the timing of our receipt of commission payments and associated commission statements from our insurance carrier partners. If we were to experience a delay in receiving a commission payment from an insurance carrier partner within a quarter, our operating cash flows for that quarter could be adversely impacted.
A significant portion of our marketing and advertising expenses is driven by the number of leads required to generate the insurance applications we submit to our insurance carrier partners. Our marketing and advertising costs are expensed and generally paid as incurred and since commission revenue is recognized upon approval of a policy but commission payments are paid to us over time there are working capital requirements to fund the upfront cost of acquiring new policies. During AEP, we experience an increase in the number of submitted Senior insurance applications and marketing and advertising expenses compared to periods outside of AEP. The timing of AEP affects the positive or negative impacts of our cash flows during each quarter.
Year Ended June 30, 2021-Cash used in operating activities was $115.4 million, consisting of net income of $131.0 million and adjustments for non-cash items of $67.9 million, offset by cash used in operating assets and liabilities of $314.4 million. Adjustments for non-cash items primarily consisted of $34.7 million in deferred income taxes as the Company defers revenue related to certain commissions receivable into following years until it is collected, $16.1 million of depreciation and amortization related to additional fixed assets purchases to accommodate our growth in headcount and internally developed software in service, $5.2 million of share-based compensation expense, and $3.8 million of non-cash lease expense. The cash decrease resulting from changes in net operating assets and liabilities primarily consisted of increases of $332.9 million in commissions receivable and $27.8 million in accounts receivable related to the increase in approved policies partially offset by increases of $19.7 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses and $25.6 million in other liabilities, which consists primarily of commission advances and accrued compensation and benefits, all driven by the increased marketing and personnel costs required to produce our increased revenue.
Year Ended June 30, 2020-Cash used in operating activities was $61.8 million, consisting of net income of $81.1 million and adjustments for non-cash items of $45.7 million, offset by cash used in operating assets and liabilities of $188.6 million. Adjustments for non-cash items primarily consisted of $25.0 million of deferred income taxes as the Company defers revenue related to certain commissions receivable into following years until it is collected, $9.5 million of stock compensation expense primarily for the distribution to stock option holders, and $8.0 million of depreciation and amortization related to the additional fixed assets purchases and internally developed software in service. The cash decrease resulting from changes in net operating assets and liabilities primarily consisted of increases of $15.6 million and $197.4 million in accounts receivable and commissions receivable, respectively, partially offset by increases of $15.7 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses and $9.2 million in accrued compensation and benefits, all driven by the increased marketing and personnel costs required to produce our increased revenue.
Year Ended June 30, 2019-Cash provided by operating activities was $0.1 million, consisting of net income of $72.6 million and adjustments for non-cash items of $27.1 million, offset by cash used in operating assets and liabilities of $99.6 million. Adjustments for non-cash items primarily consisted of $22.0 million of deferred income taxes as the Company defers revenue related to certain commissions receivable into following years until it is collected, and $4.7 million of depreciation and amortization related to the additional fixed assets purchased for new office space to accommodate our growth in headcount. The cash decrease resulting from changes in net operating assets and liabilities primarily consisted of increases of $8.7 million and $91.6 million in accounts receivable and commissions receivable, respectively, partially offset by increases of $2.8 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses and $3.5 million in accrued compensation and benefits, all driven by the increased marketing and personnel costs required to produce our increased revenue.
Investing Activities
Our investing activities primarily consist of purchases of furniture and fixtures, computer hardware, leasehold improvements related to facilities expansion, and capitalized salaries related to the development of internal-use software.
Year Ended June 30, 2021-Net cash used in investing activities of $64.0 million was primarily due to $41.0 million of cash paid net of the cash acquired for the acquisitions of a lead distribution company and Express Med Pharmaceuticals as well as $14.9 million of purchases of property and equipment and $8.1 million in purchases
of software and capitalized internal-use software spent to develop and enhance new and existing systems to efficiently accommodate our increased volumes.
Year Ended June 30, 2020-Net cash used in investing activities of $51.4 million was primarily due $35.8 million of cash paid net of the cash acquired for the acquisition of InsideResponse as well as $9.4 million of purchases of property and equipment and $6.1 million in purchases of software and capitalized internal-use software spent to develop new programs and systems to efficiently accommodate our increased volumes.
Year Ended June 30, 2019-Net cash used in investing activities of $8.6 million was due to $3.9 million of purchases of property and equipment and $4.7 million in purchases of software and capitalized internal-use software spent to develop new programs and systems to efficiently accommodate our increased volumes.
Acquisitions
On May 1, 2020, we acquired 100% of the outstanding membership units of InsideResponse for an aggregate purchase price of up to $65.0 million (subject to customary adjustments). The purchase price was comprised of $32.7 million that was paid in cash at the closing of the transaction and an earnout of $32.3 million that was paid in cash during the year ended June 30, 2021.
On February 1, 2021, we acquired substantially all of the assets of a lead distribution company for an aggregate purchase price of up to $33.5 million (subject to customary adjustments), comprised of $24.0 million in cash paid at the closing of the transaction, $6.0 million of holdback for, if any, indemnification claims, net working capital adjustments, and underperformance, and an earnout of up to $3.5 million.
On April 30, 2021, we acquired 100% of the outstanding shares of Express Med Pharmaceuticals for an aggregate purchase price of up to $24.0 million (subject to customary adjustments), comprised of $17.5 million in cash paid at the closing of the transaction, an additional $2.5 million of holdback for indemnification claims, if any, and an earnout of up to $4.0 million, if any.
Refer to Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for further details concerning our recent acquisitions.
Financing Activities
Our financing activities primarily consist of proceeds from the issuance of debt and equity and proceeds and payments related to stock-based compensation.
Year Ended June 30, 2021-Net cash provided by financing activities of $97.0 million was primarily due to $228.8 million in net proceeds from the 2021 Term Loan as a result of the First Amendment, partially offset by payments of $84.1 million related to the partial extinguishment of the 2019 Term Loan, $32.3 million of earnout for the InsideResponse acquisition, and $10.4 million for withholding taxes related to net share settlements of employee stock option awards.
Year Ended June 30, 2020-Net cash provided by financing activities of $481.4 million was primarily due to $416.5 million in net proceeds from the Term Loan, $340.2 million in proceeds from our initial public offering, net of underwriters’ discounts and commissions, and $135.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock, partially offset by $275.0 million for the Distribution, $100.0 million payment on our Term Loan with proceeds from the IPO, and $31.4 million in payments on non-recourse debt, primarily to pay off the Receivables Financing Agreement.
Year Ended June 30, 2019-Net cash provided by financing activities of $8.1 million was primarily due to $16.2 million gross proceeds from non-recourse debt and $4.3 million of common stock options exercised, partially offset by $8.7 million in net payments for our revolving line of credit which is used to fund working capital mostly due to our seasonality around AEP.
Senior Secured Credit Facilities
On February 24, 2021, the Company entered into the First Amendment with certain of its existing lenders and Morgan Stanley as administrative agent. There were no amounts drawn under the Revolving Credit Facility or DDTL Facility as of June 30, 2021. As of June 30, 2021, there was $471.9 million outstanding under the Term Loans. Refer to Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements for further details and defined terms.
Our risk management strategy includes entering into interest rate swap agreements to protect against unfavorable interest rate changes relating to forecasted debt transactions. The Company's Amended Interest Rate Swap is designated as a cash flow hedge of the interest payments on $325.0 million in principal of the Term Loans. Refer to Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements for further details.
Delayed Draw Credit Facilities
On December 14, 2018, we entered into a senior secured delayed draw credit facility in which we had access to a senior secured delayed draw credit facility consisting of up to $30.0 million aggregate principal amount of commitments, with the commissions receivable from the Auto & Home insurance policies sold as collateral. Over the life of the agreement, we received $32.8 million in proceeds from seven draws on the facility and made principal payments of $4.5 million. On June 8, 2020, we repaid in full all indebtedness and other obligations due totaling $29.3 million, and all security interests and liens were terminated and released and the agreement was terminated. We repaid the outstanding debt using proceeds from the IPO.
Series E Preferred Shares Private Placement
On April 17, 2020 and May 6, 2020, we issued and sold an aggregate of 100,000 shares and 35,000 shares, respectively, of our Series E preferred stock to certain “accredited investors” (as defined in Regulation D promulgated under the Securities Act), at a purchase price of $1,000 per share, for aggregate proceeds of $135.0 million and net proceeds to the Company of $129.4 million, after deducting commissions and expenses. A portion of the net proceeds was used to complete our acquisition of InsideResponse and the remaining was used for general corporate purposes. Upon the closing of the IPO, all outstanding shares of Series E preferred stock automatically converted into shares of common stock at a fixed discount. Refer to Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for further details.
Initial Public Offering
On May 26, 2020, we completed our IPO whereby 18,000,000 shares of common stock were sold to the public at $20.00 per share (in addition to shares sold by selling stockholders). Net proceeds to us from the offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses, were $333.1 million.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal commitments consist of obligations under our outstanding operating leases for office facilities; our Senior Secured Credit Facility which includes the Term Loans, DDTL Facility, and Revolving Credit Facility (as defined in Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements); and our Amended Interest Rate Swap (as defined in Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements). In addition, we have outstanding service and licensing agreements with various vendors for connectability, maintenance, and other services. We believe that we will be able to fund these obligations through our existing cash and cash equivalents and cash generated from operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements during the period covered by this report.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of new accounting pronouncements recently adopted and not yet adopted, see the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of revenues, expenses, assets, and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We regularly assess these estimates; however, actual amounts could differ from those estimates. The impact of changes in estimates is recorded in the period in which they become known.
An accounting policy is considered to be critical if the nature of the estimates or assumptions is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change, and the effect of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance. The accounting policies we believe to reflect our more significant estimates, judgments and assumptions that are most critical to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are: revenue recognition, commissions receivables, accounting for income taxes, share-based compensation, and valuation of intangible assets and goodwill.
Revenue Recognition and Commissions Receivable
In accordance with ASC 606, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services and is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration that an entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. We apply the following five-step model in order to determine this amount: (i) identification of the promised goods in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods are performance obligations, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation.
Significant management judgments and estimates must be made in connection with determination of the revenue to be recognized in any accounting period. If we made different judgments or utilized different estimates for any period, material differences in the amount and timing of revenue recognized could result. The accounting estimates and judgments related to the recognition of revenue require us to make assumptions about numerous factors such as the determination of performance obligations and determination of the transaction price. The estimates of renewal commissions and production bonuses are considered variable consideration in the transaction price and require significant judgment including determining the number of periods in which a renewal will occur and the value of those renewal commissions to be received if renewed. We utilize the expected value approach to do this, incorporating a combination of historical lapse and premium increase data (where applicable), available carrier experience data, historical payment data by segment and insurance carrier to estimate forecasted renewal consideration and production bonuses and then constrain revenue recognized to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. The uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved when the policy renews, and adjustments in variable consideration are recognized in the period incurred. The foregoing is exclusive of marketing development funds, InsideResponse lead generation revenue, and Population Health revenue in which the transaction prices are known.
We utilize a practical expedient to estimate commission revenue by applying the use of a portfolio approach to policies grouped together by segment, insurance carrier, product type, and quarter the policy was initially sold (referred to as a “cohort”). This provides a practical approach to estimating the renewal commissions expected to be collected for each cohort by evaluating various factors, including but not limited to, contracted commission rates, insurance carrier mix, premium increases, and persistency rates.
We recognize revenue when we have completed our performance obligation, which is at different milestones for each segment based on the contractual enforceable rights, our historical experience, and established customer business practices:
Senior Revenue
a.Commission revenue for senior health policies is recognized at the earliest of when the insurance carrier has approved the policy sold, when a commission payment is received from the insurance carrier, or when the policy sold becomes effective.
b.Lead sales revenue for InsideResponse is recognized when the generated lead is accepted by the customer, which is the point of sale, and we have no further performance obligation after the delivery.
c.Revenues generated from SelectRx are recognized upon shipment. At the time of shipment, we have performed substantially all of our performance obligations, and we do not experience a significant level of returns or re-shipments. There are no future revenue streams associated as patients have the option to cancel their service at any time.
Life Revenue
a.Commission revenue is recognized when the insurance carrier has approved the policy sold and payment information has been obtained from the policyholder.
Auto & Home Revenue
a.Commission revenue is recognized when the policy sold becomes effective.
We are continuously evaluating the assumptions and inputs into our calculation of renewal commission revenue. Cohort adjustments are a result of a change in estimate of expected cash collections when actual cash collections differs from the estimated constrained renewal commissions for the revenue recognized at the time of approval. Cohort adjustments can be positive or negative and are recognized using actual experience from policy renewals. As part of the ongoing evaluation, we revised our approach for estimating renewal commissions for the Senior segment beginning with the fourth quarter 2021, which included changing to the use of policy level persistency as the method for calculating persistency and the constraints applied to the calculation of a cohort renewal commission value.
Commissions receivable are contract assets that represent estimated variable consideration for performance obligations that have been satisfied but payment is not due as the underlying policy has not renewed yet and are therefore subject to the same assumptions, judgements, and estimates used when recognizing revenue as noted above. The current portion of commissions receivable are future renewal commissions expected to be renewed within one year, while the non-current portion of commissions receivable are expected to be renewed beyond one year. Contract assets are reclassified as accounts receivable when the rights to the renewal commissions become unconditional, which is primarily upon renewal of the underlying policy, typically on an annual basis.
Income Taxes
The Company applies ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”), in accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in the Company’s consolidated financial statements. ASC 740 requires a “more-likely-than-not” (“MLTN”) threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. The Company records a liability for the difference between the benefit recognized and measured pursuant to ASC 740 and the tax position taken or expected to be taken on the Company’s tax return. To the extent that the assessment of such tax positions changes, the change in estimate is recorded in the period in which the determination is made.
In accordance with ASC 740, we account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities result from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the consolidated financial statements that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in future years. The Company continues to recognize its deferred tax assets as of June 30, 2021, as it believes it is MLTN that the deferred tax assets will be realized. The Company recognizes a significant deferred tax liability due to the timing of recognizing revenue when a policy is sold, while revenue for tax purposes is not recognized until future renewal commission payments are received. This deferred tax liability is a source of income that can be used to support the realizability of the Company’s deferred tax assets. As such, the Company does not believe a valuation allowance is necessary as of June 30, 2021, and will continue to evaluate in the future as circumstances may change.
Share-Based Compensation
We recognize share-based compensation expense in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income based on the fair value of our stock-based awards over their respective vesting periods, depending on the plan. The estimated grant date fair value of our stock options is determined using the Black-Scholes-Merton pricing model. The weighted-average expected term for stock options granted is calculated using historical option exercise behavior. The dividend yield is determined by dividing the expected per share dividend during the coming year by the grant date stock price, however, we do not expect to pay any dividends in the foreseeable future. We base the risk-free interest rate on the implied yield currently available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equal to the expected term of our stock options. Expected volatility is determined using historical stock prices for a combination of publicly traded peer group companies and our stock price. The estimated attainment of performance-based awards and related expense is based on the expectations of target achievement. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based payment awards and expected attainment of performance-based awards represent our best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected term and volatility related to our own stock-based awards on a prospective basis, and incorporating these factors into the model. Changes in key assumptions could significantly impact the valuation of such instruments.
Fair Value of Assets Acquired and Liabilities Assumed from Acquisitions
We account for business combinations using the purchase method of accounting where the cost is allocated to the underlying net tangible and intangible assets acquired, based on their respective fair values. The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Identifiable assets acquired, and liabilities assumed are recognized and measured as of the acquisition date at fair value. Additionally, any contingent consideration is recorded at fair value on the acquisition date and classified as a liability. Goodwill is recognized to the extent by which the aggregate of the acquisition-date fair value of the consideration transferred exceeds the recognized basis of the identifiable assets acquired, net of assumed liabilities. Determining the fair value of assets acquired, and liabilities assumed requires management’s judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including, but not limited to, the selection of appropriate valuation methodology, projected revenue, expenses and cash flows, weighted average cost of capital, discount rates, estimates of customer turnover rates, estimates of terminal values, and assessment of the probabilities of the earnout metrics.