ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of federal securities laws. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in such forward-looking statements, including those discussed in the section “Risk Factors” in Part I - Item 1A of this annual report on Form 10-K.
Please see Part I, Item 1 “Business- Strategic Collaboration and License Agreements” and Note 5 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for more information relating to such arrangements.
Overview
We are a late-stage clinical biopharmaceutical company focused on developing novel cancer immunotherapeutics for a broad range of cancer indications. Our product candidates currently include galinpepimut-S and nelipepimut-S.
Galinpepimut-S, or GPS
Our lead product candidate, galinpepimut-S, or GPS, is a cancer immunotherapeutic agent licensed from Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, or MSK, that targets the Wilms tumor 1, or WT1, protein, which is present in 20 or more cancer types. Based on its mechanism of action as a directly immunizing agent, GPS has potential as a monotherapy or in combination with other immunotherapeutic agents to address a broad spectrum of hematologic, or blood, cancers and solid tumor indications.
In January 2020, we commenced a Phase 3 trial, the REGAL study, for GPS monotherapy in patients with acute myeloid leukemia, or AML, in the maintenance setting after achievement of second complete remission, or CRem2, following successful completion of second-line antileukemic therapy. We expect this study will be used as the basis for submission of a Biologics License Application, or BLA, subject to a statistically significant and clinically meaningful data outcome and agreement with the U.S. Food & Drug Administration, or the FDA. We expect to enroll approximately 116 patients at up to approximately 135 clinical sites primarily in the United States and Europe with a planned interim safety and futility analysis after 80 events (deaths).
In December 2018, we initiated a Phase 1/2 multi-arm "basket" type clinical study of GPS in combination with Merck & Co., Inc.’s anti-PD-1 therapy, Keytruda® (pembrolizumab). The tumor type currently being studied is ovarian cancer (second or third line).
In February 2020, a Phase I open-label investigator-sponsored clinical trial of GPS, in combination with Bristol-Myers Squibb’s anti-PD-1 therapy, nivolumab (Opdivo®), in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma, or MPM, who harbor relapsed or refractory disease after having received frontline standard of care multimodality therapy was commenced at MSK.
GPS was granted Orphan Drug Product Designations from the FDA, as well as Orphan Medicinal Product Designations from the European Medicines Agency, or EMA, for GPS in AML, malignant pleural mesothelioma, or MPM, and multiple myeloma, or MM, as well as Fast Track Designation for AML, MPM, and MM from the FDA.
Nelipepimut-S or NPS
Nelipepimut-S, or NPS, is a cancer immunotherapy targeting the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, or HER2, expressing cancers. Data presented in 2018 from a Phase 2b clinical trial of the combination of trastuzumab (Herceptin®) plus NPS in HER2 low expressing (1+ or 2+ per immunohistochemistry, or IHC) breast cancer patients in the adjuvant setting to prevent recurrences showed a clinically and statistically significant improvement in the disease-free survival, or DFS, rate for the triple negative breast cancer, or TNBC, cohort at 24 months for patients treated with NPS plus trastuzumab of 92.6% compared to 70.2% for those treated with trastuzumab alone. Following ongoing discussions with the FDA and based upon written feedback from the FDA and on the totality of clinical, safety and translational NPS data to date, we have finalized the design and plan for a Phase 3 registration-enabling study of NPS in combination with trastuzumab for the treatment of patients with TNBC in the adjuvant setting after standard treatment. If successful, we believe this study may be considered as the basis for a BLA submission to the FDA. We are seeking out-licensing opportunities to fund and conduct the future clinical development of NPS in order to maximize the potential of the program and we do not plan to conduct and fund a Phase 3 program for NPS on our own.
FBP-targeting bivalent vaccine (GALE-301/-302)
In order to prioritize development of our core assets, we determined to cease development of GALE-301 and GALE-302, cancer immunotherapies that target the E39 peptide derived from the folate binding protein, or FBP, which were licensed in from The Henry M. Jackson Foundation, or HJF, and the MD Anderson Cancer Center, or MDACC and entered into a Termination Agreement with HJF and MDACC in February 2021.
Financial Position
At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $35.3 million. We have incurred operating losses since inception and have not generated any product sales revenue or achieved profitable operations. We incurred net losses of $16.8 million and $19.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our accumulated deficit as of December 31, 2020 was $117.9 million, and we expect to continue to incur substantial losses in future periods.
Our operating expenses will increase substantially as we continue to advance our product candidates assuming we receive sufficient funding to continue our ongoing studies and initiate our planned studies. We anticipate that our expenses will increase as we:
•complete our Phase 3 clinical trial and our Phase 1/2 basket study;
•continue the research, development and scale-up of manufacturing capabilities to optimize products and dose forms for which we may obtain regulatory approval;
•scale up manufacturing for GPS, including manufacturing validation activities;
•maintain, expand and protect our global intellectual property portfolio;
•hire additional personnel, including clinical, manufacturing, and scientific personnel, sales and marketing personnel, and general and administrative personnel.
We intend to use our existing cash and cash equivalents for working capital and to fund the research and development of our product candidates. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 will enable us to fund our operating expenses for at least the next 12 months following the issuance of our financial statements.
Impact of COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a new coronavirus to be a “pandemic”. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to present substantial public health and economic challenges around the world which have impacted, and will continue to impact, millions of individuals and business worldwide. Efforts to contain the spread of the coronavirus since March 2020 have led to travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders and shutdowns. As we have historically functioned operationally as a semi-virtual company, the transition to “work-from-home” for our employees has not materially altered our business operations. We have implemented a return-to-work policy in compliance with federal, state and local requirements and guidance which provides for a hybrid of remote and in-office work, and we expect to operate on such a semi-virtual basis for at least the first half of 2021. We are continuously monitoring the impact of the pandemic on our clinical development programs. Our Phase 3 REGAL study is progressing, with the necessary work to activate additional sites in the United States and Europe continuing. Throughout 2020 and early 2021, we initiated additional sites as planned. However, we have observed that clinical site initiations and patient enrollment may be delayed due to prioritization of hospital resources towards the COVID-19 pandemic. Clinicians and patients may not be able to comply with clinical trial protocols if quarantines impede patient movement or interrupt operations at sites. Accordingly, we are uncertain at this time the extent to which these newly initiated sites will be fully operational, which we believe could have an impact on the projected timing of the REGAL study. Additionally, several European Union countries in which we plan to initiate clinical sites, including Germany, France, and Italy, continue to impose restrictions in response to the continued surge in coronavirus cases throughout the European Union. We believe that the COVID-19 pandemic has not materially impacted our efforts to out-license NPS. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic directly or indirectly impacts our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, subject to change and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the actions taken to contain or treat COVID-19, the overall duration of the outbreak, the availability, effectiveness and uptake of vaccines for COVID-19, the emergence of new variants of COVID-19 and whether existing vaccines are effective with respect to such variants, and the emergence of new geographic hotspots where the coronavirus is spreading more rapidly. In particular, the continued spread of the coronavirus globally could adversely impact our clinical trial operations and could have an adverse impact on our business and the financial results.
Components of Results of Operations
License Revenue
License revenue consists of revenue recognized pursuant to our Exclusive License Agreement with 3D Medicines Inc., or 3DMed, dated December 7, 2020, or the 3DMed Agreement. In the future, we may generate revenue from a combination of reimbursements, up-front payments, milestone payments and royalties in connection with the 3DMed Agreement.
Research and Development
Research and development expense consists of expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates. We expense research and development costs as incurred. These expenses include:
•expenses incurred under agreements with CROs, as well as investigative sites and consultants that conduct our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•manufacturing expenses;
•outsourced professional scientific development services;
•employee-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation;
•payments made under our license agreements, under which we acquired certain intellectual property;
•expenses relating to certain regulatory activities, including filing fees paid to regulatory agencies;
•laboratory materials and supplies used to support our research activities; and
•allocated expenses, utilities and other facility-related costs.
The successful development of our current and future product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of, or when, if ever, material net cash inflows may commence from any current or future product candidates. This uncertainty is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the duration and cost of our clinical trials, which vary significantly over the life of a project as a result of many factors, including:
•the number of clinical sites included in the trials;
•the length of time required to enroll suitable patients;
•the number of patients that ultimately participate in the trials;
•the number of doses patients receive;
•the duration of patient follow-up;
•the results of clinical trials;
•the expenses associated with manufacturing;
•the receipt of marketing approvals; and
•the commercialization of current and future product candidates.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Cancer immunotherapy product candidates in the later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in the earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of the later-stage clinical trials. We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we conduct and complete our ongoing early and late stage clinical trials and initiate additional clinical trials.
Our expenditures are subject to additional uncertainties, including the terms and timing of regulatory approvals. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our current or future product candidates. We may obtain unexpected results from our clinical trials. We may elect to discontinue, delay or modify clinical trials of some product candidates or target indications or focus on others. A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or other regulatory authorities were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive, administrative, finance and legal functions, including stock-based compensation, travel expenses and recruiting expenses, fees for outside legal counsel, and director and officer insurance premiums. Other general and administrative expenses include facility related costs, patent filing and prosecution costs, professional fees for business development, accounting, consulting, legal and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with our Nasdaq listing and SEC reporting requirements, investor relations costs, and other expenses associated with being a public company.
If and when we believe that regulatory approval of a product candidate appears likely, we anticipate that an increase in general and administrative expenses will occur as a result of our preparation for commercial operations, particularly as it relates to the sales and marketing of such product candidate. Cancer immunotherapy product commercialization may take several years and millions of dollars in development costs.
In Process Research and Development Impairment Charge
The impairment charge recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019 was in connection with the abandonment of future development of GALE-301 and GALE-302 in-process research and development, or IPR&D, assets.
Non-Operating Income (Expense), Net
Non-operating income (expense), net consists of changes in fair value of our warrant liability, changes in fair value of our contingent consideration, and interest income. Interest income primarily reflects the interest earned from our cash and cash equivalents.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net loss was $16.8 million compared with a net loss of $19.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $2.5 million in net loss was primarily attributable to a decrease in operating loss of $3.1 million, primarily driven by a $1.9 million increase in license revenue, a $0.3 million decrease in general and administrative expenses, and a $2.8 million decrease in non-cash charges for impairments of IPR&D, partially offset by an increase of $2.0 million in research and development expenses, a decrease in non-operating income of $0.5 million and a decrease in income tax benefit of $0.1 million.
Further analysis of the changes and trends in our operating results are discussed below.
License Revenue
License revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.9 million and related to the out-licensing of intellectual property rights and transfer of technical know-how associated with the 3DMed Agreement for the development and commercialization of GPS in China, Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan. There was no license revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses were $9.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $7.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. As compared to the prior period, the $2.0 million increase in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to a $0.9 million increase in clinical trial expenses primarily due to the initiation of our Phase 3 trial of GPS in AML in 2020, a $0.8 million increase in manufacturing to support our ongoing clinical programs including initiating a technology transfer to a new drug product manufacturer, a $0.5 million increase in outsourced clinical and regulatory consulting services in support of our ongoing clinical programs, a $0.4 million increase in personnel related expenses due to increased headcount, and a $0.2 million increase in other research and development expenses. These increases were partially offset by a $0.8 million decrease in licensing fees per our license agreements.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses were $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $0.3 million decrease was primarily driven by a $1.0 million decrease in legal fees due to reduced litigation, a $0.4 million decrease in personnel related expenses due to reduced headcount, and $0.2 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses. These decreases were partially offset by a $0.9 million increase in insurance premiums due to hardening insurance markets and a $0.4 million increase in outsourced professional services and public company costs.
In-Process Research and Development Impairment Charge
During the fourth quarter of 2019, we determined that the IPR&D asset associated with the GALE-301 and 302 product candidates was impaired and recorded an impairment charge of approximately $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Included in the asset impairment expenses are a non-cash charge of approximately $2.8 million for impairment of intangible assets recorded as IPR&D and an acceleration of a de minimis amount of prepaid expenses and other current assets.
Non-Operating Income, Net
Non-operating income (expense), net for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, was as follows (dollars in thousands):
The decrease in our net non-operating income (expense) during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a non-cash $1.2 million decrease in the gain arising from the change in the fair value of liability-classified warrants to acquire shares of our common stock and a $0.9 million increase in the change in fair value of the contingent consideration. The change in the estimated fair value of our warrant liability during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was primarily due to the changes in our common stock price. The change in the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration is driven by changes in discount periods and rates, changes in the timing of development milestones achieved and changes in probability assumptions with respect to the likelihood of achieving the various earnout criteria.
Interest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 consists of nominal interest earned from our cash and cash equivalents.
The changes in fair value of warrant liability, changes in fair value of contingent consideration and the loss on settlement of liability-classified warrants are all non-cash in nature.
Income Tax Benefit
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a de minimis income tax benefit. For the year ended December 31, 2019 we recognized an income tax benefit of $0.1 million primarily attributable to the IPR&D impairment charge. There was no such charge in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have not generated any revenue from product sales in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Since inception, we have incurred net losses, used net cash from our operations, and have funded substantially all of our operations through proceeds from sale of debt and equity securities.
On December 13, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain investors, pursuant to which we issued, in a registered direct offering by us directly to the investors, or the December 2020 Registered Direct Offering, an aggregate of 2,320,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $7.00 per share for gross proceeds of approximately $16.2 million. The net proceeds to us from the December 2020 Registered Direct Offering, after deducting placement agent fees and related offering expenses, was approximately $15.0 million.
In December 2020, we received a one-time upfront cash payment of $7.5 million from 3DMed pursuant to the 3DMed License Agreement.
On July 31, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell, in a private placement directly to the investors, or the July 2020 PIPE Offering, 2,744,078 shares of its common stock and accompanying warrants to purchase an aggregate of up to 2,744,078 shares of common stock at a combined purchase price of $3.335 per share and accompanying warrant. The warrants were immediately exercisable at an exercise price of $3.30 per share and will expire five years from the date of issuance. The July 2020 PIPE Offering closed on August 4, 2020. The net proceeds to us from the July 2020 PIPE Offering, after deducting the placement agent fee and related offering expenses, was approximately $8.5 million.
On January 9, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell, in a registered direct offering by us directly to the investors, or the January 2020 Registered Direct Offering, (i) an aggregate of 1,189,000 shares of our common stock at an offering price of $3.9825 per share and (ii) an aggregate of 448,800 pre-funded warrants exercisable for shares of our common stock, or the Pre-Funded Warrants, at an offering price of $3.9725 per Pre-Funded Warrant, for gross proceeds of approximately $6.5 million before deducting the placement agent fee and related offering expenses. The net proceeds to us from the January 2020 Registered Direct Offering, after deducting placement agent fees and other estimated offering expenses, and excluding the exercise of any warrants, was approximately $5.9 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $8.5 million from the exercise of warrants to acquire shares of common stock. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, during the first quarter of 2021, we received $3.0 million from the exercise of warrants to acquire shares of common stock.
The Company regularly explores alternative means of financing its operations and seeks funding through various sources, including public and private securities offerings, collaborative arrangements with third parties and other strategic alliances and business transactions.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $117.9 million, cash and cash equivalents of $35.3 million, and restricted cash and cash equivalents of $0.1 million. In addition, we had accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $12.3 million as of December 31, 2020. We expect our cash and cash equivalents, together with the $3.0 million received from the exercise of warrants to acquire shares of common stock in the first quarter of 2021, will be sufficient to fund current planned operations for at least the next twelve months from the date of issuance of these financial statements, though we may pursue additional capital resources through public or private equity or debt financings or by establishing additional collaborations with other companies. Our expectations with respect to our ability to fund current planned operations is based on estimates that are subject to risks and uncertainties. If actual results are different from management's estimates, we may need to seek additional strategic or financing opportunities sooner than would otherwise be expected. There is no guarantee that any of these strategic or financing opportunities will be executed or executed on favorable terms, and some could be dilutive to existing stockholders. If we are unable to obtain additional funding on a timely basis, we may be forced to significantly curtail, delay, or discontinue one or more of our planned research and development programs or be unable to expand our operations or otherwise prepare for the potential regulatory approval and commercialization of our product candidates, assuming positive data.
Our future operations are highly dependent on a combination of factors, including (i) the timely and successful completion of additional financing, (ii) our ability to complete revenue-generating partnerships with pharmaceutical companies, (iii) the success of our research and development activities, (iv) the development of competitive therapies by other biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, and, ultimately, (v) regulatory approval and market acceptance of our proposed future products.
The following table provides a reconciliation of the components of cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash, and restricted cash equivalents reported in our consolidated balance sheets to the total of the amount presented in the consolidated statements of cash flows (in thousands):
We maintained $0.1 million and $0.1 million as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, on hand with our financial institutions as collateral for our corporate credit cards.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (amounts in thousands):
Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities of $10.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to our net loss of $16.8 million. This amount was offset by a change in our operating assets and liabilities of $5.4 million and various net non-cash charges of $0.8 million These noncash charges were comprised of $0.6 million in non-cash stock-based compensation expense, and the amortization of $0.3 million in contract asset costs associated with the 3DMed License Agreement as well as a $0.1 million change in the fair market value of our warrant liability. These amounts were partially offset by a gain of $0.3 million from the decrease in the fair value of our contingent consideration liability. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities is primarily attributable to an increase in deferred revenue related to our 3DMed License Agreement.
Net cash used in operating activities of $17.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to our net loss of $19.3 million. This amount was offset by various net non-cash charges of $2.8 million, which was comprised of a $2.8 million impairment of our in-process research and development, or IPR&D, asset associated with the GALE-301 and GALE-302 product candidates, a $0.6 million increase in the fair value of our contingent consideration liability, and $0.6 million in non-cash stock-based compensation expense. These amounts were partially offset by a gain of $1.1 million from the decrease in the fair value of liability-classified warrants and a $0.1 million decrease in our deferred tax liability. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.1 million is primarily attributable to a decrease in our accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Net Cash Flow from Financing Activities
We generated $38.4 million of net cash from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily attributable to $29.9 million in net proceeds from the sale of common stock, common stock pre-funded warrants, and common stock warrants and $8.5 million in net proceeds from the exercise of warrants to acquire shares of common stock.
We generated $19.6 million of net cash from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was primarily attributable to $16.0 million in net proceeds from the sale of common stock, common stock pre-funded warrants, and common stock warrants and $3.6 million in net proceeds from the exercise of warrants to acquire shares of common stock.
Contractual Obligations
We acquire product candidates still in development and enter into research and development arrangements with third parties that often require milestone and royalty payments to the third-party contingent upon the occurrence of certain future events linked to the success of the product candidate in development. Milestone payments may be required, contingent upon the successful achievement of an important point in the development life-cycle of the pharmaceutical product (e.g., approval of the product for marketing by a regulatory agency). We also typically have to make royalty payments based upon a percentage of the sales of the product candidate in the event that regulatory approval for marketing is obtained. Because of the contingent nature of these payments, they are not included in the table of contractual obligations.
These arrangements may be material individually and in the event that multiple milestones are reached in the same period, the aggregate charge to expense could be material to the results of operations in any one period. In addition, these arrangements often give us the discretion to terminate development of the product candidate, which would allow us to avoid making the contingent payments; however, we are unlikely to cease development if the product candidate successfully achieves clinical testing objectives.
As of December 31, 2020, we had the following noncancelable contractual commitments:
(1) Operating lease obligations reflect our obligation to make payments in connection with our corporate headquarters in New York, NY.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires our management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported period. We base such estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this annual report on Form10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Valuation of Intangible Assets
In conjunction with the completion of the business combination with Galena Biopharma, Inc. in 2017, or the Merger, we recorded intangible assets related to IPR&D. We had total intangible assets of $5.7 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The identifiable intangible assets are measured at their respective fair values as of the acquisition date and may be subject to revision within the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date. The models used in valuing these intangible assets require the use of significant estimates and assumptions including but not limited to:
•estimates of revenue and operating profits related to products or product candidates;
•the probability of success for unapproved product candidates considering their stages of development;
•the time and resources needed to complete the development and approval of product candidates;
•the life of the potential commercialized products and associated risks, including the inherent difficulties and uncertainties in developing a product candidate such as obtaining FDA and other regulatory approvals; and
•risks related to the viability of and potential alternative treatments in any future target markets.
We believe the fair values used to record intangible assets acquired in connection with a business combination using information known and knowable and are based upon reasonable estimates and assumptions given the facts and circumstances as of the related valuation dates.
Intangible assets related to IPR&D are considered to be indefinite-lived until the completion or abandonment of the associated research and development, or R&D, efforts. If and when development is complete, which generally occurs if and when regulatory approval to market a product is obtained, the associated assets would be deemed finite-lived and would then be amortized based on their respective estimated useful lives at that point in time. During the period the assets are considered indefinite-lived, they are not amortized but are tested for impairment on an annual basis as well as between annual tests if we become aware of any events or changes that would indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the IPR&D is below their respective carrying amounts. The fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets is dependent on assumptions such as the expected timing or probability of achieving the specified milestones, changes in projected revenues or changes in discount rates. Significant judgment is employed in determining these assumptions and changes to our assumptions could have a significant impact on our results of operations in any given period.
Intangible assets with finite useful lives are reviewed for impairment when facts or circumstances suggest that the carrying value of these assets may not be recoverable.
Goodwill
Goodwill is the excess of the cost of an acquired entity over the net amounts assigned to tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized but is subject to an annual impairment test. We have a single reporting unit and all goodwill relates to that reporting unit.
We perform our annual goodwill impairment test at the reporting unit level on October 1 of each fiscal year or more frequently if changes in circumstances or the occurrence of events suggest that an impairment exists. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment using the simplified test of goodwill impairment as defined by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, Accounting Standards Update, or ASU, No. 2017-04. Under the new guidance, goodwill impairment will be measured by the amount by which the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, without exceeding the carrying amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, an impairment loss is recorded to the extent that the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill is less than the carrying value of the reporting unit’s goodwill. We did not recognize any impairment of goodwill during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers require advance payments; however, some invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of the estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•Vendors in connection with preclinical development activities;
•the production of preclinical and clinical trial materials; and
•CROs in connection with clinical trials; and investigative sites in connection with clinical trials.
We base our expenses related to preclinical studies and clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid accordingly. Although we do not expect its estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not made any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Valuation of Contingent Consideration
Acquisitions may include contingent consideration payments based on the achievement of certain future financial performance measures of the acquired company (earnout). Contingent consideration is required to be recognized at fair value as of the acquisition date. We estimate the fair value of these liabilities based on financial projections of the acquired companies and estimated probabilities of achievement. We believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable; however, there is significant judgment involved. We evaluate, on a routine, periodic basis, the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration and changes in estimated fair value, subsequent to the initial fair value estimate at the time of the acquisition, are reflected in income or expense in the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss. Changes in the fair value of contingent consideration obligations may result from changes in discount periods and rates, changes in the timing of development milestones achieved and changes in probability assumptions with respect to the likelihood of achieving the various earnout criteria. Any changes in the estimated fair value of contingent consideration may have a material impact on our operating results.
Revenue Recognition
We record revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 606, Revenue From Contracts with Customers. This standard applies to all contracts with customers, except for contracts that are within the scope of other standards, such as leases, insurance, collaboration arrangements and financial instruments. Under Topic 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of Topic 606, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of Topic 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations, and we assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Development, Regulatory and Sales Milestones and Other Payments
At the inception of each arrangement that includes regulatory or development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within the control of us or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. We evaluate factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial, and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we reevaluate the probability of achievement of all milestones subject to constraint and, if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments upon first commercial sales and milestone payments based on a level of sales, which are the result of a customer-vendor relationship and for which the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied or partially satisfied. To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from any of our licensing arrangements.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation by estimating the fair value of each stock option on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes model. We recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting term. We account for stock-options issued to non-employees by valuing the award using the Black-Scholes model and re-measuring such awards to the current fair value until the awards are vested or a performance commitment has otherwise been reached. Because the fair market value of options granted to non-employees is subject to change in the future, the amount of the future compensation expense will include fair value re-measurements until the stock options are fully vested.
The Black-Scholes model requires us to make certain assumptions regarding: (i) the expected volatility in the market price of our shares; (ii) dividend yield; (iii) risk-free interest rates; and (iv) the period of time employees are expected to hold the award prior to exercise (referred to as the expected holding period). As a result, if we revise our assumptions and estimates, our stock-based compensation expense could change.
Given our limited history as a publicly traded company following the Merger on December 29, 2017, we did not have sufficient trading data to calculate volatility based on our own common stock, and the expected volatility was calculated as of each grant date based on our own implied volatility in combination with a peer group of publicly traded companies. The expected term of the stock options was determined based upon the simplified approach for employees, allowed under SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 110, which assumes that the stock options will be exercised evenly from vesting to expiration. As data associated with future exercises is obtained, the expected term of future grants will be adjusted accordingly. For non-employee awards, we use the remaining contractual term.
We measure compensation for restricted stock units, or RSUs, based on the price of our shares at the grant date and we recognize the expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. The expense relating to RSUs that contain both a service and a performance condition is estimated and adjusted on a quarterly basis based upon our assessment of the probability that the performance condition would be met. As a result, if we revise such assessment, our stock-based compensation expense could change.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Adopted
In August 2018, FASB issued No. ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820) Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement ("ASU No. 2018-13"). ASU No. 2018-13 modifies, adds and removes certain specific disclosure requirements on fair value measurements in Topic 820. The amendments in ASU No. 2018-13 are effective for all entities for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019. The amendments on changes in unrealized gains and losses, the range and weighted average of significant unobservable inputs used to develop Level 3 fair value measurements, and the narrative description of measurement uncertainty should be applied prospectively for only the most recent interim or annual period presented in the initial fiscal year of adoption. All other amendments should be applied retrospectively to all periods presented upon their effective date. Early adoption is permitted. An entity is permitted to early adopt any removed or modified disclosures upon issuance of ASU No. 2018-13 and to delay adoption of the additional disclosures until their effective date. We adopted this standard on January 1, 2020 and the required disclosures are included in our consolidated financial statements.