Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. These statements are often identified by the use of words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “could,” “estimate,” or “continue,” and similar expressions or variations. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including but not limited to those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” and in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our fiscal year ends January 31. A discussion and analysis of our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows for the year ended January 31, 2020 compared to the year ended January 31, 2019 is included in Item 7 of Part II, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on March 31, 2020.
Overview
Smartsheet is the enterprise platform for dynamic work. We empower anyone to drive meaningful change. Our leading cloud-based platform enables teams and organizations to plan, capture, manage, automate, and report on work at scale, resulting in more efficient processes and better business outcomes. We were founded in 2005 with a vision to build a universal application for work management that does not require coding capabilities.
Unstructured or dynamic work is work that has historically been managed using a combination of email, spreadsheets, whiteboards, phone calls, and in-person meetings to communicate with team members and complete projects and processes. It is frequently changing, often ad-hoc, and highly reactive to new information. Our platform helps manage this kind of unstructured work and serves as a single source of truth across work processes, fostering accountability and engagement within teams, leading to more efficient decision-making and better business outcomes.
We generate revenue primarily from the sale of subscriptions to our cloud-based platform. For subscriptions, customers select the plan that meets their needs and can begin using Smartsheet within minutes. We offer four subscription levels: Individual, Business, Enterprise, and Premier, the pricing for which varies by the capabilities provided. Customers can also purchase Connectors, which provide data integration and automation to third-party applications. We also offer Dynamic View, Data Uploader, Control Center and Accelerators, which enable customers to implement solutions for a specific use case or for large scale projects, initiatives, or processes. We acquired 10,000ft in May 2019 which augmented our product portfolio by providing resource allocation and planning. We acquired Brandfolder, Inc. (“Brandfolder”) in September 2020, which provides a centralized platform to organize, discover, control, distribute, and measure all forms of digital content. Combining Brandfolder capabilities with Smartsheet will create dynamic solutions that manage workflows around content and collaboration. Professional services are offered to help customers create and administer solutions for specific use cases and for training purposes.
Customers can begin using our platform by purchasing a subscription directly from our website or through our sales force, starting a free trial, or working as a collaborator on a project.
Impact of COVID-19
In December 2019, a novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) was first reported. In January 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) declared COVID-19 a Public Health Emergency of International Concern, and in March 2020, the WHO characterized it as a pandemic.
In response to reports of COVID-19, our executive leadership team and the human resources leadership team began ongoing monitoring of the COVID-19 situation. Beginning in early February 2020, and aligning with guidance provided by government agencies and international organizations, we took measures to restrict travel, institute a broad work-from-home policy, and limit visitors and office services. By mid-March 2020, and again aligning with guidance provided by government agencies and international organizations, we restricted all travel, mandated a work-from-home policy across our global workforce, fully closed our offices to all visitors and services, and moved all in-person customer-facing events to be virtual. As of January 31, 2021, all of our offices remain subject to restrictions which limit levels of allowed in-person contact, with restrictions aligned with guidance relevant to the office’s specific geographic location.
During the year ended January 31, 2021, purchasing decisions of certain customers were impacted and sometimes deferred due to uncertainties around COVID-19. We experienced some limitations in our ability to deliver consulting and training services, primarily due to travel restrictions. As long as the global economic environment is influenced by COVID-19, our existing customers may be hesitant to expand their use of Smartsheet and may be more likely to churn.
The broader implications of the global emergence of COVID-19 on our business, operating results, and overall financial performance remain uncertain and depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, impact on our customers and our sales cycles, impact on our partners and employees, and impact on the economic environment and financial markets, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. As we continue to operate in the current environment, modifications to our usual circumstances include modifications to employee travel, employee work locations, and marketing events, among others. We expect that our customers and potential customers will take actions to reduce operating expenses and moderate cash flows, including by delaying purchase decisions and requesting extended billing and payment terms. We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations, as may be required by federal, state, or local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners, suppliers, and shareholders.
Key Business Metrics
We review the following key business metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions.
Average ACV per domain-based customer
We use average annualized contract value (“ACV”) per domain-based customer to measure customer commitment to our platform and sales force productivity. We define average ACV per domain-based customer as total outstanding ACV for domain-based subscriptions as of the end of the reporting period divided by the number of domain-based customers as of the same date. We define domain-based customers as organizations with a unique email domain name.
Dollar-based net retention rate
We calculate dollar-based net retention rate as of a period end by starting with the ACV from the cohort of all customers as of the 12 months prior to such period end (“Prior Period ACV”). We then calculate the ACV from these same customers as of the current period end (“Current Period ACV”). Current Period ACV includes any upsells and is net of contraction or attrition over the trailing 12 months, but excludes subscription revenue from new customers in the current period. We then divide the total Current Period ACV by the total Prior Period ACV to arrive at the dollar-based net retention rate.
The dollar-based net retention rate is used by us to evaluate the long-term value of our customer relationships and is driven by our ability to retain and expand the subscription revenue generated from our existing customers.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Subscription revenue
Subscription revenue primarily consists of fees from customers for access to our cloud-based platform. We recognize subscription revenue ratably over the term of the subscription period beginning on the date access to our platform is provided, as no implementation work is required, assuming all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
Professional services revenue
Professional services revenue primarily includes fees for consulting and training services. Our consulting services consist of platform configuration and use case optimization, and are primarily invoiced on a time and materials basis, with some smaller engagements being provided for a fixed fee. We recognize revenue for our consulting services as those services are delivered. Our training services are delivered either remotely or at the customer site. Training services are charged for on a fixed-fee basis and we recognize revenue as the training program is delivered. Our consulting and training services are generally considered to be distinct, for accounting purposes, and we recognize revenue as services are performed or upon completion of work.
Cost of revenue and gross margin
Cost of subscription revenue
Cost of subscription revenue primarily consists of expenses related to hosting our services and providing support, including employee-related costs such as salaries, wages, and related benefits, third-party hosting fees, software and maintenance costs, amortization of acquisition-related intangibles, payment processing fees, allocated overhead, costs of outside services to supplement our internal teams, costs of Connectors between Smartsheet and third-party applications, and travel-related expenses.
We intend to continue to invest in our platform infrastructure and our support organization. As of January 31, 2021, we transitioned substantially all of our infrastructure from a combination of third-party co-location data centers and public cloud service providers to the public cloud.
Cost of professional services revenue
Cost of professional services revenue consists primarily of employee-related costs for our consulting and training teams, costs of outside services to supplement our internal teams, allocated overhead, software-related costs, billable expenses, and travel-related costs.
Gross margin
Gross margin is calculated as gross profit expressed as a percentage of total revenue. Our gross margin may fluctuate from period to period as our revenue mix fluctuates, and as a result of the timing and amount of investments to expand our hosting capacity, our continued building of application support and professional services teams, and increased share-based compensation expense. As we continue to invest in technology innovation, we expect our gross margin to moderately decline.
Operating expenses
Research and development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs, software-related costs, allocated overhead, costs of outside services used to supplement our internal staff, and travel-related costs. We consider continued investment in our development talent and our platform to be important for our growth. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars as our business grows and to gradually decrease over the long-term as a percentage of total revenue due to economies of scale.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs, costs of general marketing and promotional activities, allocated overhead, software-related costs, amortization of acquisition-related intangibles, travel-related expenses, and costs of outside services used to supplement our internal staff. Commissions earned by our sales force that are incremental to each customer contract, along with related fringe benefits and taxes, are capitalized and amortized over an estimated useful life of three years. We expect that sales and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollars as we expect more of our future revenue to come from our inside and direct sales models, rather than through digital self-service sales. We expect sales and marketing costs to gradually decrease over the long-term as a percentage of total revenue due to economies of scale.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs for accounting, finance, legal, IT, and human resources personnel. In addition, general and administrative expenses include non-personnel costs, such as accounting and legal fees, costs of outside services used to supplement our internal staff, allocated overhead, software-related costs, taxes, licenses and insurance, bad debt expense, bank charges, and travel-related expenses.
We are incurring additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, and increased expenses for insurance, investor relations, and professional services. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars as our business grows, and to gradually decrease over the long term as a percentage of total revenue due to economies of scale.
Interest income
Interest income consists of interest income from our investment holdings. In light of the current near-zero interest rate environment, consistent with the year ended January 31, 2021, we expect our interest income in the near term to remain insignificant.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of interest expense associated with our finance leases, which were terminated during the year ended January 31, 2021, and foreign exchange gains and losses.
Income tax provision (benefit)
Our income tax provision (benefit) consists primarily of a partial release of our valuation allowance, income taxes in foreign jurisdictions and state income taxes. We maintain a valuation allowance on our U.S. federal, state and certain foreign deferred tax assets as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of our total revenue for those periods:
(1) Amounts include share-based compensation expense as follows:
The following table sets forth the components of our results of operations, for each of the periods presented, as a percentage of total revenue.
Comparison of the years ended January 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Subscription revenue increased $108.7 million or 45%, for the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the year ended January 31, 2020. The increase in revenue between periods was driven by increased sales of user-based subscription plans, which contributed $77.0 million of the increase, followed by sales of pre-configured capabilities, which contributed $31.7 million of the increase.
The increase in professional services revenue was primarily driven by increasing demand for our remotely delivered consulting and training services, partially offset by a decline in in-person consulting and training engagements due to COVID-19.
Cost of revenue, gross profit, and gross margin
Cost of subscription revenue increased $26.7 million, or 82%, for the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the year ended January 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $11.7 million in employee-related expenses due to increased headcount, of which $2.8 million was related to share-based compensation expense, an increase of $8.2 million in hosting fees, an increase of $2.2 million in software-related costs, an increase of $1.8 million in amortization of acquisition-related intangibles, an increase of $1.3 million in allocated overhead costs, an increase of $0.9 million in costs of outside services to supplement our internal staff, an increase of $0.6 million in costs of Connectors with third-party applications, and an increase of $0.2 million in credit card processing fees. This was partially offset by a decrease of $0.2 million in travel-related costs.
Our gross margin for subscription revenue was 83% and 87% for the years ended January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in gross margin during the year ended January 31, 2021 was driven primarily by migration of our application from our co-location data centers into the public cloud, which at times during the fiscal year led us to incur both the costs related to co-location data centers and the costs related to the public cloud.
Cost of professional services revenue increased $6.0 million, or 30%, for the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the year ended January 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $5.0 million in employee-related expenses, of which $0.8 million was related to share-based compensation expense, an increase of $1.9 million in costs of outside services to supplement our internal staff, and an increase of $0.2 million in allocated overhead costs. This was partially offset by a decrease of $0.7 million in billable expenses, a decrease of $0.3 million in travel-related costs, and a decrease of $0.1 million in software-related costs.
Our gross margin for professional services revenue was 20% and 25% for the year ended January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in gross margin during the year ended January 31, 2021 was primarily driven by increases in personnel expenses and costs of outside personnel to supplement our staff, partially offset by decreases in billable and travel-related expenses.
Operating expenses
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses increased $23.3 million, or 24%, for the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the year ended January 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $20.8 million in employee-related expenses due to increased headcount, of which $10.8 million was related to share-based compensation expense, an increase of $3.7 million in software-related costs, and an increase of $0.7 million in allocated overhead. This was partially offset by a decrease of $1.2 million in costs of outside services to supplement our internal staff, and a decrease of $0.7 million in travel-related costs.
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased $54.2 million, or 31%, for the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the year ended January 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $54.9 million in employee-related expenses due to increased headcount, of which $12.8 million related to increased share-based compensation expense, an increase of $2.7 million in allocated overhead costs, an increase of $1.7 million in amortization of acquisition-related intangibles, an increase of $1.3 million in software-related costs, and an increase of $0.2 million in costs of outside services used to supplement our internal staff. This was partially offset by a decrease of $3.5 million in general marketing and advertising costs, and a decrease of $3.1 million in travel-related costs.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $21.2 million, or 42%, for the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the year ended January 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $14.9 million in employee-related expenses due to increased headcount, of which $6.8 million related to increased share-based compensation expense, an increase of $2.2 million in accounting, internal control, and tax related costs, an increase of $1.5 million in legal fees, an increase of $1.3 million in software-related costs, an increase of $1.0 million in bad debt expense, an increase of $0.6 million in allocated overhead costs, an increase of $0.5 million in costs of other outside services used to supplement our internal staff, and an increase of $0.2 million in bank charges. This was partially offset by a decrease of $0.8 million in travel-related costs and a decrease of $0.2 million in taxes, licenses, and insurance.
Interest income
For the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the year ended January 31, 2020, the decrease in interest income of $7.0 million was driven by the decline in interest rates year over year.
Other income (expense), net
For the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the year ended January 31, 2020, the change in other income (expense), net was driven by a net $0.2 million change from realized foreign currency loss recorded during the year ended January 31, 2020 to realized foreign currency gain recorded during the year ended January 31, 2021, a net $0.2 million change from unrealized foreign currency loss recorded during the year ended January 31, 2020 to unrealized foreign currency gain recorded during the year ended January 31, 2021, a $0.2 million decrease in other expense, and a $0.1 million decrease in interest expense.
Income tax provision (benefit)
The income tax benefit increased by $3.9 million for the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the year ended January 31, 2020. The increase was primarily related to a partial release of our valuation allowance resulting from the purchase accounting for the acquisition of Brandfolder. In connection with the acquisition of Brandfolder, we recorded a net deferred tax liability which provides an additional source of taxable income to support the realization of the pre-existing deferred tax assets.
Quarterly Results of Operations and Other Data
The following tables set forth selected unaudited quarterly statements of operations and comprehensive loss data for each of the eight fiscal quarters ended January 31, 2021, as well as the percentage of total revenue that each line item represents for each quarter. The information for each of these quarters has been prepared on the same basis as the audited annual consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report and, in the opinion of management, includes all adjustments, which consist only of normal recurring adjustments, necessary for the fair presentation of the results of operations for these periods. This data should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. These quarterly results are not necessarily indicative of our results of operations to be expected for any future period.
(1) Amounts include share-based compensation expense as follows:
All values from the statement of operations and comprehensive loss, expressed as percentage of total revenue were as follows:
Quarterly revenue trends
Our quarterly revenue increased sequentially in each of the periods presented due primarily to an increase in sales of user-based subscription plans, followed by sales of pre-configured capabilities.
Our professional services business was impacted by COVID-19 restrictions, including our loss of ability to travel and deliver in-person training and consulting services. This impact negatively affected parts of the first fiscal quarter of fiscal 2021, and the entirety of every other fiscal quarter of fiscal 2021. As such, we recorded a decrease in professional services revenue during the three months ended July 31, 2020 as compared to the three months ended April 30, 2020. In addition, we believe that our professional services business is subject to negative seasonal trends during the holiday period of our fourth fiscal quarter due to the fewer number of business days during this period. The overall growth in our business has offset this seasonal trend to date, but its impact may be more pronounced in future periods.
Quarterly cost of revenue and gross margin trends
During fiscal 2020, our quarterly gross margin remained relatively consistent, varying between 80% and 81%. During fiscal 2021, we worked on migration of our platform infrastructure from hosting in co-location data centers onto the public cloud. During this process, at times, we incurred dual expenses associated with hosting which negatively impacted our gross margin especially during the three months ended October 31, 2020. In addition, throughout fiscal 2021, our gross margin was negatively impacted by higher share-based compensation expenses. We expect our gross margin to remain below 80% in future periods, primarily due to higher share-based compensation expenses.
Quarterly operating expense trends
Total operating expenses generally increased for the fiscal quarters presented primarily due to the addition of personnel, related overhead, and investments in hardware and software in connection with the expansion of our business.
Our research and development expenses as a percent of revenue decreased during each three-month period in fiscal 2021 against its comparable year-ago period, due to economies of scale.
Our sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of total revenue generated in the three months ended October 31, 2019 increased due to our ENGAGE customer conference. During the three months ended October 31, 2020, we held our ENGAGE conference through an entirely remote setting, because of COVID-19 restrictions, and therefore did not experience a similar quarterly increase in expenses. During the fiscal year ending January 31, 2022, we intend to continue to host ENGAGE virtually.
Our general and administrative expenses were impacted throughout fiscal 2021, and especially during the three months ended July 31, 2020 and October 31, 2020, by additional investments made in our SOX compliance and internal audit program.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”), we believe the following non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We use the below referenced non-GAAP financial measures, collectively, to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that non-GAAP financial measures, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors because they provide consistency and comparability with past financial performance, and assist in comparisons with other companies, some of which use similar non-GAAP financial measures to supplement their GAAP results. The non-GAAP financial measures are presented for supplemental informational purposes only, and should not be considered a substitute for financial measures presented in accordance with GAAP, and may be different from similarly-titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies. A reconciliation is provided below for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
Limitations of non-GAAP financial measures
Our non-GAAP financial measures have limitations as analytical tools and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for an analysis of our results under GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of these non-GAAP financial measures versus their nearest GAAP equivalents. First, free cash flow and calculated billings are not substitutes for net cash used in operating activities and total revenue, respectively. Similarly, non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP operating loss are not substitutes for gross profit and operating loss, respectively. Second, other companies may calculate similar non-GAAP financial measures differently or may use other measures as tools for comparison. Additionally, the utility of free cash flow as a measure of our financial performance and liquidity is further limited as it does not represent the total increase or decrease in our cash balance for a given period. Furthermore, as calculated billings are affected by a combination of factors, including the timing of sales, the mix of monthly and annual subscriptions sold and the relative duration of subscriptions sold, and each of these elements has unique characteristics in the relationship between calculated billings and total revenue, our calculated billings activity is not closely correlated to revenue except over longer periods of time.
Non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP gross margin
We define non-GAAP gross profit as gross profit adjusted for share-based compensation expense and amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets. Non-GAAP gross margin represents non-GAAP gross profit as a percentage of total revenue.
(1) Includes amortization related to share-based compensation expense that was capitalized in internal-use software and other assets in previous periods.
(2) Consists entirely of amortization of intangible assets that were recorded as part of purchase accounting and contribute to revenue generation. The amortization of intangible assets related to acquisitions will recur in future periods until such intangible assets have been fully amortized.
Non-GAAP operating loss and non-GAAP operating margin
We define non-GAAP operating loss as loss from operations adjusted for share-based compensation expense, amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets, and one-time costs of acquisition. Non-GAAP operating margin represents non-GAAP operating loss as a percentage of total revenue.
(1) Includes amortization related to share-based compensation expense that was capitalized in internal-use software and other assets in previous periods.
(2) Consists entirely of amortization of intangible assets that were recorded as part of purchase accounting and contribute to revenue generation. The amortization of intangible assets related to acquisitions will recur in future periods until such intangible assets have been fully amortized.
Non-GAAP net loss
We define non-GAAP net loss as net loss adjusted for share-based compensation expense, amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets, one-time costs of acquisition, non-recurring income tax adjustments associated with mergers and acquisitions, and remeasurement of convertible preferred stock warrant liability.
(1) Includes amortization related to share-based compensation expense that was capitalized in internal-use software and other assets in previous periods.
(2) Consists entirely of amortization of intangible assets that were recorded as part of purchase accounting and contribute to revenue generation. The amortization of intangible assets related to acquisitions will recur in future periods until such intangible assets have been fully amortized.
Free cash flow
We define free cash flow as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities less cash used for purchases of property and equipment, capitalized internal-use software, and payments on finance lease obligations. We believe free cash flow facilitates period-to-period comparisons of liquidity. We consider free cash flow to be a key performance metric because it measures the amount of cash we generate from our operations after our capital expenditures and payments on finance lease obligations. We use free cash flow in conjunction with traditional GAAP measures as part of our overall assessment of our liquidity, including the preparation of our annual operating budget and quarterly forecasts, to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies, and to communicate with our board of directors concerning our liquidity.
Calculated billings
We define calculated billings as total revenue plus the change in deferred revenue in the period. Because we recognize subscription revenue ratably over the subscription term, calculated billings can be used to measure our subscription sales activity for a particular period, to compare subscription sales activity across particular periods, and as an indicator of future subscription revenue.
Because we generate most of our revenue from customers who are invoiced on an annual basis, and because we have a wide range of customers, from those who pay us less than $200 per year to those who pay us more than $2.5 million per year, we experience seasonality and variability that is tied to typical enterprise buying patterns and contract renewal dates of our largest customers. Our calculated billings results for the year ended January 31, 2021 were negatively affected by economic circumstances caused by COVID-19. We expect that our billings trends will continue to vary in future periods based on the timing and size of new and renewal bookings, changes to the economic environment inclusive of those related to COVID-19, and other factors.
Non-GAAP weighted average shares outstanding
We use non-GAAP weighted average shares outstanding in calculating non-GAAP earnings per share. Our number of non-GAAP weighted average shares outstanding is calculated after assuming conversion of all outstanding preferred stock into shares of common stock either at the beginning of the fiscal period presented or when issued, if later.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of January 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents totaling $442.2 million, which were held for working capital purposes. Our cash equivalents were comprised primarily of money market funds. We have generated significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations as reflected in our accumulated deficit and consolidated statements of cash flows. We expect to continue to incur operating losses and negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future.
We have financed our operations primarily through payments received from customers for subscriptions and professional services, net proceeds we received through sales of equity securities, option exercises, and contributions from our 2018 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”), finance leases, and interest income.
We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents, and cash provided by sales of our products and services will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our subscription growth rate, subscription renewal activity, billing frequency, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced product offerings, and the continuing market adoption of our product. We may, in the future, enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in new technologies, our ability to compete successfully could be reduced, and this could harm our results of operations.
A significant majority of our customers pay in advance for annual subscriptions. Therefore, a substantial source of our cash is from our deferred revenue, which is included on our consolidated balance sheet as a liability. Deferred revenue consists primarily of the unearned portion of billed fees for our subscriptions, which is recognized as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. As of January 31, 2021, we had deferred revenue of $224.0 million, of which $222.7 million was recorded as a current liability and was expected to be recognized as revenue in the subsequent 12 months, provided all recognition criteria are met.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating activities
Our largest sources of operating cash are cash collections from our customers for subscription and professional services. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for employee-related expenditures and sales and marketing expenses. Historically, we have generated negative cash flows from operating activities during most fiscal years, and have supplemented working capital requirements through net proceeds from the sale of equity securities.
During the year ended January 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $15.6 million, driven by our net loss of $115.0 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $131.7 million, and net cash outflows of $32.4 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of share-based compensation expense, amortization of deferred commissions, depreciation of property and equipment, non-cash operating lease costs, and amortization of intangible assets. Fluctuations in operating assets and liabilities included an increase in deferred revenue of $60.5 million and an increase in accounts receivable of $43.1 million, both due to an increase in billings. Additionally, there was an increase in deferred commissions of $43.0 million due to increased customer sales, a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $7.7 million driven by lease payments and offset by slower office expansions due to COVID-19, an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $6.4 million due to increase in overall purchasing activity and timing of when vendor invoices are received and paid, an increase in other long-term assets of $5.8 million, an increase in other long-term liabilities of $3.9 million, and an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $3.7 million.
During the year ended January 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $10.9 million, driven by our net loss of $95.9 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $78.8 million, and net cash inflows of $6.3 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of share-based compensation expense, amortization of deferred commissions, depreciation of property and equipment, amortization of lease right-of-use assets, and amortization of intangible assets. Fluctuations in operating assets and liabilities included an increase in deferred revenue of $61.6 million, an increase in deferred commissions of $39.0 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $26.0 million, an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $21.4 million, an increase in operating lease right-of-use assets of $12.2 million, an increase in operating lease liabilities of $5.6 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $3.9 million, a decrease in other long-term liabilities of $1.0 million, and an increase in other long-term assets of $0.3 million.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended January 31, 2021 of $85.1 million consisted of $125.1 million in payments for business acquisitions net of cash acquired for the purchase of Brandfolder and the release of the $1.0 million holdback related to the January 2019 acquisition of TernPro, Inc., spend on capitalized internal-use software development of $7.6 million, and purchases of property and equipment of $4.2 million. This was offset by proceeds from early termination of short-term investments of $50.5 million and proceeds from the sale of property and equipment of $1.3 million.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended January 31, 2020 of $90.0 million consisted of purchases of short-term investments of $100.5 million, payments for business acquisition, net of cash acquired, of $26.7 million, spend on capitalized internal-use software development of $6.7 million, purchases of property and equipment of $5.2 million, and a purchase of a long-term investment of $1.0 million. This was offset by proceeds from maturity of an investment of $50.0 million.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended January 31, 2021 of $25.8 million was primarily due to $17.4 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options, and $14.8 million in proceeds from our ESPP, which were partially offset by principal payments on finance leases of $4.1 million, taxes paid related to net share settlement of restricted stock units of $2.2 million, and payments of deferred follow-on offering costs of $0.1 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended January 31, 2020 of $402.0 million was primarily due to $379.8 million in proceeds from the follow-on offering, net of underwriters’ discounts and commissions, discussed further in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements. Additionally, we had $15.9 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options, and $11.3 million in proceeds from our ESPP, which were partially offset by principal payments on finance leases of $4.2 million, and payments of deferred offering costs of $0.8 million.
Obligations and Other Commitments
Our contractual obligations consist primarily of obligations under our operating leases for office space, our commitments with cloud-based hosting service providers, and non-cancelable purchase commitments. The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of January 31, 2021:
(1) Amounts include our commitment with cloud-based hosting service providers for $17.3 million within one year, $42.1 million between one to three years, and $11.3 million within three to five years.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers, vendors, lessors, business partners, and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us, or from intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain officers and employees that will require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers, or employees. An indemnification claim has been made to the Company related to litigation in which a former director and shareholder are parties. On January 29, 2021, Ryan Hinkle and Insight Venture Partners VII, L.P. and certain affiliates filed a complaint against Smartsheet Inc. in the Superior Court of Washington, King County, for the advancement of legal fees, costs, and expenses incurred related to this indemnification claim. At this time, the Company cannot reasonably estimate the probability or magnitude of any alleged indemnification claim.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of January 31, 2021, we did not have any relationships with organizations or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities that would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses. Generally, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions in accordance with GAAP that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue recognition
We derive our revenue primarily from subscription services and professional services. Revenue is recognized when control of these services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services, net of any sales taxes.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•determination of the transaction price;
•allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Subscription revenue
Subscription revenue primarily consists of fees from customers for access to our cloud-based platform and involves a significant volume of transactions. Subscription revenue is recognized on a ratable basis over the subscription contract term, beginning on the date the access to our platform is provided, as no implementation work is required, if consideration we are entitled to receive is considered probable of collection. Subscription contracts generally have terms of one year or one month, are billed in advance, and are non-cancelable. The subscription arrangements do not allow the customer the contractual right to take possession of the platform; as such, the arrangements are considered to be service contracts.
Certain of our subscription contracts contain performance guarantees related to service continuity. To date, refunds related to such guarantees have been immaterial in all periods presented.
Professional services revenue
Professional services revenue primarily includes revenue recognized from fees for consulting and training services. Our consulting services consist of platform configuration and use case optimization, and are primarily invoiced on a time and materials basis, monthly in arrears. Services revenue is recognized over time, as service hours are delivered. Smaller consulting engagements are on occasion provided for a fixed fee. These smaller consulting arrangements are typically of short duration (less than three months). In these cases, revenue is recognized over time, based on the proportion of hours of work performed, compared to the total hours expected to complete the engagement. Configuration and use case optimization services do not result in significant customization or modification of the software platform or user interface.
Training services are billed in advance, on a fixed-fee basis, and revenue is recognized after the training program is delivered, or after the customer’s right to receive training services expires.
Associated out-of-pocket travel expenses related to the delivery of professional services are typically reimbursed by the customer. Out-of-pocket expense reimbursements are recognized as revenue at the point in time, or as, the distinct performance obligation to which they relate is delivered. Out-of-pocket expenses are recognized as cost of professional services as incurred.
On occasion, we sell our subscriptions to third-party resellers. The price at which we sell to the reseller is typically discounted, as compared to the price at which we would sell to an end customer, in order to enable the reseller to realize a margin on the eventual sale to the end customer. As our pricing to the reseller is fixed, and we do not have visibility into the pricing provided by the reseller to the end customer, the revenue is recorded net of any reseller margin.
Contracts with multiple performance obligations
Some of our contracts with customers contain multiple performance obligations. We account for individual performance obligations separately, as they have been determined to be distinct, i.e., the services are separately identifiable from other items in the arrangement and the customer can benefit from them on their own or with other resources that are readily available to the customer. The transaction price is allocated to the distinct performance obligations on a relative stand-alone selling price basis. Stand-alone selling prices are determined based on the prices at which we separately sell subscription, consulting, and training services, and based on our overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration market conditions, value of our contracts, the types of offerings sold, customer demographics, and other factors.
Deferred revenue
Deferred revenue is recorded for subscription services contracts upon establishment of unconditional right to payment under a non-cancelable contract before transferring the related services to the customer. Deferred revenue for such services is amortized into revenue over time, as those subscription services are delivered.
Similarly, we record deferred revenue for fixed-fee professional services upon establishment of an unconditional right to payment under a non-cancelable contract. Deferred revenue for training services is recognized as revenue upon delivery of training services or upon expiration of customer’s right to receive such services. Deferred revenue for consulting services is recognized as revenue as hours of service are delivered to the customer.
Deferred commissions
The majority of sales commissions earned by our sales force are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. Sales commission are paid on initial contracts and on any upsell contracts with a customer. No sales commissions are paid on customer renewals. Sales commissions are deferred and then amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of benefit that we have determined to be three years. We determined the period of benefit by taking into consideration our customer contracts, expected customer life, the expected life of our technology and other factors. Amortization expense is included in sales and marketing expenses in the accompanying statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We evaluate the period of benefit and test for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of these assets.
Internal-use software development costs
We capitalize certain qualifying costs incurred during the application development stage in connection with the development of internal-use software. Costs related to preliminary project activities and post-implementation activities are expensed in research and development (“R&D”) as incurred. R&D expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs, hardware- and software-related costs, allocated overhead, costs of outside services used to supplement our internal staff, and travel-related costs.
Internal-use software costs of $9.5 million were capitalized in the year ended January 31, 2021, all of which related to costs incurred during the application development stage of software development for our platform to which subscriptions are sold. Internal-use software costs of $8.1 million were capitalized in the year ended January 31, 2020, of which $5.8 million related to costs incurred during the application development stage of software development for our platform to which subscriptions are sold.
Capitalized internal-use software costs are included within property and equipment, net on the consolidated balance sheets, and are amortized over the estimated useful life of the software, which is typically three years. The related amortization expense is recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss within the function that receives the benefit of the developed software. We evaluate the useful lives of these assets and test for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of these assets. Amortization expense of capitalized internal-use software costs totaled $3.6 million, $2.3 million, and $1.0 million for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception, and leases are classified at commencement as either operating or finance leases.
Right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term. ROU assets also include any lease payments made. Operating lease ROU assets are presented separately in long-term assets and finance lease ROU assets are included in property and equipment, net on our consolidated balance sheets. As our operating leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on information available at the commencement date in determining the present value of future payments. This rate is an estimate of the collateralized borrowing rate we would incur on our future lease payments over a similar term based on the information available at commencement date. Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. At January 31, 2021, we did not include any options to extend leases in our lease terms as we were not reasonably certain to exercise them. Our lease agreements do not contain residual value guarantees or covenants.
We utilize certain practical expedients and policy elections available under the lease accounting standard. Leases with a term of one year or less are not recognized on our consolidated balance sheets; we recognize lease expense for these leases on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Additionally, we have elected to include non-lease components with lease components for contracts containing real estate leases for the purpose of calculating lease ROU assets and liabilities, to the extent that they are fixed. Non-lease components that are not fixed are expensed as incurred as variable lease payments. Our real estate operating leases typically include non-lease components such as common-area maintenance costs.
ROU assets are subject to evaluation for impairment or disposal on a basis consistent with other long-lived assets.
Business combinations
When we acquire a business, the purchase price is allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. Any residual purchase price is recorded as goodwill. The allocation of the purchase price requires management to make significant estimates in determining the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, especially with respect to the identifiable intangible assets. These estimates can include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future, the appropriate weighted-average cost of capital, the cost savings expected to be derived from acquiring an asset, its expected remaining economic useful life, and the appropriate discount rate to employ in the valuation analyses in order to properly account for the risk associated with the asset’s expected future cash flows. These estimates are inherently uncertain. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed may be recorded, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Goodwill on our consolidated balance sheets totaled $125.6 million and $16.5 million at January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Goodwill is tested for impairment annually on September 1, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may exist. Based on the annual assessment, no indicator of impairment was noted and therefore no goodwill impairments were recorded during the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020, or 2019.
Share-based compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all share-based awards granted to employees and directors, based on the estimated fair value of the award on the date of grant. Expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the award based on the estimated portion of the award that is expected to vest.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to measure the fair value of stock option awards when they are granted. We make several estimates in determining share-based compensation expense and these estimates generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop. These assumptions and estimates are as follows:
Fair value of common stock. As our stock was not publicly traded prior to our IPO, we were required to estimate the fair value of common stock, as discussed in “Valuation of Common Stock” below.
Expected term. The expected term of options represents the period that share-based awards are expected to be outstanding. We estimate the expected term using the simplified method due to the lack of historical exercise activity for our company.
Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yield available at the time of the option grant in the U.S. Treasury securities at maturity with a term equivalent to the expected term of the option.
Expected volatility. Expected volatility is based on an average volatility of stock prices for a group of publicly traded peer companies. In considering peer companies, we assess characteristics such as industry, state of development, size and financial leverage.
Dividend yield. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future, and, therefore, use an expected dividend yield of zero.
If any assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model change significantly, share-based compensation for future awards may differ materially compared with the awards granted previously.
In addition to the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model, we must also estimate a forfeiture rate to calculate the share-based compensation expense for awards. Our forfeiture rate is derived from historical employee termination behavior. If the actual number of forfeitures differs from these estimates, additional adjustments to compensation expense will be required.
Valuation of common stock
Given the absence of an active market for our common stock prior to our IPO, our board of directors was required to estimate the fair value of our common stock at the time of each option grant based upon several factors, including its consideration of input from management and contemporaneous third-party valuations.
The exercise price for all stock options granted was at the estimated fair value of the underlying common stock, as estimated on the date of grant by our board of directors in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. Each fair value estimate was based on a variety of factors, which included the following:
•contemporaneous valuations performed by an unrelated third-party valuation firm;
•the prices, rights, preferences and privileges of our preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
•the lack of marketability of our common stock;
•our actual operating and financial performance;
•current business conditions and projections;
•hiring of key personnel and the experience of our management;
•our history and the timing of the introduction of new applications and capabilities;
•our stage of development;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or a merger or acquisition of our business given prevailing market conditions;
•the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and
•U.S. and global capital market conditions.
In valuing our common stock, our board of directors determined the equity value of our business using valuation methods they deemed appropriate under the circumstances applicable at the valuation date.
One method, the market approach, estimates value based on a comparison of our company to comparable public companies in a similar line of business. To determine our peer group of companies, we considered public enterprise cloud-based application providers and selected those that are similar to us in size, stage of life cycle, and financial leverage. From the comparable companies, a representative market value multiple is determined which is applied to our operating results to estimate the value of our company. The market value multiple was determined based on consideration of the last 12-month revenue and the implied multiples for each of the comparable companies.
Another method, the prior sale of our stock approach, estimates value by considering any prior arm’s length sales of our equity. When considering prior sales of our equity, the valuation considers the size of the equity sale, the relationship of the parties involved in the transaction, the timing of the equity sale, and our financial condition at the time of the sale.
Once an equity value was determined, our board of directors used one of the following methods to allocate the equity value to each of our classes of stock: (1) the option pricing method, or OPM; or (2) a probability weighted expected return method, or PWERM.
The OPM treats common stock and preferred stock as call options on a business, with exercise prices based on the liquidation preference of the preferred stock. Therefore, the common stock only has value if the funds available for distribution to the holders of common stock exceed the value of the liquidation preference of the preferred stock at the time of a liquidity event, such as a merger, sale, or initial public offering, assuming the business has funds available to make a liquidation preference meaningful and collectible by shareholders. The common stock is modeled as a call option with a claim on the business at an exercise price equal to the remaining value immediately after the preferred stock is liquidated. The OPM uses the Black-Scholes option pricing model to price the call option.
The estimated value of the common stock derived from the OPM is then discounted by a non-marketability factor due to the fact that shareholders of private companies do not have access to trading markets similar to those enjoyed by shareholders of public companies, which impacts liquidity.
The PWERM employs various market approach calculations depending upon the likelihood of various liquidation scenarios. For each of the various scenarios, an equity value is estimated and the rights and preferences for each shareholder class are considered to allocate the equity value to common shares. The common stock value is then multiplied by a discount factor reflecting the calculated discount rate and the timing of the event. Lastly, the common stock value is multiplied by an estimated probability for each scenario. The probability and timing of each scenario were based on discussions between our board of directors and our management team. Under the PWERM, the value of our common stock is based upon possible future exit events for our company.
Subsequent to the closing of the IPO on May 1, 2018, the fair value of our common stock is represented by the price quoted on the New York Stock Exchange.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See the sections titled “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recently adopted accounting pronouncements” in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.