Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to CM Life Sciences, Inc. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as those that will be set forth in our preliminary prospectus/proxy statement to be included in a Registration Statement on Form S-4 that we will file with the SEC relating to the proposed Sema4 Business Combination.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on July 10, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar Business Combination with one or more target businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering, the sale of the Private Placement Warrants that occurred simultaneously with the completion of our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Forward Purchase Shares, shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target or others, or a combination of the foregoing.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, described below, and seeking to identify a target company for our initial Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We will incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing our initial Business Combination.
For the period from July 10, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $192,244, which consists of operating costs of $206,195, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $13,951.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On September 4, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 44,275,000 Units, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 5,775,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $442,750,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 7,236,667 Private Placement Warrants to our Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $10,855,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $442,750,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $24,895,463 in transaction costs, including $8,855,000 of underwriting fees, $15,496,250 of deferred underwriting fees and $544,213 of other offering costs.
For the period from July 10, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $386,106. Net loss of $192,244 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $13,951 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $179,911 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $442,763,951. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes payable and deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our initial Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies. During the period ended December 31, 2020, we did not withdraw any interest income from the Trust Account.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $1,094,681 of cash held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with our initial Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our initial Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Sema4 Business Combination Announcement
On February 10, 2021, the Company announced that it executed an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) with Mount Sinai Genomics, Inc., a Delaware corporation, d/b/a Sema4 (“Sema4”) and the other parties thereto (the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, including the Merger (as defined below), the “Sema4 Business Combination”). Specifically, the Company entered into the Merger Agreement with Sema4 and S-IV Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a direct, wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”). Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, CMLS will acquire Sema4 through the merger of Merger Sub with and into Sema4, with Sema4 surviving as a wholly-owned subsidiary of CMLS (the “Merger”)
The Sema4 Business Combination is expected to close in the second quarter of 2021, following the receipt of the required approval by CMLS’s stockholders and the satisfaction of certain other customary closing conditions.
At the effective time of the Merger (the “Effective Time”), each share of Sema4 class B common stock, par value $0.00001 per share (“Sema4 Class B Common Stock”) issued and outstanding as of immediately prior to the Effective Time will be converted into 1/100th of a share of Sema4 class A common stock, par value $0.00001 per share (“Sema4 Class A Common Stock”, together with Sema4 Class B Common Stock, “Sema4 Common Stock”) in accordance with Sema4’s organizational documents.
Immediately thereafter, each share of Sema4 Common Stock and Sema4’s series A-1 preferred stock, series A-2 preferred stock, series B preferred stock and series C preferred stock (collectively, “Sema4 Capital Stock”) issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time (other than Excluded Shares and Dissenting Shares (each as defined in the Merger Agreement)) will be converted into the right to receive a portion of the total closing merger consideration, with each Sema4 stockholder being entitled to receive the following:
(a) if such stockholder has made a cash election as set forth and in accordance with the terms of the Merger Agreement, a portion of the specified aggregate amount of cash consideration payable under the terms of the Merger Agreement (such aggregate amount not to exceed $343,000,000) and pursuant to the terms of such stockholder’s cash election; and
(b) a number of shares of common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, of CMLS (the “Common Stock”) equal to the quotient of: (i) (A) the product of (x) such stockholder’s total shares of Sema4 Capital Stock multiplied by (y) the per share amount calculated in accordance with the Merger Agreement minus (B) the amount of cash payable to such stockholder pursuant to its cash election, if any, divided by (ii) $10.
In addition, at the Effective Time, each outstanding option to purchase Sema4 Capital Stock, each outstanding and unsettled restricted stock unit in respect of shares of Sema4 Capital Stock and each outstanding stock appreciation right will be rolled over into options to purchase Common Stock, restricted stock units in respect of Common Stock and stock appreciation rights in respect of Common Stock, all as further set forth in and in accordance with the terms of the Merger Agreement.
In addition to the payment of cash, issuance of Common Stock and rollover of other Sema4 equity awards described above as of the Effective Time, in the event that the closing sale price of Common Stock exceeds certain price thresholds for 20 out of any 30 consecutive trading days during the period of time commencing upon the expiration of the lock-up period applicable to the Sponsor under the Letter Agreement, dated as of August 27, 2021, by and among the Company, Sponsor and each of the executive officers and directors of the Company and ending on the second anniversary of the closing of the Merger, an additional number of shares equal to an amount up to an aggregate of 11% of the shares of Common Stock that would have been issuable upon closing of the Merger to the stockholders of the Company if no cash elections were made and the closing cash payment amount under the Merger Agreement was $0.00 (the “Earn-Out Shares”) shall become issuable, in accordance with the terms of the Merger Agreement following the achievement of those certain price thresholds, to the stockholders of Sema4 as of immediately prior to the closing of the Merger; provided that the board of directors of Sema4 (or a duly authorized committee thereof) may, prior to the closing of the Merger, allocate a portion of such Earn-Out Shares to be issued to service providers of Sema4 in the form of restricted stock units of the Company.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than as described below.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $15,496,250 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
In addition, we entered into separate forward purchase agreements with affiliates of the Sponsor, Casdin and Corvex, in their capacities as investment advisors on behalf of one or more investment funds, clients or accounts managed by the Clients, pursuant to which, subject to the conditions described below, they will cause the Clients to purchase from us up to an aggregate amount of 15,000,000 Forward Purchase Shares, for $10.00 per Forward Purchase Share, or an aggregate amount of up to $150,000,000, in a private placement that will close concurrently with the closing of a Business Combination. The amount of Forward Purchase Shares sold pursuant to the forward purchase agreements will be determined at our discretion based on our needs for additional capital to consummate a Business Combination. Under each forward purchase agreement, we are required to approach Casdin and Corvex if it proposes to raise additional capital by issuing any equity, or securities convertible into, exchangeable or exercisable for equity securities in connection with a Business Combination. The respective obligations of Casdin and Corvex to purchase Forward Purchase Shares will, among other things, be conditioned on us completing a Business Combination with a company engaged in a business that is within the investment objectives of the Clients purchasing Forward Purchase Shares and on the Business Combination (including the target assets or business, and the terms of the Business Combination) being reasonably acceptable to such Clients as determined by Casdin or Corvex, as relevant, as investment advisors on behalf of such Clients. Each of Casdin and Corvex will have the right to transfer a portion of its purchase obligation under the forward purchase agreement to third parties, or upon mutual agreement to each other, subject to compliance with applicable securities laws. To the extent that we obtain alternative financing to fund the initial Business Combination and the Clients participate in such financing, the aggregate commitment under the forward purchase agreement will be reduced by the amount of such alternative financing.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of Class A redeemable common stock outstanding for the period. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for Class B non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the net income, less income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of Class B non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the independent registered public accounting firm’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of the Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever earlier.