Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements of the Company (including the Notes thereto) included elsewhere in this report. Dollar amounts are in thousands, except for per share amounts.
The Company generates revenues primarily from the sale, leasing, licensing, shipping and installation of precast concrete products and systems for the construction, utility and farming industries. The Company's operating strategy has involved producing and marketing innovative and proprietary products, including Slenderwall™, a patent pending, lightweight, energy efficient concrete and steel exterior wall panel for use in building construction; J-J Hooks® Barrier, a patented positive-connected highway safety barrier; Sierra Wall™, a patented sound barrier primarily for roadside use; transportable concrete buildings; and SoftSound™, a highway sound attenuation system. In addition, the Company produces utility vaults; farm products such as cattleguards; and custom order precast concrete products with various architectural surfaces.
As a part of the construction industry, the Company's sales and net income may vary greatly from quarter to quarter over a given year. Because of the cyclical nature of the construction industry, many factors not under our control, such as weather and project delays, affect the Company's production schedule, possibly causing a momentary slowdown in sales and net income. As a result of these factors, the Company is not always able to earn a profit for each period, therefore, please read Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and the accompanying financial statements with these factors in mind.
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus originating in Wuhan, China (the “COVID-19 outbreak”) and the risks to the international community as the virus spread globally beyond its point of origin. In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally.
The full impact of the COVID-19 outbreak continues to evolve as of the date of this report. As such, it is uncertain as to the full magnitude that the pandemic will have on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity, and future results of operations. The Company has already experienced an adverse impact to its business by a reduction in revenues in 2020 from that in 2019, a reduction in backlog, lower production volumes, employee absence, bidding restrictions within certain key states such as Maryland and North Carolina, and minor delays in receipt of materials through the Company's supply chain. The Company may be further negatively impacted in the following respects:
a) by the potential inability of customers of the Company to pay amounts owed to the Company for products or services already provided should their businesses suffer setbacks; this risk is heightened by the relatively long lag time experienced by the Company in collecting accounts receivable (see "Liquidity and Capital Resources" below);
b) by potential supply side issues should our vendors experience hardships, and have to reduce or terminate operations, due to the COVID-19 outbreak, impacting the Company's sourcing of materials;
c) by increased adverse effects on our workforce due to contracting or taking care of a relative who has contracted COVID-19, or have been quarantined by a medical professional; in this respect, our workforce has been impacted as of this date with an effect on operations at all locations, but this impact has diminished as of the filing date, but no assurance can be provided as to future impacts, particularly in view of new coronavirus outbreaks;
d) in the event that any of the three states in which we have facilities provide for the quarantine of our manufacturing employees, our production manufacturing will be significantly affected;
e) in the event that any of the states in which we sell our products and services may eliminate, cancel, or delay projects due to monetary limitations resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak; in this respect, the Company has experienced a reduction in bidding activity;
f) the reduction of state infrastructure budgets due to the reduction in funding through the gas tax, or other funding sources;
g) the increase in the overall loan defaults, which in turn impacts the banking sector's ability to fund projects in which the Company's products may be utilized; and
h) in the event that economic hardships force the Company to default on loan payments, our loans may be called and our ability to borrow under our bank line of credit could cease;
Management is actively monitoring the global situation on its financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry, and workforce. Although the Company experienced a loss in the first quarter of 2020 and reduced revenues for the year 2020 as compared to 2019, as well as experiencing factors described above, given the daily evolution of the COVID-19 outbreak and the global responses to curb its spread, the Company is not able to ultimately estimate the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak on its results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity for fiscal year 2021.
The discussions below, including without limitation with respect to liquidity, are subject to the future effects of the COVID-19 outbreak. In this respect, should the outbreak cause serious economic harm in our areas of operation, our revenue expectations are unlikely to be fulfilled.
Overview
Overall, the Company’s financial bottom line performance was higher in 2020 when compared to 2019. The Company had net income for 2020 in the amount of $2,665 compared to net income of $1,949 for 2019. Sales decreased by $2,829 to $43,862 in 2020 from $46,691 in 2019. The decrease in sales is mainly attributed to the decrease in product sales, which was derived from reduced SlenderWall, Easi-Set Building, and barrier sales partially offset by an increase in Architectural sales. The reduction in barrier sales is in line with the
Company's strategy to shift toward barrier rentals versus barrier sales. The decrease in product sales was offset in part by the significant increase in barrier rentals in 2020 compared to 2019 which is mainly due to the increased linear feet rented over the prior year, short-term special projects, and the continued revenue recognition of the deferred buy-back lease obligation (as described in our financial statements under "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Revenue Recognition - Sale to a Customer with a Buy-Back Guarantee - Lease Income"). The significant increase in barrier rentals also favorably impacted gross margins, excluding royalties, with an increase to 22% in 2020 from 18% in 2019. Operating expenses for 2020 remain in line with the prior year. The Company continues to manage costs with the strategic goals in place to increase marketing and sales efforts towards SlenderWall sales and barrier rentals.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31,
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had total revenue of $43,862 compared to total revenue of $46,691 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $2,829, or 6%. Revenue includes product sales, barrier rentals, royalty income, and shipping and installation revenues. Product sales are further divided into soundwall, architectural and SlenderWall™ panels, miscellaneous wall panels, highway barrier, Easi-Set®/Easi-Span® buildings, utility products, and miscellaneous precast products. The following table summarizes the revenue by type and a comparison for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
The revenue items: soundwall sales, architectural panel sales, SlenderWall sales, miscellaneous wall sales, barrier rentals, and royalty income are recognized as revenue over time. The revenue items: barrier sales, Easi-Set and Easi-Span building sales, utility sales, miscellaneous sales, and shipping and installation revenue are recognized as revenue at a point in time.
Soundwall Sales - Soundwall panel sales slightly decreased by 3% in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to the smaller number of projects in production during 2020 at the North Carolina and South Carolina facilities as compared to 2019. The Virginia plant continues to produce soundwall for the largest soundwall contract in Company history, which was initially awarded during 2018, and for which production is expected to continue in 2021.
Architectural Sales - Architectural panel sales significantly increased by 232% in 2020 compared to 2019. The Company had one large architectural panel project begin during the first quarter 2020 with continued production through the third quarter 2020. The Company was also awarded a large architectural project which began production the fourth quarter 2020, with additional production scheduled into 2021.
SlenderWall Sales - SlenderWall panel sales decreased by 81% in 2020 when compared to 2019. SlenderWall sales are generated on a project basis, and success is determined by the number and dollar value of projects awarded and produced in any particular period. The decrease is mainly attributable to the Company finishing production of a major SlenderWall project during the first and second quarter 2019, as compared to the completion of several smaller projects during the first quarter of 2020. The Company recorded revenue in the third quarter 2020 for a customer sample test panel which is part of the sales strategy to expand the product offering and capabilities. The Company continues to focus sales initiatives on SlenderWall, but no assurance can be given as to the success of this endeavor, particularly in light of the COVID-19 outbreak.
Miscellaneous Wall Sales - Miscellaneous wall sales can be highly customized precast concrete products or retaining and lagging panels that do not fit other product categories. Miscellaneous wall sales doubled in 2020 when compared to 2019. The Company was awarded various miscellaneous wall panel projects in the later part of 2019, with production expected to continue into 2021.
Barrier Sales - Barrier sales decreased by 36% in 2020 when compared to 2019. Aligning with the Company's strategy to shift to barrier rentals versus barrier sales, barrier sales are expected to continue to trend lower than previous periods.
Easi-Set® and Easi-Span® Building Sales - The Easi-Set® Buildings program includes Easi-Set®, plant assembled and Easi-Span®, site assembled, and an extensive line of pre-engineered restrooms. Building sales decreased significantly by 51% in 2020 as compared to 2019 which was
mainly due to a large building and restroom project occuring in 2019 which was produced at multiple plants.
Utility Sales - Utility products are mainly comprised of underground utility vaults used in infrastructure construction. Utility product sales decreased by 19% in 2020 compared to 2019. The utility market is extremely competitive, with many competitors who specialize in lower priced utility products. The Company is much more competitive on larger quantity projects and continues to bid on utility projects.
Miscellaneous Product Sales - Miscellaneous products are products that are produced or sold that do not meet the criteria defined for other revenue categories. Examples would include precast concrete slabs, blocks or small add-on items. For 2020, miscellaneous product sales increased by 199% when compared to 2019. These products are typically small in nature and the Company focuses it's priorities on larger, more profitable jobs.
Barrier Rentals - Barrier rentals increased by 176% in 2020 when compared to 2019. The increase was due to the higher quantity of linear feet rented than the previous year and a few short-term special projects, which carried slightly higher margins due to the complexity and risk of the projects. Barrier rentals were also positively impacted by the revenue recognition from the deferred buy-back lease obligation. As indicated above, the Company is shifting its focus to barrier rentals compared to barrier sales with the significant investment in the rental fleet in late 2019. Its success in this endeavor will be affected by the level of governmental spending on future public highway products, which spending may be adversely effected by cutbacks resulting from diversion of funds due to the COVID-19 outbreak.
Royalty Income - Royalties increased by 1% in 2020 as compared to 2019. Royalty income increased during the second half of the year 2020 with a large increase in barrier and building royalties. The Company is uncertain how the COVID-19 outbreak will impact each licensee in future periods. The Company continues to seek new license opportunities to expand product offerings around the world.
Shipping and Installation - Shipping revenue results from shipping our products to the customers' final destination and is recognized when the shipping services take place. Installation activities include installation of our products at the customers’ construction site. Installation revenue results when attaching architectural wall panels to a building, installing an Easi-Set® building at a customers' site, setting highway barrier, or setting any of our other precast products at a site specific to the requirements of the owner. Shipping and installation revenues decreased by 17% for 2020 when compared to 2019. The decrease is mainly a result of less SlenderWall and Easi-Set building installation occurring in 2020 as compared to the prior year.
Cost of Goods Sold - Total cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $32,820, a decrease of $3,902, or 11%, from $36,722 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Total cost of goods sold, as a percentage of total revenue not including royalties, decreased to 78% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 82% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cost of goods sold as a percentage of revenue, not including royalties is mainly due to the increase in barrier rentals, which typically have higher margins than product sales, and the short-term special projects, which carry slightly higher margins due to the complexity and risk of the projects.
General and Administrative Expenses - For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company's general and administrative expenses increased by $102, or 2%, to $4,989 from $4,887 during the same period in 2019. The increase is mainly attributed to
the write-off of bad debts associated with retainage on two jobs.
Selling Expenses - Selling expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $242, or 10%, to $2,294 from $2,536 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The reduction in selling expenses are attributed to a decrease in wages and sales commissions compared to the same periods in the prior year.
Operating Income - The Company had operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $3,759 compared to operating income of $2,546 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $1,213, or 48%. The increase in operating income was primarily the result of the increase in gross profit margins associated with barrier rentals.
Interest Expense - Interest expense was $217 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $179 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $38, or 21%, was due primarily to the debt financing on the North Carolina expansion project completed in the fourth quarter 2019.
Income Tax Expense - The Company had income tax expense of $1,127 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to income tax expense of $549 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company had an effective rate of 29.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to an effective rate of 21.9% for the same period in 2019. The increase in the tax rate is mainly attributed to the change in various state tax rates.
Net Income - The Company had net income of $2,665 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income of $1,949 for the same period in 2019. The basic and diluted income per share was $0.51 for 2020, compared to basic and diluted income per share of $0.38 for the year ended December 31, 2019. There were 5,185 basic and 5,185 diluted weighted average shares outstanding in 2020 and 5,142 basic and 5,147 diluted weighted average shares outstanding in the 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company financed its capital expenditures requirements for 2020 with cash flows from operations, cash balances on hand and notes payable to a bank. The Company had $4,936 of debt obligations at December 31, 2020, of which $740 is scheduled to mature within twelve months. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Company made repayments of outstanding debt in the amount $2,868 and received $2,793 in proceeds of borrowings mainly deriving from a refinance consolidating notes payable, yard expansion in Virginia, and a vehicle. The Company did not draw on the line of credit during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
The Company has a mortgage note payable to Summit Community Bank (the “Bank”), with a balance of $227 as of December 31, 2020. The note has a maturity date of September 20, 2021 and a fixed interest rate of 3.99% annually with monthly payments of $26 and is secured by principally all of the assets of the Company. Under the terms of the note, the Bank will permit chattel mortgages on purchased equipment not to exceed $250 for any one individual loan so long as the Company is not in default.
The Company has a mortgage note payable to the Bank for the construction of it's North Carolina facility. The note carries a ten year term at a fixed interest rate of 3.64% annually per the Promissory Note Rate Conversion Agreement, with monthly payments of $22, and is secured by all of the assets of Smith-Carolina and a guarantee by the Company. The balance of the note payable at December 31, 2020 was $2,008.
On March 27, 2020, the Company completed the refinancing of existing loans with a note payable to the Bank in the amount of $2,701. A portion of the funds in the amount of $678 were secured for improvements to an existing five acre parcel for additional storage at the Midland, Virginia plant. The loan is collateralized by a first lien position on the Virginia property, building, and assets. The refinance also released the lien on the Smith-Columbia plant in Hopkins, South Carolina (Columbia). The interest rate per the Promissory Note is fixed at 3.99% per annum, with principal and interest payments payable monthly over 120 months in the amount of $27. The loan matures on March 27, 2030. The balance of the note payable at December 31, 2020 was $2,535.
The Company additionally has 5 smaller installment loans with annual interest rates between 3.99% and 5.29%, maturing between 2020 and 2025, with varying balances totaling $166.
Under the loan covenants with the Bank, the Company is limited to annual capital expenditures of $3,500 and must maintain tangible net worth of $10,000. The Company is in compliance with all covenants pursuant to the loan agreements as of December 31, 2020.
In addition to the notes payable discussed above, on April 16, 2020, the Company obtained a loan, evidenced by a promissory note, under the Paycheck Protection Program (the "PPP") from the Bank in the amount of $2,692. The PPP provides for loans to qualifying businesses, the proceeds of which may ony be used for payroll costs, rent, utilities, mortgage interest, and interest on other pre-existing indebtedness (the "permissible expenses"). The interest rate per the promissory note, dated April 16, 2020 and executed by the Company in favor of the Bank, is fixed at 1.00% per annum, with principal and interest payments starting thirty (30) days after the amount of forgiveness is determined under section 1106 of the CARES Act. The loan matures on April 16, 2022. The proceeds of the loan must be utilized pursuant to the requirements of the PPP, and all or a portion of the loan may be forgiven in accordance with the PPP applicable rules, regulations, and guidelines. Pursuant to the loan agreement relating to the PPP loan, the Bank may accelerate the loan in the event of a default under this or any other loan agreement with the Bank. The Company has currently applied for loan forgiveness in the full amount of the loan, but no assurance can be given as to the amount, if any, of forgiveness.
Also in addition to the notes payable discussed above, the Company has a $4,000 line of credit with the Bank with no balance outstanding as of December 31, 2020. The line of credit is evidenced by a commercial revolving promissory note which carries a variable interest rate of prime and matures on October 1, 2021. The loan is collateralized by a first lien position on the Company's accounts receivable and inventory and a second lien position on all other business assets. Key provisions of the line of credit require the Company (i) to obtain bank approval for capital expenditures in excess of $3,500 during the term of the loan; and (ii) to obtain bank approval prior to its funding any acquisition. On October 21, 2020 the Company received a Commitment Letter from the Bank to provide a guidance line of credit specifically to purchase business equipment in an amount up to $1,500. The commitment provides for the purchase of equipment for which a note payable will be executed with a term not to exceed five years with an interest rate at the Wall Street Journal prime rate plus 0.50% with a floor of 4.00% per annum. The loan is collateralized by a first lien position on all equipment purchased under the line. The commitment for the guidance line of credit matures on October 21, 2021. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had not purchased any equipment pursuant to the $1,500 commitment.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had cash totaling $8,764 and $1,228 of investment securities available for sale compared to cash totaling $1,364 and $1,176 of investment securities available for sale at December 31, 2019. Investment securities at December 31, 2020 consist of shares of USVAX (a Virginia Bond Fund). During 2020, the Company’s operating activities provided $7,487 of cash due mainly to operating income and the collection of accounts receivable. In 2020, investing activities used $2,421 in cash primarily for the yard expansion in Virginia, the purchase of rental barrier, manufacturing equipment, and a vehicle. Financing activities provided $2,334 in cash in 2020, resulting primarily from the PPP loan received in April as a result of the CARES Act.
Capital spending, including financed additions, decreased from $4,513 in 2019 to $2,627 in 2020. Capital expenditures in 2020 included spending for the yard expansion in Virgnia, rental barrier, manufacturing equipment, and a vehicle. While the Company anticipates capital spending for 2021 to be approximately $2,000, excluding acquisitions and plant expansions (which none are anticipated at this time), such plans may change if the Company is adversely effected by the coronavirus outbreak.
The Company's three mortgage notes payable are financed at fixed rates of interest. This leaves the Company almost impervious to fluctuating interest rates. Increases in such rates will only slightly affect the interest paid by the Company on an annual basis. Approximately 95% of the Company's debt obligations are financed at a fixed interest rate so that each 1% increase in the interest rates of the Company’s outstanding debt will reduce income by approximately $1 annually.
The Company’s cash flow from operations is affected by production schedules set by contractors, which generally provide for payment 45 to 75 days after the products are produced and with some architectural contracts, retainage may be held until the entire project is completed. This payment schedule could result in liquidity problems for the Company because it must bear the cost of production for its products before it receives payment. The Company's days sales outstanding (DSO) in 2020 and 2019 was 89 days for both periods. Although no assurances can be given, the Company believes that it's current cash resources, anticipated cash flow from operations, the availability under the line of credit, and the Payment Protection Plan loan received during the second quarter 2020 will be sufficient to finance the Company’s operations for at least the next 12 months.
The Company’s inventory at December 31, 2020 was $2,194 and at December 31, 2019 was $2,242, a decrease of $48. The annual inventory turns for 2020 and 2019 were 13.9 and 12.1, respectively. The inventory turns for 2020 have increased due to the Company having limited inventory, and all major contracts were recognized in revenue as produced. Finished goods inventory decreased for 2020 as compared to 2019 mainly staying consistent with prior years by limiting standard products produced and held at the end of 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company’s significant accounting policies are more fully described in its Summary of Accounting Policies to the Company’s consolidated financial statements. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted within the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions in certain circumstances that affect amounts reported in the accompanying financial statements and related notes. In preparing these consolidated financial statements, management has made its best estimates and judgments of certain amounts included in the consolidated financial statements, giving due consideration to materiality. The Company does not believe there is a great likelihood that materially different amounts would be reported related to the accounting policies described below, however, application of these accounting policies involves the exercise of judgment and the use of assumptions as to future uncertainties and as a result, actual results could differ from these estimates.
The Company evaluates the adequacy of its allowance for doubtful accounts at the end of each quarter. In performing this evaluation, the Company analyzes the payment history of its significant past due accounts, subsequent cash collections on these accounts, comparative accounts receivable aging statistics, and other customer specific considerations existing and known as of the time of the analysis. Based on this information, along with other related factors, the Company develops what it considers to be a reasonable estimate of the uncollectible amounts included in accounts receivable. This estimate involves significant judgment by the management of the Company. Actual uncollectible amounts may differ from the Company’s estimate.
The Company recognizes revenue on the sale of its standard precast concrete products at shipment date, including revenue derived from any projects to be completed under short-term contracts. Installation services for precast concrete products, leasing and royalties are recognized as revenue over time. Certain sales of Soundwall, Slenderwall, and other architectural concrete products are recognized over time because as the Company's performance creates or enhances customer controlled assets or creates or enhances an asset with no alternative use, and the Company has an enforceable right to receive compensation. Over time product contracts are estimated based on the number of units produced (output method) during the period multiplied by the unit rate stated in the contract. As the output method is driven by units produced, the Company recognizes revenues based on the value transferred to the customer relative to the remaining value to be transferred. The Company also matches the costs associated with the units produced. If a contract is projected to result in a loss, the entire contract loss is recognized in the period when the loss was first determined and the amount of the loss updated in subsequent reporting periods. Revenue recognition also includes an amount related to a contract asset or contract liability. If the recognized revenue is greater than the amount billed to the customer, a contract asset is recorded in accounts receivable - unbilled. Conversely, if the amount billed to the customer is greater than the recognized revenue, a contract liability is recorded in customer deposits on uncompleted contracts. Changes in the job performance, job conditions and final contract settlements are factors that influence management’s assessment of total contract value and therefore, profit and revenue recognition.
Seasonality
The Company services the construction industry primarily in areas of the United States where construction activity may be inhibited by adverse weather during the winter. As a result, the Company may experience reduced revenues from December through February and realize the substantial part of its revenues during the other months of the year. The Company may experience lower profits, or losses, during the winter months, and as such, must have sufficient working capital to fund its operations at a reduced level until the spring construction season. The failure to generate or obtain sufficient working capital during the winter may have a material adverse effect on the Company.
Inflation
Management believes that the Company's operations were not significantly affected by inflation in 2020 and 2019, particularly in the purchases of certain raw materials such as cement and steel. The Company believes that raw material pricing will slightly increase in 2021, although no assurance can be given regarding future pricing.
Backlog
As of March 8, 2021 the Company's sales backlog was approximately $19.6 million as compared to approximately $30.9 million at approximately the same time in 2020. It is estimated that most of the projects in the sales backlog will be produced within 12 months, but a few will be produced through the year 2022. The reduction in backlog was due to reduced bidding opportunities and delays in contract awards. The Company expects the backlog to increase with continued bidding on large infrastructure and SlenderWall/architectural projects, although no assurance can be given.
The risk exists that recessionary economic conditions and the coronavirus outbreak may adversely affect the Company more than it has experienced to date. To mitigate these economic and other risks, the Company has a broader product offering than most competitors and has historically been a leader in innovation and new product development in the industry. The Company is continuing this strategy through the development, marketing and sales efforts for its new products.
The Company continues to evaluate both production and administrative processes, and has streamlined many of these processes through lean activities. During 2020 and 2019, the Company, through lean activities, continued to see positive effects in production and office areas. The lean business philosophy is a long-term, customer focused approach to eliminating waste and providing value. It is management's intention to continue on the lean journey while implementing a lean culture throughout the Company to help reach our goals for 2021. The Company's lean efforts are aimed to increase quality to the customer, significantly reduce defects, while increasing production capacity and sales volume. In order to meet these goals, substantial improvements through lean tools and lean thinking are being implemented company wide.