ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
The following discussion and analysis should be read together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. See “Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a company providing technology solutions to improve the clinical effectiveness and efficiency of healthcare providers. Our mission is to develop, manufacture and market innovative proprietary products and services that assist our customers in evaluating and treating chronic diseases. In 2011, we began commercializing our first patented and U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, cleared product, which measured arterial blood flow in the extremities to aid in the diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease, or PAD. In March 2015, we received FDA 510(k) clearance for the next generation version of our product, QuantaFlo®, which we began commercializing in August 2015. In September 2020, we entered into an agreement with a private company to exclusively market and distribute a new product line in the United States, including Puerto Rico, and, in September and October 2020, in an effort to provide access to potentially complementary product offerings, we made investments in two private companies working in other product areas. We believe our current products and services, and any future products or services that we may offer, position us to provide valuable information to our customer base, which in turn permits them to better guide patient care.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, we had total revenues of $38.6 million and net income of $14.0 million compared to total revenues of $32.8 million and net income of $15.1 million in 2019. We had an income tax expense of $2.5 million in 2020, compared to an income tax benefit of $4.4 million in 2019, primarily due to the release of a tax valuation allowance in the third quarter of 2019. Our pre-tax net income was $16.5 million in 2020 compared to $10.7 million in 2019.
Recent Developments
Late in the first quarter and into the second quarter of 2020, we experienced decreased test volumes due to COVID-19 related “social distancing” and other executive orders mandating “shelter-in-place” or similar restrictions, which limited patient visits by our customers. As such restrictions have been lifted around the country and non-emergency medical services resumed in late 2020, our business has returned to and even exceeded pre-COVID-19 levels. In the third and fourth quarters of 2020, we experienced even higher test volumes as our customers accelerated usage due to a backlog of untested patients. However, as we look forward into 2021, there is uncertainty that the recent roll-back in restrictions will be maintained. New, additional or different restrictions could be imposed, which could impact the usage of our product by our customers. Other customers who have fixed-fee licenses could decide to cancel their licenses if they are not able to use our device as frequently as they had anticipated in light of such restrictions.
In September 2020, we entered into an agreement with a private company to exclusively market and distribute a new product line in the United States, including Puerto Rico, for which we are currently developing a marketing plan. Under this distribution agreement, we agreed to purchase $1.2 million of product inventory. We also agreed to make royalty payments ranging from 0% to 10% of net sales depending on the average net sales price of the distributed products. Unless early terminated in accordance with its terms, the exclusive distribution agreement will remain in full force and effect until December 31, 2024, and thereafter there is an option for this agreement to be automatically renewed for additional 4-year terms. During September 2020, we prepaid for $900,000 of product inventory, of which we have received $72,000 as of December 31, 2020.
In September 2020, we acquired a $500,000 promissory note from a second private company in a new product area. We funded $400,000 of the note, and the remaining $100,000 was retained for expense reimbursement. Following this, in October 2020, we purchased 211,928 shares of common stock of such private company from certain sellers in exchange for 40,922 shares of our common stock. We have the right to, in various circumstances, sell any or all of these shares of common stock back to the sellers in exchange for the shares of our common stock originally issued to the sellers. These rights are tied to the private company completing a bona fide equity financing, the share price in such financing, the timing of delivery of certain documents to us or, at our sole option, at any time between March 31, 2021 and October 8, 2021. In December 2020, we agreed to the conversion of the $500,000 promissory note, together with all accrued interest thereon, into shares of the private company’s preferred stock as repayment in full of such promissory note.
In October 2020, we acquired a convertible note in a third private company in a new product area for a purchase price of $58,000, which note converted into shares of preferred stock of such private company concurrent with our purchase of additional shares of preferred stock of such private company for $250,000. Subsequently, we acquired a $1.5 million convertible promissory note and warrants to purchase shares of common stock of this third privately-held company. We funded $1,400,000 of the note, and the remaining $100,000 was retained for expense reimbursement. In November 2020, the $1.5 million convertible promissory note, together with all accrued interest thereon, converted pursuant to its terms into shares of the private company’s preferred stock as repayment in full of such convertible promissory note. In December 2020, we transferred and sold these shares of preferred stock, along with the warrants to purchase common stock we had acquired from such company in October 2020, to one of our significant stockholders, for a cash purchase price of $1.9 million. Following this transfer, we continue to hold the shares of preferred stock we acquired from this company in October 2020.
We invested in these three private companies as they are developing products that may allow us to expand our current product offering beyond QuantaFlo® for PAD, in addition to our internal research and development efforts. Their products deal with better chronic disease management and may be used by primary care practitioners, are FDA-cleared or equivalent, produced positive clinical data and two of the three new products seek to improve aspects or sequelae of the metabolic syndrome.
Sources of Revenues and Expenses
Revenues
We generate revenues primarily from the rental or license of our vascular testing product. We recognize revenues from the licensing of our vascular testing product pursuant to agreements that normally automatically renew each month with revenues recognized on a daily convention basis. Our arrangements with customers for our vascular testing product are normally on a month-to-month basis with fees billed at the rates established in our customer agreements, which are either fixed fees, or variable fees based on usage. We also recognize revenue for hardware and supplies sales, as well as sales of products under our exclusive marketing and distribution agreement, as of the date of shipment.
Cost of revenues
Our cost of revenues for our vascular testing product consists primarily of five components: the depreciation expense of our vascular testing product for lease; the write-off of the residual value of our vascular testing products retired from active leasing; manufacturing oversight personnel costs; the cost of hardware and supplies sold; and other miscellaneous items, such as freight, that are not directly related to product production. Each vascular testing product unit has a depreciation schedule based on the cost of the unit. The cost of each unit is depreciated on a straight-line basis over 36 months. Each unit has its own cost of production, which varies from time to time. We believe that the cost of each unit is a function of manufacturing efficiencies, supply costs and fixed overhead expense as affected by volume of units produced, which change from time to time. When cost of production is lower, the new units have a lower monthly depreciation and decrease the average depreciation per unit per month, which means our cost of revenues is lower. Similarly, if cost of production is higher, the new units will have a higher monthly depreciation and increase the average depreciation per unit per month, which means our cost of revenues is higher. We believe growth in the number of monthly depreciation charges is predominately due to our sales and marketing efforts, which add new customers to an established customer base. The retirement of units from active leasing is primarily a function of the aggregate number of vascular testing units rented and the occurrence from time to time of system upgrades. The cost of hardware or supplies sold are the cost of production for the item sold. The other costs of revenue vary primarily as a function of the aggregate number of vascular testing units rented and changes in operations such as manufacturing, delivery or maintenance.
Engineering and product development expense
Our engineering and product development expense consists of costs associated with the design, development, testing and enhancement of our vascular testing product and other products in development. We also include salaries and related employee benefits, research-related overhead expenses and fees paid to external service providers in our engineering and product development expense.
Sales and marketing expense
Our sales and marketing expense consists primarily of sales commissions and support costs, salaries and related employee benefits, travel, education, trade show and marketing costs.
General and administrative expense
Our general and administrative expense consists primarily of salaries and related employee benefits, professional service fees, associated travel costs and depreciation and amortization expense.
Total other expense
Our total other income expense primarily reflects other taxes and fees as well as interest income and expense.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures in the financial statements. Critical accounting policies are those accounting policies that may be material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change, and that have a material impact on financial condition or operating performance. While we base our estimates and judgments on our experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Our most critical accounting estimates include:
● the allowance for doubtful accounts, which impacts revenue;
● the valuation of inventory, which impacts profit margins;
● the valuation and recognition of share-based compensation, which impacts profit margin and operating expenses;
● the recognition and measurement of current and deferred income taxes (including the measurement of uncertain tax positions), which impact our provision for taxes; and
● the valuation and recognition of investments, which impacts our investment portfolio balance when we assess fair value and interest and other income, net, when we record impairments.
For additional information relating to these and other accounting policies, see Note 2 to our audited financial statements, appearing elsewhere in this this annual report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from the licensing of our vascular testing product pursuant to agreements that automatically renew each month with revenue recognized on a daily convention basis. Our arrangements with customers for our vascular testing product are normally on a month-to-month basis with fees billed at the rates established in the customer agreement, which are either fixed fees or variable fees based on usage. We also recognize revenue for hardware and supplies sales as of the date of shipment. Our sale arrangements contain multiple products and services, including License fee for vascular testing product, system accessories, and service. Other than service, we generally deliver all of the products upfront. Each of these products and services is a distinct performance obligation. System accessories and service are also sold on a standalone basis.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We make estimates of the collectability of accounts receivable, especially analyzing the aging and nature of accounts receivable and historical bad debts, customer concentrations, customer credit-worthiness, current economic trends, and changes in customer payment terms when evaluating the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts. Credit evaluations are undertaken for all major sales transactions before shipment is authorized. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate aged items in the accounts receivable aging report and provide an allowance in an amount that we deem adequate for doubtful accounts. If management were to make different judgments or utilize different estimates, material differences in the amount of our reported operating expenses could result.
Inventory Valuation
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value on a first-in, first-out basis. The cost basis of our inventory is reduced for any products that are considered excessive or obsolete based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions. If actual future demand or market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional inventory write-downs may be required, which could have a material adverse effect on the results of our operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation expense in an amount equal to the estimated grant-date fair value of each option grant, or stock award over the estimated period of service and vesting. Although we calculate the fair value under the Black Scholes option pricing model, which is a standard option pricing model, this model still requires the use of numerous assumptions, including, among others, the expected life (turnover), volatility of the underlying equity security, a risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. The model and assumptions also attempt to account for changing employee behavior as the stock price changes and capture the observed pattern of increasing rates of exercise as the stock price increases. The use of different values by management in connection with these assumptions in the Black Scholes option pricing model could produce substantially different results.
Accounting for Income Taxes
Deferred income taxes result primarily from temporary differences between financial and tax reporting. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement basis and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates. Future tax benefits are subject to a valuation allowance when management is unable to conclude that our deferred tax assets will more-likely-than-not be realized from the results of operations. Our estimate for the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets requires management to make significant estimates and judgments about projected future operating results. If actual results differ from these projections or if management’s expectations of future results change, it may be necessary to adjust the valuation allowance.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations. We recognize liabilities for uncertain tax positions based on a two-step process. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. If we determine that a tax position will more likely than not be sustained on audit, then the second step requires us to estimate and measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. It is inherently difficult and subjective to estimate such amounts, as we have to determine the probability of various possible outcomes. We re-evaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis. This evaluation is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, effective settlement of audit issues, and new audit activity. Such a change in recognition or measurement would result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the tax provision.
Investment Valuation
We have investments in equity securities in privately held companies without readily determinable fair values, which are generally recorded at cost, plus or minus subsequent observable price changes in orderly transactions for identical or similar investments, less impairments. As part of our assessment for impairment indicators, we consider significant deterioration in the earnings performance and overall business prospects of the investee as well as significant adverse changes in the external environment these investments operate. If our qualitative assessment indicates the investments are impaired, the fair value of these equity securities would be estimated, which would involve a significant degree of judgement and subjectivity.
No impairment charges were recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Factors Affecting Future Results
We have not identified any factors that have a recurring effect that are necessary to understand period to period comparisons as appropriate, nor any one-time events that have an effect on the financials.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
We had revenues of $38.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $32.8 million in 2019. Our revenues are primarily from fees charged to customers for use of our vascular testing products and from sale of accessories used with these products. We recognized revenues of $37.3 million from fees for our vascular testing products in 2020, consisting of $25.7 million from fixed-fee licenses and $11.6 million from variable-fee licenses, compared to $31.8 million in 2019, consisting of $22.9 million from fixed-fee licenses and $8.9 million from variable-fee licenses. The remainder was from other equipment/supply sales of accessories, which were $1.3 million in 2020 as compared to $927,000 in 2019.
Revenues from fees for vascular testing products are recognized monthly for each unit installed with a customer, usually billed as a fixed monthly fee or as a variable monthly fee dependent on usage. The primary reason for the increase in revenues was growth in the number of installed units from both new customers and established customers, which we believe is the result of our sales and marketing efforts.
Operating Expenses
We had total operating expenses of $22.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $22.1 million in 2019. The primary reason for this change was overall growth in our business, increased compensation of the sales team and increased headcount of field sales and technical support personnel to service the expanding number of customers. As a percentage of revenues, operating expenses decreased to 59% in 2020, as compared to 67% in 2019. The changes in the various components of our operating expenses are described below.
Cost of Revenues
We had cost of revenues of $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.7 million for 2019. The primary reason for this change was lower depreciation per unit per month as a greater percentage of installations were software and sensor only rather than laptop, software and sensor, as well as lower residual value for retired units. These changes were partially offset by increased costs due to increased sales volume of, placement of and technical support for installations in the field. As a percentage of revenues, cost of revenues decreased to 9% in 2020, as compared to 11% in 2019.
Engineering and Product Development Expense
We had engineering and product development expense of $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.5 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to personnel, clinical studies and other costs associated with our product development and customization efforts. As a percentage of revenues, engineering and product development expense was unchanged at 8% in both 2020 and 2019.
Sales and Marketing Expense
We had sales and marketing expense of $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $9.0 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to higher sales compensation and personnel expense partially offset by lower travel expenses compared to the prior year period due to COVID-19. As a percentage of revenues, sales and marketing expense decreased to 26% in 2020, as compared to 27% in 2019.
General and Administrative Expense
We had general and administrative expense of $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $7.0 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due lower professional fees, travel, and stock compensation expense partially offset by higher expenses for personnel, insurance, and our board of directors. As a percentage of revenues, general and administrative expense was 17% in 2020, as compared to 21% in 2019.
Other Income and Expense
We had other income of $525,000 for 2020, compared to $7,000 in other expense in 2019. The increase was primarily due to interest income associated with of notes receivable and the sale of equity of an outside company.
Provision (Benefit) for Taxes
In 2020, we recorded an income tax expense of $2.5 million, compared to a tax benefit of $4.4 million in 2019. The increase in income tax expense was primarily due to an income tax benefit recognized in 2019 relating to the release of the entire valuation allowance against deferred tax assets. The valuation allowance was released in the third quarter of 2019 due to our recent history of eight straight quarters of positive income before income taxes, resulting in an income tax benefit. Due to full release of the valuation allowance in the third quarter of 2019, income in future periods may also result in income tax expense. As of December 31, 2020, we had federal NOL carryforwards of $310,000.
Net Income
For the foregoing reasons, we had a net income of $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a net income of $15.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had cash of $22.1 million at December 31, 2020, compared to cash of $7.7 million at December 31, 2019, and total current liabilities of $4.5 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $5.2 million at December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital of approximately $21.7 million.
Our cash is held in a variety of non-interest bearing bank accounts and interest-bearing instruments subject to investment guidelines allowing for holdings in U.S. government and agency securities, corporate securities, taxable municipal bonds, commercial paper and money market accounts. In addition, we may also choose to invest some of our cash resources in other entities that may have complementary technologies or product offerings.
Operating Activities
We generated $15.4 million of net cash from operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $12.7 million of net cash from operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. The improvement was primarily due to changes in net income, as well as both non-cash adjustments and operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash from operating activities were $2.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to negative non-cash charges of $3.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in deferred tax expense due to changes in accounting for taxes in 2019, partially offset by a decrease in non-cash investment income due to retirement of interest on notes and investments. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $1.4 million of net cash in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to providing $894,000 of net cash in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets due to overall growth in our business, lower accrued expenses due to the payment of a majority of annual bonuses earlier than usual and lower deferred revenue due to an increased proportion of monthly licenses instead of annual licenses, partially offset by an increase in trade accounts receivable due to customers choosing to pay earlier than usual.
Investing Activities
We used $1.3 million of net cash in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.7 million of net cash in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in purchase of assets for lease as a result of decreased manufacturing activity due to the COVID-19 pandemic and a decrease in purchase of property and equipment, partially offset by an increase in long-term investments due to our investments in two private companies.
Financing Activities
We generated $230,000 of net cash from financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $6.6 million of net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to large repurchases of warrants in 2019, partially offset by an increase in proceeds from exercise of stock options due to increased exercise activity and a higher stock price.
Description of Indebtedness
We do not currently have any outstanding material indebtedness.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of each of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Commitments and Contingencies
As of each of December 31, 2020 and 2019, other than employment/consulting agreements with our executive officers and our Santa Clara lease, and our commitment to purchase $1.2 million of inventory under our exclusive distribution agreement, of which we prepaid $900,000 and have received $72,000 of inventory as of December 31, 2020, we had no material commitments other than the liabilities reflected in our financial statements.