Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Report. This Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.” Readers are also urged to carefully review and consider these and other disclosures made by us which attempt to advise interested parties of the factors which affect our business.
Introduction and Overview
Providing software solutions that simplify and enhance the mobile experience to some of the leading wireless and cable service providers around the globe is a mission that Smith Micro pursues with passion. From enabling the family digital lifestyle to providing powerful voice messaging capabilities, we strive to enrich today’s connected lifestyles while creating new opportunities to engage consumers via smartphones and consumer IoT devices. The Smith Micro portfolio includes a wide range of products for creating, sharing and monetizing rich content, such as visual voice messaging, retail content display optimization and performance analytics on any product set.
During 2020, we experienced an increase in our wireless revenues primarily due to entering 2020 with a higher number of subscribers than the prior year. However, as the year progressed, the continued growth of SafePath subscriber numbers was negatively impacted by the closure of customer retail stores due to the COVID-19 pandemic combined with the T-Mobile / Sprint merger. CommSuite revenues were relatively stable during 2020. The Company received additional cash proceeds of $4.2 million during 2020 from the exercise of warrants previously issued as part of 2018 private placements of common stock undertaken by the Company.
Results of Operations
Revenues generated from our sales to T-Mobile (including Sprint, prior to its merger with T-Mobile) and its affiliates accounted for 81% and 84% of the Company’s total revenues and 91% and 92% of accounts receivable for fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table sets forth certain consolidated statement operations data as a percentage of total revenues for the periods indicated:
Revenues and Expense Components
The following is a description of the primary components of our revenues and expenses:
Revenues. Revenues are net of sales returns and allowances. Our operations are organized into one business segment: Wireless, which includes all of our existing core products, including SafePath, CommSuite, and ViewSpot family of products. We also generate an immaterial amount of revenue from a few non-core Graphics products.
Cost of revenues. Cost of revenues consists of direct product and assembly, maintenance, data center, royalties, and technical support expenses.
Selling and marketing. Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, advertising costs, sales commissions, trade show expenses, and the amortization of certain intangible assets. These expenses vary significantly from quarter to quarter based on the timing of trade shows and product introductions.
Research and development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel and equipment costs required to conduct our software development efforts. It also includes the amortization of certain intangible assets.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, professional services and fees paid for external service providers, space and occupancy costs, and legal and other public company costs.
Gain on sale of software products. Consists of gain resulting from the sale of the Poser® 3D and Moho and Motion Artist animation software.
Interest income (expense), net. Interest income is primarily related to interest earned on cash equivalents.
Other income (expense), net. Other income (expense) is primarily related to fixed asset disposals and other non-operating gains or losses.
Provision for income tax expense (benefit). The Company accounts for income taxes as required by Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic No. 740, Income Taxes. This statement requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future consequences of events that have been recognized in the Company’s financial statements or tax returns. Measurement of the deferred items is based on enacted tax laws. In the event the future consequences of differences between financial reporting bases and tax bases of the Company’s assets and liabilities result in a deferred tax asset, we are required to evaluate the probability of being able to realize the future benefits indicated by such asset. The deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if, based upon all available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Establishing, reducing or increasing a valuation allowance in an accounting period generally results in an increase or decrease in tax expense in the statement of operations. We must make significant judgments to determine the provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, unrecognized tax benefits, and any valuation allowance to be recorded against deferred tax assets.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues. Revenues of $51.3 million in 2020 increased $8.0 million, or 18%, from $43.3 million in 2019. Wireless revenues of $50.7 million increased $8.1 million, or 19%, from $42.6 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to entering 2020 with a higher number of SafePath subscribers than the prior year and additional revenues resulting from the Circle acquisition. The growth in wireless revenues from these products was slightly offset by a reduced strategic focus on the NetWise® products. Sales from our discontinued or non-core products decreased $0.1 million, or 15%, from $0.7 million in 2019, due to lower demand as a result of reduced strategic focus and marketing efforts for these products.
Cost of revenues. Cost of revenues of $5.2 million in 2020 increased $1.3 million, or 32%, from $3.9 million in 2019. This increase was primarily due to hosting costs associated with the increase in SafePath revenues and additional costs associated with the new Circle operator business platform acquired in 2020.
Gross profit. Gross profit of $46.1 million, or 90% of revenues in 2020, increased $6.7 million, or 17%, from $39.4 million, or 91% of revenues in 2019. This increase in gross profit was due to higher revenues coupled with stable variable costs during the period.
Selling and marketing. Selling and marketing expenses of $10.7 million in 2020 increased $3.2 million, or 42%, from $7.5 million in 2019. This increase was primarily due to additional headcount-related expenses and increased intangibles amortization related to the Circle acquisition (see Note 2). The amortization of intangible assets within sales and marketing expenses was $1.6 million and $0.4 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Research and development. Research and development expenses of $19.2 million in 2020 increased $7.4 million, or 63%, from $11.7 million in 2019. This increase was primarily due to additional headcount related expenses and external contract development costs to support SafePath development, as well as increased intangibles amortization related to the Circle acquisition. The amortization of intangible assets within research and development expenses was $1.3 million and $0.6 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses of $12.8 million in 2020 increased $2.9 million, or 29%, from $9.9 million in 2019. This increase was primarily due to an increase in non-cash stock compensation, variable compensation expense, and fees associated with the Circle acquisition.
Restructuring expenses. Restructuring expense of $19 thousand in 2020 and $194 thousand in 2019 related to restructuring activities initiated during those years.
Gain on sale of software products. The gain on sale of software products of $0.7 million in 2020 resulted from the sale of the Company’s Moho® and Motion Artist® animation software in December 2020. The gain on sale of software product of $0.5 million in 2019 resulted from the sale of the Company’s Poser 3D animation software in June 2019.
Interest expense, net. Interest income was $96 thousand and $228 thousand in 2020 and 2019, respectively, resulting from interest earned on cash equivalents during the year.
Provision for income tax expense. Because of our cumulative loss position, the current provision for income tax expense consists of state income tax minimums, foreign tax withholdings, and foreign income taxes. After consideration of the Company’s cumulative loss position as of December 31, 2020, the Company retained a valuation allowance related to its U.S.-based deferred tax assets of $49.4 million at December 31, 2020. During fiscal year 2020, the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets decreased by $1.0 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, we had $25.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and $30.9 million of working capital.
Operating Activities
In 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $7.9 million, primarily due to net income of $4.2 million and add-backs of non-cash expenses totaling $7.2 million, offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $1.3 million and a decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $1.9 million.
In 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $10.0 million, primarily due to net income of $10.7 million.
Investing Activities
In 2020, cash used in investing activities was $14.7 million, due to $13.5 million in payments related to the Circle acquisition in February 2020, $1.3 million in capital expenditures, and a $225 thousand equity investment, offset by proceeds of $367 thousand from the sale of the Moho and Motion Artist animation software.
In 2019, cash used in investing activities was $5.3 million, due to $4.0 million in payments related to the Smart Retail acquisition in January 2019 and $1.7 million in capital expenditures, offset by proceeds of $370 thousand from the sale of the Poser 3D animation software.
Financing Activities
In 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $4.2 million, primarily due to proceeds from the exercise of common stock warrants during the year.
In 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $11.4 million, primarily due to $11.5 million in proceeds from the exercise of common stock warrants during the second half of the year. This was offset by $0.1 million in preferred stock dividend payments during the year.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
During our normal course of business, we have made certain indemnities, commitments, and guarantees under which we may be required to make payments in relation to certain transactions. These include: intellectual property indemnities to our customers and licensees in connection with the use, sale and/or license of our products; indemnities to various lessors in connection with facility leases for certain claims arising from such facility or lease; indemnities to vendors and service providers pertaining to claims based on the negligence or willful misconduct; indemnities involving the accuracy of representations and warranties in certain contracts; and indemnities to directors and officers of the Company to the maximum extent permitted under the laws of the State of Delaware. We may also issue a guarantee in the form of a standby letter of credit as security for contingent liabilities under certain customer contracts. The duration of these indemnities, commitments and guarantees varies, and in certain cases, may be indefinite. The majority of these indemnities, commitments and guarantees may not provide for any limitation of the maximum potential for future payments we could be obligated to make. We have not recorded any liability for these indemnities, commitments and guarantees in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
Real Property Leases
Our corporate headquarters is located in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where we currently lease approximately 55,600 square feet of space under a lease that expires on April 30, 2026. We sublease 19,965 square feet of our leased space in Pittsburgh under an agreement which commenced on February 1, 2015 and continues through December 31, 2021. We lease and occupy approximately 8,513 square feet of space in Aliso Viejo, California under a lease that expires on October 31, 2024. Internationally, we lease approximately 8,500 square feet in Belgrade, Serbia under a lease that expires December 31, 2023, we lease approximately 1500 square feet in Stockholm, Sweden under a lease that expires on September 30, 2023, and we lease approximately 3,200 square feet in Braga, Portugal under a lease that expires July 31, 2021.
We lease an additional 19,100 square feet in Aliso Viejo, California under a lease that expires January 31, 2022. In August 2014, we signed an addendum to sublease all of this space commencing on September 15, 2014 for a three-year period, with two renewal options. In October 2017, the sublease agreement was renewed through January 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of results of operations, financial condition, and liquidity are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may materially differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On an on-going basis, we review our estimates to ensure that they appropriately reflect changes in our business or new information as it becomes available.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Business Combinations
The Company applies the provisions of FASB ASC Topic No. 805, Business Combinations, in the accounting for its acquisitions, which requires recognition of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at their acquisition date fair values, separately from goodwill. Goodwill as of the acquisition date is measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. While the Company uses its best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date as well as contingent consideration, where applicable, its estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period that exists up to twelve months from the acquisition date, the Company may record adjustments to the tangible and specifically identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed with a corresponding adjustment to goodwill in the reporting period in which the adjusted amounts are determined. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, the impact of any subsequent adjustments is included in the consolidated statements of operations.
Costs to exit or restructure certain activities of an acquired company or the Company’s internal operations are accounted for as a one-time termination and exit cost pursuant to FASB ASC Topic No. 420, Exit or Disposal Cost Obligations, and are accounted for separately from the business combination. A liability for costs associated with an exit or disposal activity is recognized and measured at its fair value in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations in the period in which the liability is incurred.
Uncertain income tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances that are acquired in connection with a business combination are initially estimated as of the acquisition date. The Company reevaluates these items quarterly based upon facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date, with any adjustments to the preliminary estimates being recorded to goodwill if such adjustments occur within the 12-month measurement period. Subsequent to the end of the measurement period or the Company’s final determination of the value of the tax allowance or contingency, whichever comes first, changes to these uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances will affect the provision for income taxes in the consolidated statement of operations, and could have a material impact on results of operations and financial position.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company measures and discloses fair value measurements as required by FASB ASC Topic No. 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures.
Fair value is an exit price, representing the amount that would be received upon the sale of an asset or the amount that would be paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. As such, fair value is a market-based measurement that is determined based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or a liability. As a basis for considering such assumptions, the FASB establishes a three-tier value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in the valuation methodologies in measuring fair value:
•
Level 1 - Observable inputs that reflect quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
•
Level 2 - Include other inputs that are directly or indirectly observable in the marketplace.
•
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs which are supported by little or no market activity.
The fair value hierarchy also requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value.
As required by FASB ASC Topic No. 820, we measure our cash equivalents and short-term investments at fair value. Our cash equivalents and short-term investments are classified within Level 1 by using quoted market prices utilizing market observable inputs.
As required by FASB ASC Topic No. 825, Financial Instruments, an entity can choose to measure at fair value many financial instruments and certain other items that are not currently required to be measured at fair value. Subsequent
changes in fair value for designated items are required to be reported in earnings in the current period. This Topic also establishes presentation and disclosure requirements for similar types of assets and liabilities measured at fair value.
As required by FASB ASC Topic No. 350, for goodwill and other intangibles impairment analysis, we utilize fair value measurements which are categorized within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy.
Impairment or Disposal of Long Lived Assets
Long-lived assets to be held are reviewed for events or changes in circumstances which indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. They are tested for recoverability using undiscounted cash flows to determine whether or not impairment to such value has occurred as required by FASB ASC Topic No. 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment.
Goodwill
In accordance with FASB ASC Topic No. 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, we review the recoverability of the carrying value of goodwill at least annually or whenever events or circumstances indicate a potential impairment. The Company’s annual impairment testing date is December 31. Recoverability of goodwill is determined by comparing the fair value of the Company’s reporting units to the carrying value of the underlying net assets in the reporting units. If the fair value of a reporting unit is determined to be less than the carrying value of its net assets, goodwill is deemed impaired and an impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying value of goodwill exceeds the difference between the fair value of the reporting unit and the fair value of its other assets and liabilities.
Intangible Assets and Amortization
Amortization expense related to other intangibles acquired in acquisitions is calculated on a straight line basis over one to ten years. Intangible assets are tested for impairment if events or circumstances occur indicating that the respective asset might be impaired.
Revenue Recognition
The Company adopted FASB ASC Topic No. 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, as of January 1, 2018, and recognizes the sale of goods and services based on the five-step analysis of transactions as provided in Topic 606, which requires an entity to recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for such goods and services.
In our Wireless segment, we transfer software licenses to our customers on a royalty free, non-exclusive, non-transferrable, limited use basis during the term of the agreement. In some instances, we perform customization services to ensure the software operates within our customer’s operating platforms as well as the operating platforms of the mobile devices used by their end customers, before transferring the license. Revenue related to these services is recognized at a point in time upon acceptance of the software license by the customer. We also earn usage based revenue on our platforms. Usage based revenue is generated based on active licenses used by our customer’s end customers, the provision of hosting services, revenue share based on media placements on our platform, and use of our cloud based services. We recognize our usage-based revenue when we have completed our performance obligation and have the right to invoice the customer. This revenue is generally recognized monthly or quarterly. We ratably recognize such revenue over the contract period when customers pay in advance of our service delivery.
On February 12, 2020, we acquired certain assets from Circle (as described in Note 2 below), including a source code license to Circle’s parental control software solution and two customer contracts. Pursuant to these contracts, the customer parties thereto license the parental control software solution for distribution to their respective subscribers in designated markets. In each case, the contracts allow the customer to take possession of the software solution and to host it on their platform or with an independent third party hosting service provider without significant cost. We also provide significant services that are required by the customer to ensure they have the utility of the license. As the license to the software solution and the services we provide are highly interrelated, we have concluded that the license
and our services are a single performance obligation. The license fee is earned and recognized on a pro-rata basis over the contract term based on our customer’s continued use of the license and our services.
We also provide consulting services to develop customer-specified functionality that are generally not on our software development roadmap. We recognize revenue from our consulting services upon delivery and acceptance by the customer of our software enhancements and upgrades. For certain Wireless segment customers we provide maintenance and technology support services for which the customer either pays upfront or as we provide the services. When the customer pays upfront, we record the payments as contract liabilities and recognize revenue ratably over the contract period as this is our stand ready performance obligation that is satisfied ratably over the maintenance and technology services period.
We receive upfront payments from customers from services to be provided under our ViewSpot contracts. The advance receipts are deferred and subsequently recognized ratably over the contract period. We also provide consulting services to configure ad hoc targeted promotional content for our customers upon request. These requests are driven by our customers’ marketing initiatives and tend to be short term “bursts” of activity. We recognize these revenues upon delivery of the configured promotional content to the cloud platform.
For our Graphics products where we sell off-the-shelf software products with no customization or post sale technology support services, we recognize revenue at the time we transfer control of the product to the customer. This occurs upon shipment of the product or when the customer downloads the software from our website or website of our resellers. We offer a 30 day return option to our customers; a return reserve is established at the time revenue is recorded and the reserve is monitored and adjusted based on actual experience. Historically, returns have been insignificant.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for all stock-based payment awards made to employees and directors based on their fair values and recognizes such awards as compensation expense over the vesting period using the straight-line method over the requisite service period for each award as required by FASB ASC Topic No. 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), to increase transparency and comparability among organizations by recognizing all lease transactions (with terms in excess of 12 months) on the balance sheet as a lease liability and a right-of-use asset (as defined). The Company adopted the FASB ASC Topic No. 842, Leases, and related amendments, as of January 1, 2019, utilizing the modified retrospective approach through a cumulative-effect adjustment to equity. Management elected the package of practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance within the new standard which allowed for the carry forward of the historical lease classification. Adoption of the new standard resulted in the recording of additional net lease assets and lease liabilities of approximately $3.1 million as of January 1, 2019, and an adjustment to retained earnings of $0.1 million. The standard did not materially impact the consolidated net income or earnings per share and had no impact on cash flows. See Note 12 for further details.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326) - Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which replaces the “incurred loss” credit losses framework with a new accounting standard that requires management’s measurement of the allowance for credit losses to be based on a broader range of reasonable and supportable information for lifetime credit loss estimates. The adoption of this standard is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.