Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and operating results should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See also “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking and Cautionary Statements” at the beginning of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a leading global supplier of high-performance analog and mixed-signal semiconductors and advanced algorithms and were incorporated in Delaware in 1960. We design, develop, manufacture, and market a broad range of products that are sold principally into applications within the infrastructure, high-end consumer and industrial end markets. Infrastructure end market includes data centers, PON, base stations, optical networks, servers, carrier networks, switches and routers, cable modems, wireless LAN and other communication infrastructure equipment. High-end consumer end market includes smartphones, tablets, wearables, desktops, notebooks, and other handheld products, wireless charging, set-top boxes, digital televisions, monitors and displays, digital video recorders and other consumer equipment. Industrial end market includes IoT, analog and digital video broadcast equipment, video-over-IP solutions, automated meter reading, smart grid, wireless charging, military and aerospace, medical, security systems, automotive, industrial and home automation and other industrial equipment. Our end customers are primarily OEMs that produce and sell electronics.
We report results on the basis of 52 and 53 week periods and our fiscal year ends on the last Sunday in January. The fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 consisted of 53 weeks and the fiscal years ended January 26, 2020 and January 27, 2019, each consisted of 52 weeks. Therefore, while not specifically quantifiable, the extra week of business activity in fiscal year 2021 contributed to slightly higher revenue and expenses. We operate and account for our results in one reportable segment. See Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for segment information.
Despite the challenges of the pandemic, we remained focused on furthering our role as a leading provider of disruptive platforms that enable our customers to deliver solutions to create a smarter planet. We continued to invest in secular trends that enable a smarter, more sustainable planet; enable higher bandwidth; and enable greater mobility. As a result, we expect these markets and our associated products’ sales to grow rapidly over the next several years. The increasing adoption of our LoRa® technology for low power wide-area networks (“LPWAN”) is providing connectivity solutions that enable Internet of Things (“IoT”) networks to make a smarter, more connected planet. Additionally, our portfolio of optical connectivity solutions continue to address the demand for greater bandwidth and higher performance, while using less power by our global hyper-scale data center customers. Additionally, the unexpected pivot to online learning and work from home (“WFH”) during the pandemic exposed the fragile nature of many global networks that struggled under the spike in demand. This has driven infrastructure suppliers around the world to accelerate their investments in high speed connectivity using 5G wireless and PON technology where we are an industry leader. Finally, the increasing demand for smaller, lower-powered higher performance mobile platforms with more enjoyable organic light-emitting diode (“OLED”) displays has benefited our protection and proximity sensing solutions that protect these mobile devices and their users from dangerous radio frequency (“RF”) signals.
During the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, we also maintained our strategy of smaller, targeted investments focused mainly on minority positions in support of the developing LoRa ecosystem and the many new IoT solutions we are introducing. In addition to these strategic investments, we took further actions to help ensure the supply of products from our vendors and suppliers. After the initial onset of the pandemic, the semiconductor industry experienced a significant increase in demand that led to tighter capacity. We believe our investments in fiscal year 2021 position us well to support our expectations of future growth.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly affected health and economic conditions throughout the U.S. and the rest of the world including Asia, where a significant percentage of our customers, suppliers, third party foundries and subcontractors are located. As a result of the pandemic, certain of our facilities and the third-party foundries and assembly and test contractors which we outsource our manufacturing functions to, have had to periodically reduce or suspend operations. The disruption experienced during such closures has resulted in reduced production of our products, delays for delivery of our products to our customers, and reduced ability to receive supplies, which have had and may continue to have an adverse effect on our results. For example, in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, certain shipments of our products were delayed due to COVID-19 related shutdowns of our plant in Reynosa, Mexico, as well as certain subcontractors in Malaysia. Our customers have also experienced and may continue to or again experience, reductions or closures of their manufacturing facilities or inability to obtain other components, either of which could negatively impact demand for our products, which are incorporated into our customers' devices and solutions. We cannot assure you that such facilities will not have to reduce or suspend operations again, and such reductions or closures could extend for a longer term than the prior shutdown of such facilities, thereby causing a disruption to the manufacturing and shipping of our products.
Because a significant majority of our net sales is through authorized distributors, the financial health of our distributors is critical to our success. Our authorized distributors have experienced disruptions to their operations, including temporary
reductions or closures during which they have diminished ability or are unable to sell our products. The ability of our distributors to purchase our products may be materially impacted depending on the length and severity of the pandemic, including the impact on general economic conditions. Further, if credit conditions worsen in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, our customers may ask for extension of payment terms and are more likely to default, thereby increasing risk of receivables being uncollectible.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we continue to evaluate the impact on long-lived assets, such as goodwill and intangible assets for possible impairment. We did not record a goodwill impairment charge during fiscal year 2021. We recorded $6.8 million of investment impairments and credit loss reserves during fiscal year 2021, some of which were in part due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our investees.
We expect the COVID-19 pandemic to persist into fiscal year 2022, which could potentially adversely impact our results of operations. We believe, however, that our strong liquidity position will allow us to withstand some of the uncertainties in the current environment. As of January 31, 2021, we had $268.9 million of cash and cash equivalents and $419.0 million of undrawn capacity on our credit facility. In addition, we operate a predominantly fabless business model, resulting in low capital spending requirements, which enhances our ability to preserve our overall liquidity. We also have continued strong backlog and bookings, which we believe will help us to navigate through these uncertain times.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Most of our sales to customers are made on the basis of individual customer purchase orders. Many customers include cancellation provisions in their purchase orders. Trends within the industry toward shorter lead-times and "just-in-time" deliveries have resulted in our reduced ability to predict future shipments. As a result, we rely on orders received and shipped within the same quarter for a significant portion of our sales. Sales made directly to customers during fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 were approximately 18%, 28% and 32% of net sales, respectively. The remaining 82%, 72% and 68% of net sales, respectively, were made through independent distributors. The decline in direct sales is due to customers electing to leverage the value of distribution to better manage their supply chain.
Our business relies on foreign-based entities. Many of our third-party subcontractors and suppliers, including third-party foundries that supply silicon wafers, are located in foreign countries including Taiwan, China and Israel. Foreign sales for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 constituted approximately 90%, 91% and 89%, respectively, of our net sales. Approximately 80%, 77% and 76% of net sales in fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, were to customers located in the Asia-Pacific region. The remaining foreign sales were primarily to customers in Europe, Canada and Mexico. Doing business in foreign locations also subjects us to export restrictions and trade laws, which may limit our ability to sell to certain customers. For example, the U.S. Department of Commerce expanded its restrictions on certain technology sold to or for Huawei in 2020, which adversely impacted our sales to this customer.
We use several metrics as indicators of future potential growth. The indicators that we believe best correlate to potential future sales growth are design wins and new product releases. There are many factors that may cause a design win or new product release to not result in sales, including a customer decision not to go to system production, a change in a customer’s perspective regarding a product’s value or a customer’s product failing in the end market. As a result, although a design win or new product introduction is an important step towards generating future sales, it does not inevitably result in us being awarded business or receiving a purchase commitment.
Revenue
We derive our revenue primarily from the sale of semiconductor products into various end markets. Revenue is recognized when control of these products is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for these products. Control is generally transferred when products are shipped and, to a lesser extent, when the products are delivered. Recovery of costs associated with product design and engineering services are recognized during the period in which services are performed and are reported as a reduction to product development and engineering expense. Historically, these recoveries have not exceeded the cost of the related development efforts. We include revenue related to granted technology licenses as part of "Net sales" in the Statements of Income. Historically, revenue from these arrangements has not been significant though it is part of our recurring ordinary business.
We determine revenue recognition through the following five steps:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
•Determination of the transaction price
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, performance obligations are satisfied
We account for a contract when it has approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable.
Our revenue contracts generally represent a single performance obligation to sell our products to trade customers. Net sales reflect the transaction prices for contracts, which include units shipped at selling prices reduced by variable consideration. Determination of variable consideration requires judgment by us. Variable consideration includes expected sales returns and other price adjustments. Variable consideration is estimated using the expected value method considering all reasonably available information, including our historical experience and our current expectations, and is reflected in the transaction price when sales are recorded. Sales returns are generally accepted at our discretion or from distributors with such rights. Our contracts with trade customers do not have significant financing components or non-cash consideration. We record net sales excluding taxes collected on our sales to our trade customers.
We provide an assurance type warranty, which is typically not sold separately and does not represent a separate performance obligation. Our payment terms are generally aligned with shipping terms.
On October 5, 2016, we issued a Warrant to Comcast to purchase up to 1,086,957 Warrant Shares. The cost of the Warrant Shares is recognized as an offset to net sales. On April 27, 2018, we accelerated the vesting of the remaining 586,956 unvested shares from the Warrant ("Acceleration Event"), resulting in the full recognition of the previously unrecognized costs. For the fiscal year ended January 27, 2019, the net sales offset reflects the cost associated with the Warrant Shares of $21.5 million, including $15.9 million related to the Acceleration Event. As of January 27, 2019, the Warrant was fully vested and exercisable for a total of 869,565 shares, with no additional costs to be recognized in future periods. The Warrant was fully exercised and no longer outstanding as of March 15, 2019.
Gross Profit
Gross profit is equal to our net sales less our cost of sales. Our cost of sales includes materials, depreciation on fixed assets used in the manufacturing process, shipping costs, direct labor and overhead. The majority of the Company's manufacturing is outsourced, resulting in relatively low fixed manufacturing costs and variable costs that highly correlate with volume. We determine the cost of inventory by the first-in, first-out method.
Operating Costs
Our operating costs and expenses generally consist of selling, general and administrative, product development and engineering costs, costs associated with acquisitions, restructuring charges, and other operating related charges.
Results of Operations
A discussion of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2021 and January 26, 2020 and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal years 2021 and 2020 appear below. A discussion of our results of operations for the fiscal year ended January 27, 2019 and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal years 2020 and 2019 have been omitted from this Annual Report on Form 10-K, but may be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 26, 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 20, 2020 and is incorporated herein by reference.
Fiscal Year 2021 Compared with Fiscal Year 2020
Reclassifications have been made to prior period amounts to conform to the current classification and all periods presented in the following summary of net sales by major end market reflect our current classification methodology:
Net Sales
Net sales for fiscal year 2021 were $595.1 million, an increase of 9% compared to $547.5 million for fiscal year 2020. During fiscal year 2021, the infrastructure end market increased by $36 million driven by a $20 million increase in PON sales and a $17 million increase in data center demand. The industrial end market increased by $8 million due to a $14 million increase in LoRa-enabled product sales, partially offset by a $6 million decrease in broadcast revenue due to the adverse impact of COVID-19 on large venue events. In the high-end consumer end market, the sales increase was driven by strength in proximity sensing products. Net sales also benefited from the extra week in the fiscal year, as noted above.
Entering fiscal year 2022, customer demand remains strong and supply tight, with many of our suppliers running at or near capacity and our customers competing for the limited supply. While we believe we have good visibility going into the first quarter of fiscal year 2022, it is unknown how much of this demand strength reflects real end market consumption or just the customers' goal to increase their inventory levels over fear of the global supply chain constraints. To the extent that the increase in demand is driven by the latter, we and the industry could experience a period of slower future demand as the potential excess inventories are worked down. Based on booking trends and backlog entering the quarter, we estimate net sales for the first quarter of fiscal year 2022 to be between $164.0 million to $172.0 million.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $363.5 million and $336.7 million in fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our gross margin was 61.1% in fiscal year 2021, compared to 61.5% in fiscal year 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by a less favorable product mix and higher charges for inventory reserves. The majority of the Company's manufacturing is outsourced, resulting in relatively low fixed manufacturing costs and variable costs that highly correlate with volume.
Despite the capacity constraints within the industry, we expect overall gross margins for the first quarter of fiscal year 2022 to remain consistent with our fiscal year 2021 performance. We have increased our inventory levels to meet the strong backlog of orders and higher demand, as well as to minimize the impact of potential supply shortages.
Operating Costs and Expenses
Selling, General & Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses for fiscal year 2021 decreased by $0.3 million primarily driven by $4.3 million lower travel costs and the absence of $2.2 million in restructuring charges recorded in fiscal year 2020, partially offset by an increase of $5.9 million in staffing-related costs. The extra week in fiscal year 2021 slightly increased costs compared to fiscal year 2020.
Product Development and Engineering Expenses
Product development and engineering expenses for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 were $117.5 million and $107.4 million, respectively, or an increase of 9%. This increase reflects higher staffing costs of $8.7 million, including $5.8 million in variable bonus and share-based compensation expense driven by our strong financial performance. The increase also reflects the timing of development activities and certain pre-production start-up costs associated with our manufacturing facility in Colorado. The extra week in fiscal year 2021 slightly increased costs compared to fiscal year 2020.
The levels of product development and engineering expenses reported in a fiscal period can be significantly impacted by the number of new product tape-outs and by the timing of recoveries from non-recurring engineering services, which are typically recorded as a reduction to product development and engineering expense.
Intangible Amortization
Intangible amortization was $8.3 million and $16.5 million in fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. This decrease was primarily due to certain finite-lived intangible assets associated with the acquisitions of Gennum Corporation, Triune Systems, LLC, and AptoVision Technologies, Inc. that had become fully amortized during fiscal years 2020 and 2021.
Changes in the Fair Value of Contingent Earn-out Obligations
The change in the fair value of contingent earn-out obligations in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 reflects the difference between the final earn-out targets achieved for Cycleo SAS in fiscal year 2021 and the forecast achievement level at the end of fiscal year 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $5.3 million and $9.1 million for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $3.8 million decrease was primarily related to lower interest rates and to a lesser extent, lower overall debt levels. During fiscal year 2021, we entered into an interest rate swap agreement with a three-year term to hedge the variability of interest payments on the first $150.0 million
of our debt outstanding. Interest payments on $150.0 million of our debt are effectively locked in at a fixed rate of 1.9775%, based on our current leverage ratio as of January 31, 2021. Interest payments on debt outstanding in excess of $150.0 million remain variable and are tied to the one-month LIBOR rate, which was 0.14% as of January 31, 2021, plus a margin of 1.25%, based on our current leverage ratio as of January 31, 2021.
Investment Impairments and Credit Loss Reserves
In fiscal year 2021, we increased our total current expected credit loss reserve by $2.9 million for our held-to-maturity debt securities and available-for-sale debt securities consisting of our convertible debt investments in privately-held companies, in part, due to the adverse impact of COVID-19 on these early-stage companies. In addition, we tested our equity investments for other-than-temporary impairment and the results of this analysis indicated that five of our investments were other than temporarily impaired by an aggregate amount of $3.9 million. In fiscal year 2020, we had a $0.5 million write-down of a cost method investment and a $0.7 million write-down of a convertible debt investment.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was $3.4 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to a provision for income taxes of $12.8 million for fiscal year 2020. The effective tax rates for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 were a tax provision rate of 5.4% and a tax provision rate of 28.7%, respectively. Our effective tax rate for fiscal year 2021 differs from the statutory federal income tax rate of 21% primarily due to our regional mix of income, the impact of tax credits generated, and the recognition of excess tax benefits related to share-based compensation.
We receive a tax benefit from a tax holiday that was granted in Switzerland. The tax holiday commenced on January 30, 2017, and is effective for five years (the “Initial Term”) and can be extended for an additional five years, subject to meeting certain staffing targets. The ability to meet the requirements to extend the ruling is within our control and we do not anticipate any issues meeting the established targets. The maximum benefit under this tax holiday is CHF 500.0 million of cumulative after tax profit, which equates to a maximum potential tax savings of CHF 44.0 million. Depending on the operational performance of our Swiss operations, it is possible that we could utilize the maximum benefit during the Initial Term. Once the term of the tax holiday expires or we achieve the maximum benefit, our effective tax rate could be negatively impacted if we are unable to negotiate an extension or expansion of the tax holiday. The Swiss Tax Reform that was enacted during fiscal year 2020 reduces the Swiss Cantonal tax rate, which further increases the benefit of our Tax Holiday.
As a global organization, we are subject to audit by taxing authorities in various jurisdictions. To the extent that an audit, or the closure of a statute of limitations results in adjusting our reserves for uncertain tax positions, our effective tax rate could experience extreme volatility since any adjustment would be recorded as a discrete item in the period of adjustment.
For further information on the effective tax rate and Tax Act’s impact, see Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our capital requirements depend on a variety of factors including, but not limited to, the rate of increase or decrease in our existing business base; the success, timing and amount of investment required to bring new products to market; sales growth or decline; potential acquisitions; the general economic environment in which we operate; and our ability to generate cash flow from operations, which are more uncertain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the general economy. Our liquidity needs during this uncertain time will depend on multiple factors, including our ability to continue operations and production of our products, the COVID-19 pandemic's effects on our customers, the availability of sufficient amounts of financing and our operating performance.
We believe that our cash on hand, cash available from future operations and available borrowing capacity under our Credit Facility are sufficient to meet liquidity requirements for at least the next 12 months, including funds needed for our material cash requirements as described below. As of January 31, 2021, we had $268.9 million in cash and cash equivalents and $419.0 million of undrawn capacity on our Credit Facility. Over the longer-term, we believe our strong cash generating business model will continue to provide adequate liquidity to fund our normal operations, which have minimal capital intensity. To the extent that we enter into acquisitions or strategic partnerships, we may be required to raise additional capital through debt issuances or equity offerings. In addition, we expect to refinance our Credit Facility ahead of its maturity in November 2024. While we have not had issues securing favorable financing historically, there is no assurance that we will be able to refinance or secure additional capital at favorable terms, or at all in the future.
A meaningful portion of our capital resources, and the liquidity they represent, are held by our foreign subsidiaries. As of January 31, 2021, our foreign subsidiaries held approximately $182.9 million of cash and cash equivalents, compared to $261.9 million at January 26, 2020. In connection with the enactment of the Tax Act, all historic and current foreign earnings are taxed in the U.S. and are subject to a 5% Swiss withholding tax, if repatriated. In fiscal year 2018, we determined that we would repatriate back to the U.S. approximately $240.0 million of foreign earnings, of which $83.9 million, $76.1 million and $80.0 million of foreign earnings were remitted in fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In the second quarter of fiscal year 2021, we determined an additional $50.0 million of current earnings will not be permanently reinvested. As of January 31,
2021, our foreign subsidiaries had $547.9 million of unremitted earnings for which no taxes have been provided. Those historical earnings have been and are expected to continue to be permanently reinvested.
We expect our future cash uses will be for capital expenditures, repurchases of our common stock and potentially, acquisitions and other investments that support achievement of our business strategies. We expect to fund those cash requirements through our cash from operations and borrowings against our Credit Facility.
Sources of Liquidity
Operating Cash Flows
Operating cash flows over the past three years have ranged from $118.6 million to $183.6 million, which represents 20% to 29% of revenue. Our consistently solid profitability and operating cash flow are driven by our ability to value price for the differentiated technology that we provide, as well as our fabless business model, which is highly flexible to changes in customer demand.
Credit Facility
On November 7, 2019, we, with certain of our domestic subsidiaries as guarantors, entered into an amended and restated credit agreement ("the Credit Agreement") with the lenders party thereto and HSBC Bank USA, National Association, as administrative agent, swing line lender and letter of credit issuer in order to provide a more flexible borrowing structure by expanding the borrowing capacity of the revolving loans under the secured first lien credit facility ("the Credit Facility") to $600.0 million, eliminating the term loans and extending the maturity to November 7, 2024. Up to $40.0 million of the revolving loans may be used to obtain letters of credit, up to $25.0 million of the revolving loans may be used to obtain swing line loans, and up to $40.0 million of the revolving loans may be used to obtain revolving loans and letters of credit in certain currencies other than U.S. Dollars ("Alternative Currencies"). The proceeds of the Credit Facility may be used by us for capital expenditures, permitted acquisitions, permitted dividends, working capital and general corporate purposes. A portion of the proceeds of the Credit Facility were used to repay in full all of the obligations outstanding under our then existing senior secured first lien credit facility and to pay transaction costs in connection with such refinancing.
In fiscal year 2021, we made payments that totaled $16.0 million on our Credit Facility. In fiscal year 2020, we received $201.0 million in proceeds from our revolving loans and made payments that totaled $101.0 million and $115.3 million on our revolving loans and on our previous term loans, respectively. In fiscal year 2019, we made payments that totaled $15.9 million on our previous term loans. As of January 31, 2021, we had $181.0 million of outstanding borrowings on our Credit Facility, which had $419.0 million of undrawn borrowing capacity.
The amendment of the Credit Agreement in fiscal year 2020 resulted in a loss on early extinguishment of debt totaling $0.5 million, related to the write off of unamortized discounts and loan costs, which was presented in "Non-operating income, net" in the Statements of Income.
The Credit Agreement provides that, subject to certain customary conditions, including obtaining commitments with respect thereto, we may request the establishment of one or more term loan facilities and/or increases to the revolving loans in a principal amount not to exceed (a) $300.0 million, plus (b) an unlimited amount, so long as our consolidated leverage ratio, determined on a pro forma basis, does not exceed 3.00 to 1.00. However, the lenders are not required to provide such increase upon our request.
Interest on loans made under the Credit Facility in U.S. Dollars accrues, at our option, at a rate per annum equal to (1) the Base Rate (as defined below) plus a margin ranging from 0.25% to 1.25% depending upon our consolidated leverage ratio or (2) LIBOR (determined with respect to deposits in U.S. Dollars) for an interest period to be selected by us plus a margin ranging from 1.25% to 2.25% depending upon our consolidated leverage ratio (such margin, the "Applicable Margin"). The "Base Rate" is equal to a fluctuating rate equal to the highest of (a) the prime rate of the Administrative Agent, (b) 0.50% above the federal funds effective rate published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and (c) one-month LIBOR (determined with respect to deposits in U.S. Dollars), plus 1.00%. Interest on loans made under the Credit Facility in Alternative Currencies accrues at a rate per annum equal to LIBOR (determined with respect to deposits in the applicable Alternative Currency) (other than loans made in Canadian Dollars, for which a special reference rate for Canadian Dollars applies) for an interest period to be selected by us plus the Applicable Margin. See “Interest Rate and Credit Risk” under