ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recent Developments
On July 29, 2020, we held a special meeting pursuant to which our shareholders approved extending the date by which we had to complete a Business Combination from July 31, 2020 to October 31, 2020 (or December 31, 2020 if we had executed a definitive agreement for a Business Combination by October 31, 2020). In connection with the approval of the extension, shareholders elected to redeem an aggregate of 4,303,096 ordinary shares. As a result, an aggregate of $44,063,656 (or approximately $10.24 per share) was released from the Trust Account to pay such shareholders.
On October 28, 2020, we held a special meeting pursuant to which our shareholders approved extending the date by which we had to complete a Business Combination from October 31, 2020 to January 31, 2021 (or April 30, 2021 if we have executed a definitive agreement for a Business Combination by January 31, 2021). In connection with the approval of the extension, shareholders elected to redeem an aggregate of 5,174,508 ordinary shares. As a result, an aggregate of $52,996,135 (or approximately $10.24 per share) was released from the Trust Account to pay such shareholders and 4,417,396 ordinary shares were issued and outstanding at December 31, 2020.
On November 4, 2020, we announced the mutual termination of negotiations with EMMAC Life Sciences Limited regarding the proposed business combination between the parties.
On January 5, 2021, we received a written notice (the “Notice”) from the Listing Qualifications Department of The Nasdaq Stock Market (“Nasdaq”) indicating that we are not in compliance with Listing Rule 5620(a), due to our failure to hold an annual meeting of stockholders within twelve months of the end of our fiscal year end. The Notice is only a notification of deficiency, not of imminent delisting, and has no current effect on the listing or trading of our securities on the Nasdaq Capital Market. We held the 2020 general annual meeting on January 27, 2021. On February 2, 2021, the Company received a letter from Nasdaq indicating it had regained compliance with Listing Rule 5620(a).
On January 27, 2021, we held a special meeting pursuant to which our shareholders approved extending the date by which we had to complete a Business Combination from January 31, 2021 to April 30, 2021 (or July 31, 2021 if we have executed a definitive agreement for a Business Combination by April 30, 2021) (such date or later date, as applicable, the “Extended Date”). In connection with the approval of the extension, shareholders elected to redeem an aggregate of 300 ordinary shares. As a result, an aggregate of $3,073 (or approximately $10.24 per share) was released from our Trust Account to pay such shareholders and 4,417,096 ordinary shares are now issued and outstanding.
On January 28, 2021, we entered into a definitive business combination agreement (the “Business Combination Agreement”), pursuant to which, subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein, (i) we will re-domesticate as a Delaware corporation, (ii) Stryve Foods, LLC (“Stryve”) will conduct a reorganization pursuant to which Stryve Foods Holdings LLC (“Stryve Holdings”) will become a holding company for Stryve, the former owners of Stryve will become the owners of Stryve Holdings, and Stryve will retain all of its business, assets and liabilities, and become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Stryve Holdings, (iii) Stryve Holdings will contribute to Andina Holdings LLC, our subsidiary (“Andina Holdings”), the equity interests of Stryve, in exchange for newly issued non-voting membership interests of Andina Holdings and our voting (but non-economic) common stock, and (iv) we will contribute all of our cash and cash equivalents to Andina Holdings, after payment of our shareholders that elect to have their shares redeemed or converted in connection with the consummation of the Merger, in exchange for newly issued voting membership interests of Andina Holdings, all upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Business Combination Agreement.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed on July 29, 2016 for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more target businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our Initial Public Offering, described below, and, after our Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $583,689, which consists operating costs of $1,279,291, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $556,030 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $142. In addition, we received a $139,430 reimbursement of due diligence expenses that we incurred in connection with evaluating a potential Business Combination that did not materialize.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had net income of $1,762,447, which consists of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $2,136,694 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $12,428, offset by operating costs of $386,675.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On January 31, 2019, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 10,800,000 Units, which included a partial exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 800,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $108,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of our Initial Public Offering we consummated the sale of 395,000 Private Units to certain initial shareholders and the underwriters at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $3,950,000.
Following our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Units, a total of $108,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $3,204,451 in Initial Public Offering related costs, including $2,700,000 of underwriting fees and $504,451 of other costs.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $13,545,503 (including approximately $322,000 of interest income and unrealized gains) consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 180 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. On April 9, 2020, pursuant to the prospectus relating to the IPO and the terms and conditions of the Investment Management Trust Agreement, dated January 28, 2019, by and between the Company and Continental Stock Transfer and Trust Company, the Company withdrew $100,000 of interest income on the funds in the trust account to support the Company’s working capital obligations.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $254,332. Net loss of $583,689 was impacted by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $556,030, an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $142 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $885,529 of cash for operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $399,103. Net income of $1,762,447 was offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $2,136,694, an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $12,428 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $4,352 of cash for operating activities.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes payable) to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay franchise and income taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Following our Initial Public Offering, we entered into a letter agreement with a member of our board of directors that provides for a success fee to be paid to such director upon consummation of a Business Combination with a target business introduced to us by such director in an amount equal to 0.6% of the total consideration paid by us in the transaction, subject to certain minimum and maximum amounts set forth in the agreement.
In addition, we entered into several letter agreements with unaffiliated third parties that provide for a success fee to be paid to each such third party upon consummation of a Business Combination with a target business introduced to us by such third party in amounts ranging from 0.75% to 1% of the total consideration paid by us in the transaction, subject to certain minimum and maximum amounts set forth in the various agreements.
Related to the business combination with Stryve, we entered into engagement letters with Cowen and Craig-Hallum, to be financial advisors and placement agent to the transaction, with an aggregate success fee of 2% of the transaction value and 6% fee of gross proceeds raised as agents.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $198,192 held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our Sponsor, an affiliate of our Sponsor, or our officers or directors. Our officers, directors and Sponsor, or their affiliates, may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through the Extended Date, which is the date we are required cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up if we have not completed a Business Combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than as described below.
We entered into an agreement to pay the joint book-running managers in our Initial Public Offering as advisors in connection with a Business Combination to assist us in holding meetings with its shareholders to discuss the potential Business Combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with a Business Combination, assist us in obtaining shareholder approval for the Business Combination and assist us with its press releases and public filings in connection with the Business Combination. We will pay the joint book-running managers aggregate cash fees for such services upon the consummation of a Business Combination in an amount equal to $3,240,000 (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable). If a proposed Business Combination is not consummated for any reason during the 18-month period from the closing of the Initial Public Offering (as such period may be extended), no fee will be due or payable to the advisors.
We entered into a letter agreement with a member of our board of directors that provides for a success fee to be paid to such director upon consummation of a Business Combination with a target business introduced to us by such director in an amount equal to 0.6% of the total consideration paid by us in the transaction, subject to certain minimum and maximum amounts set forth in the agreement.
In addition, we entered into several letter agreements with unaffiliated third parties that provide for a success fee to be paid to each such third party upon consummation of a Business Combination with a target business introduced to us by such third party in amounts ranging from 0.75% to 1.0% of the total consideration paid by us in the transaction, subject to certain minimum and maximum amounts set forth in the various agreements.
Related to the business combination with Stryve, we entered into engagement letters with Cowen and Craig-Hallum, to be financial advisors and placement agent to the transaction, with an aggregate success fee of 2% of the transaction value and 6% fee of gross proceeds raised as agents.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Ordinary Shares Subject to Redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Ordinary shares subject to possible redemption, which are not currently redeemable and are not redeemable at fair value, have been excluded from the calculation of basic net loss per ordinary share since such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of the Trust Account earnings. Our net income is adjusted for the portion of income that is attributable to ordinary shares subject to redemption, as these shares only participate in the earnings of the Trust Account and not our income or losses.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.