ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Unless otherwise indicated, references to the “Company,” “us” or “we” refer to Sentient Brands Holdings Inc. and its subsidiaries.
Special Note Regarding Forward-looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under the risk factors and business sections in this Form 10-K.
Overview
Sentient Brands is a next-level product development and brand management company with a focus on building innovative brands in the Luxury and Premium Market space. The Company has a Direct-to Consumer business model focusing on the integration of CBD, wellness and beauty for conscious consumers. The Company incorporates an omnichannel approach in its marketing strategies to ensure that its products are accessible across both digital and retail channels. The Company develops and nurtures Lifestyle Brands with carefully thought-out ingredients, packaging, fragrance and design. Sentient Brands’ leadership team has extensive experience in building world-class brands such as Hugo Boss, Victoria’s Secret, Versace, and Bath & Body Works. The Company is focused on two key market segments targeting: wellness and responsible luxury, which the Company believes represent unique opportunities for its Oeuvre product line. Sentient Brands intends to leverage its in-house innovation capabilities to launch new products that “disrupt” adjacent product categories. We plan to grow by leveraging our deep connections within our existing network and attract consumers through increased brand awareness and investing in unique social media marketing. The Company’s goal is to create customer experiences that have sustainable resonance with consumers and consistently implement strategies that result in long-term profit growth for our investors.
Principal Products and Services
The Company currently has one main product line and two in development. The Company’s current active product line is Oeuvre.
Ouevre
Oeuvre - “A Body of Art” - is the next product line we plan to launch in Spring 2021 and is intended to be a next generation CBD luxury skin care line and lifestyle brand. Planned product offerings under this line include:
● Purifying Exfoliator
● Replenishing Oil
● Ultra-Nourishing Face Cream
● Revitalizing Eye Cream
● High Potency Tincture
● CBD infused and scented candles
● CBD infused women’s fragrance
Drawing inspiration from petals, leaves, roots, minerals and gemstones, Ouevre celebrates the artistry of well-being and beauty, inside and out. Ouevre products are non-toxic, ungendered products made with zero GMO, retinyl palmitate, petroleum, mineral oil, parabens, sulfates, and synthetic colors.
Ouevre Target Market
Ouevre is planned to be our luxury segment product line. With Ouevre, we are targeting a large and influential consumer class of individuals that are “HENRYs” - High-Earners-Not-Rich-Yet. They have discretionary income and are highly likely to be wealthy in the future. HENRYs earn between $100,000 and $250,000 annually. They are digitally fluent, love online shopping online, and are big discretionary spenders. Therefore, ouvreskincare.com offers inclusive, aspirationally affordable luxury products positioned for them.
We believe the benefit of onboarding this demographic to Ouevre are twofold: securing valuable present customers and building relationships and business with those most likely to be amongst the most affluent consumers in the future. By the year 2025, Millennials and Generation Z will represent more than 40% of the overall luxury goods market, according to a 2019 report published by Boston Consulting Group. We seek to target such group for the sale of our Ouevre products.
On social media, we will target the following audiences for the Ouevre brand:
● Women aged 30+
● Luxury Skincare Enthusiasts
● CBD Enthusiasts
● Crystal Lovers
● Wellness Audience
● Makeup Artists
● Art
● Beauty
● Influencers
● Bloggers
● Stores
Future Product Lines
The Company has two product lines planned for introduction by the end of 2021:
● F.A.M.E. - a millennial, premium priced dual-gender lifestyle brand
● LevelLab - a premium priced millennial fitness/wellness/performance product line
LevelLab
We intend LevelLab to be a premium priced millennial fitness, wellness, and performance product line. Intended products include:
● Therapeutic recovery cream that provides heating and cooling effects to sooth pain, containing isolate hemp CBD, 100% THC free.
● LevelLab Bundle including daily facial cleanser, hyaluronic and vitamin C moisturizer, and retinol night cream.
● LevelLab Active Hydration - supplement for mineral replenishment and optimal hydration for before, during, and after workout.
● LevelLab Fuel - a recovery drink containing a unique combination of CBD and amino acids.
LevelLab Target Market
We plan to target Millennials (generally ages 23 - 38 as of 2019) for our LevelLab product line. These consumers, who came of age in a hyper-connected, digital world, have unique shopping preferences, spend their time in different mediums, and respond to a different style of messaging than generations past. This evolution in consumer behavior accompanies a significant transition of purchasing power to the Millennial generation. According to the 2015 U.S. Census Bureau, Millennials accounted for more than 25% of the U.S. population, exceeding the number of baby boomers and making it the largest percentage of the workforce in the United States. Further, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, people born after 1981, including Millennials and Generation Z, accounted for approximately $1.7 trillion or 22% of the nation’s total consumer expenditure in 2017. We expect this number to significantly increase as Millennials enter their peak earning years and an increasing percentage of Generation Z joins the workforce.
F.A.M.E
F.A.M.E. will merge health and wellness with art and entertainment to curate unique and impactful products, content, and activities for a global community. As stated in a 2017 article on the Wellness industry published by Forbes, 72% of millennials would rather spend money on experiences than on material goods. With F.A.M.E., we intend to give them both. Products and offerings under the F.A.M.E. brand name are currently under development.
F.A.M.E Target Market
The target market for F.A.M.E. is also Millennials. We intend to market F.A.M.E. to premium consumers - both male and female - in the Millennial market.
Suppliers
The Company has several third-party suppliers and is not reliant on any particular supplier for its product offerings. Many of our products contain CBD derived from industrial hemp or cannabis which we get from third parties. Hemp cultivation can be impacted by weather patterns and other natural events, but we have not faced any supply issues to date with obtaining raw materials for our products.
Distribution
We have two primary methods through which we sell our products:
1. Direct to Consumer online e-commerce platform
2. Wholesale partners
Marketing Strategy
We support brand launches with social media & marketing campaigns, including influencers. Leading marketing and PR firms were engaged by the Company to spearhead the launch of Oeuvre, and will likely be engaged for our future planned brand launches.
Sentient Brands Growth Strategies:
In order to grow our company, Sentient Brands intends to:
● Create a leading consumer packaged goods company;
● Partner with established distributers and retailers;
● Focus on operational excellence and product quality; and
● Establish ongoing communication with the capital markets
Sentient Brand’s mission is to create the next generation of CBD consumer brands. The Company believes it has assembled a highly accomplished team of branding and marketing professionals who have successfully launched and operated major brands in the consumer market space, which the Company believes will give it a competitive edge in the industry.
Customers
The company plans to launch its Oeuvre product line in the second quarter of 2021. The Company’s sales channels will be direct to consumer and wholesale.
Intellectual Property
The Company’s Oeuvre brand is trademarked in the United States with a European trademark application pending. The Company expects to rely on trade secrets and proprietary know-how protection for our confidential and proprietary information, however we have not yet taken security measures to protect this information.
Competition
We have experienced, and expect to continue to experience, intense competition from a number of companies.
The current market for hemp-derived CBD products is highly competitive, consisting of publicly-trade and privately-owned companies, many of which are more adequately capitalized than the Company. The Company’s current publicly listed competitors include market leader Charlotte’s Web, CV Sciences, Elixinol, Abacus, and Green Growth Brands, and private companies such as BeBoe, St. Jane. Mary’s, Lord Jones, Bluebird Folium Biosciences, Global Cannabinoids, and Pure Kana. In addition, both public and private U.S. multi-state operators and Canadian LP’s have entered the hemp-derived CBD consumer market or have announced plans to do so. This market is highly fragmented, and according to the Hemp Business Journal, the vast majority of industry participants generate less than ~$2 million of annual revenue. We see this an opportunity to get a foothold in the CBD consumer marketplace and build our company as a major brand name in this space.
Industry Overview
The market for products based on extracts of hemp and cannabis, is expected to grow substantially over the coming years. Arcview Market Research and BDS Analytics are forecasting the combined market to reach nearly $45 billion within the U.S. in the year 2024. While much of this market is expected to be comprised of high potency THC-based products that will be sold in licensed dispensaries, the research firms are still predicting the market to grow to $5.3 billion, $12.6 billion, and $2.2 billion by 2024 for the product areas of low THC cannabinoids, THC-free Cannabinoids and pharmaceutical cannabinoids, respectively.
We believe the recent passage of the 2018 Farm Bill will allow the Company to expand its marketplace opportunities. On December 20, 2018, President Donald J. Trump signed into law the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018, otherwise known as the “Farm Bill.” Prior to its passage, hemp, a member of the cannabis family, and hemp-derived CBD were classified as a Schedule I controlled substances, and so illegal under the CSA. Under Section 10113 of the Farm Bill, hemp cannot contain more than 0.3 percent THC. THC refers to the chemical compound found in cannabis that produces the psychoactive “high” associated with cannabis. Any cannabis plant that contains more than 0.3 percent THC would be considered non-hemp cannabis-or marijuana-under federal law and would thus face no legal protection under this new legislation and would be an illegal Schedule 1 drug under the CSA.
With the passage of the Farm Bill, hemp cultivation is broadly permitted. The Farm Bill explicitly allows the transfer of hemp-derived products across state lines for commercial or other purposes. It also puts no restrictions on the sale, transport, or possession of hemp-derived products, so long as those items are produced in a manner consistent with the law.
Recent Developments
Covid-19
A novel strain of coronavirus (“Covid-19”) emerged globally in December 2019 and has been declared a pandemic. The extent to which Covid-19 will impact our customers, business, results and financial condition will depend on current and future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. While the Company’s day-to-day operations beginning March 2020 have been impacted, we have suffered less immediate impact as most staff can work remotely and can continue to develop our product offerings.
On April 18, 2020, the Company, through its subsidiary Jaguaring Company, entered into Paycheck Protection Program Promissory Note and Agreement with KeyBank National Association, pursuant to which the Company received loan proceeds of $231,500 (the “PPP Loan”). The PPP Loan was made under, and is subject to the terms and conditions of, the PPP which was established under the CARES Act and is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. The term of the PPP Loan is two years with a maturity date of April 18, 2022 and contains a favorable fixed annual interest rate of 1.00%. Payments of principal and interest on the PPP Loan will be deferred for the first six months of the term of the PPP Loan until November 18, 2020. Principal and interest are payable monthly and may be prepaid by the Company at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties. Under the terms of the CARES Act, recipients can apply for and receive forgiveness for all or a portion of loans granted under the PPP. Such forgiveness will be determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of loan proceeds for certain permissible purposes as set forth in the PPP, including, but not limited to, payroll costs (as defined under the PPP) and mortgage interest, rent or utility costs (collectively, “Qualifying Expenses”), and on the maintenance of employee and compensation levels during the eight-week period following the funding of the PPP Loan. The Company has been using the proceeds of the PPP Loan, for Qualifying Expenses. However, no assurance is provided that the Company will be able to obtain forgiveness of the PPP Loan in whole or in part.
Forward Stock Split / Increase of Authorized / Name Change / Migratory Merger
On December 9, 2020, the Company filed a Certificate of Amendment of Articles of Incorporation (the “Certificate”) with the State of California to (i) effect a forward stock split of its outstanding shares of common stock at a ratio of 7 for 1 (the “Forward Stock Split”), (ii) increase the number of authorized shares of common stock from 50,000,000 shares to 500,000,000 shares, and (iii) effectuate a name change (the "Name Change"). Fractional shares that resulted from the Forward Stock Split will be rounded up to the next highest number. As a result of the Name Change, the Company's name changed from "Intelligent Buying, Inc." to "Sentient Brands Holdings Inc.". The Certificate was approved by the majority of the Company's shareholders and by the Board of Directors of the Company. The effective date of the Forward Stock Split and the Name Change was March 2, 2021.
In connection with the above, the Company filed an Issuer Company-Related Action Notification Form with the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. The Forward Stock Split and the Name Change was implemented by FINRA on March 2, 2021. Our symbol on OTC Markets was INTBD for 20 business days from March 2, 2021 (the “Notification Period”). Our new CUSIP number is 81728V 102. As a result of the name change, our symbol was changed to “SNBH” following the Notification Period.
In addition, on January 29, 2021, the Company, merged with and into its wholly owned subsidiary, Sentient Brands Holdings Inc., a Nevada corporation, pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger between Sentient Brands Holdings Inc., a California corporation, and Sentient Brands Holdings Inc., a Nevada corporation. Sentient Brands Holdings Inc., a Nevada corporation, continued as the surviving entity of the migratory merger. Pursuant to the migratory merger, the Company changed its state of incorporation from California to Nevada and each share of its common stock converted into one share of common stock of the surviving entity in the migratory merger. No dissenters’ rights were exercised by any of the Company’s stockholders in connection with the migratory merger.
Following the consummation of the migratory merger, the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the Nevada corporation that was newly-created as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company became the articles of incorporation and bylaws for the surviving entity in the migratory merger.
The foregoing information is a summary of each of the matters described above, is not complete, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the exhibits, each of which is attached an exhibit to this Form 10-K Annual Report. Readers should review those exhibits for a complete understanding of the terms and conditions associated with this matter.
Government Regulation
The United States Food & Drug Administration (“FDA”) is generally responsible for protecting the public health by ensuring the safety, efficacy, and security of (1) prescription and over the counter drugs; (2) biologics including vaccines, blood & blood products, and cellular and gene therapies; (3) foodstuffs including dietary supplements, bottled water, and baby formula; and, (4) medical devices including heart pacemakers, surgical implants, prosthetics, and dental devices.
Regarding its regulation of drugs, the FDA process requires a review that begins with the filing of an investigational new drug (IND) application, with follow on clinical studies and clinical trials that the FDA uses to determine whether a drug is safe and effective, and therefore subject to approval for human use by the FDA.
Aside from the FDA’s mandate to regulate drugs, the FDA also regulates dietary supplement products and dietary ingredients under the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994. This law prohibits manufacturers and distributors of dietary supplements and dietary ingredients from marketing products that are adulterated or misbranded. This means that these firms are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet all the requirements of the law and FDA regulations, including, but not limited to the following labeling requirements: (1) identifying the supplement; (2) nutrition labeling; (3) ingredient labeling; (4) claims; and, (5) daily use information.
The FDA has not approved cannabis, marijuana, hemp or derivatives as a safe and effective drug for any indication. As of the date of this filing, we have not, and do not intend to file an IND with the FDA, concerning any of our products that contain CBD derived from industrial hemp or cannabis. Further, our products containing CBD derived from industrial hemp are not marketed or sold using claims that their use is safe and effective treatment for any medical condition subject to the FDA’s jurisdiction.
Government Approvals
The Company does not currently require any government approvals for its operations or product offerings. In August 2019, the DEA affirmed that CBD preparations at or below the 0.3 percent delta-9 THC threshold, is not a controlled substance, and a DEA registration is not required. As a result of the 2018 Farm Bill the FDA has been tasked with developing CBD regulations. The FDA has not yet published regulations.
Research and Development
We are constantly in the process of identifying and/or developing potential new products to offer to our customers. Our expenditures on research and development have historically been small and immaterial compared to our other business expenditures. We are currently developing new formulations for additional product lines.
Employees
We believe that our success depends upon our ability to attract, develop and retain key personnel. As of April 15, 2021, we employed 2 full-time employees. The Company otherwise currently relies on the services of independent contractors. None of our employees are covered by collective bargaining agreements, and management considers relations with our employees to be in good standing. Although we continually seek to add additional talent to our work force, management believes that it currently has sufficient human capital to operate its business successfully.
Our compensation programs are designed to align the compensation of our employees with our performance and to provide the proper incentives to attract, retain and motivate employees to achieve superior results. The structure of our compensation programs balances incentive earnings for both short-term and long-term performance.
The health and safety of our employees is our highest priority, and this is consistent with our operating philosophy. Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, employees, including our specialized technical staff, are working from home or in a virtual environment unless they have a requirement to be in the office for short-term tasks and projects.
The primary mailing address for the Company is 555 Madison Avenue, 5th Floor, New York, New York 10022. The Company's telephone number is (646) 202-2897. The Company's website is https://www.sentientbrands.com/.
Going Concern
We have a limited operating history, and our continued growth is dependent upon the continuation of selling our products to our customers; hence generating revenues and obtaining additional financing to fund future obligations and pay liabilities arising from normal business operations. We had an accumulated deficit of $1,953,887 at December 31, 2020. The report of our independent registered public accounting firm on our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 contained an explanatory paragraph regarding our ability to continue as a going concern based upon cash used in operating activities and the current cash balance cannot be projected to cover the operating expenses for the next twelve months from the release date of this report. These factors, among others, raised substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this report do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. There are no assurances we will be successful in our efforts to generate significant revenues or report profitable operations or to continue as a going concern, in which event investors would lose their entire investment in our company.
Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to carry out our business plan, achieve profitable operations, obtain additional working capital funds from our significant shareholders, and or through debt and equity financings. However, there can be no assurance that any additional financings will be available to us on satisfactory terms and conditions, if any.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability or classification of asset-carrying amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We continually evaluate our estimates, including those related to bad debts, recovery of long-lived assets, income taxes and the valuation of equity transactions.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Any future changes to these estimates and assumptions could cause a material change to our reported amounts of revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred or products have been sold, the purchase price is fixed or determinable and collectability is reasonably assured.
We sell CBD-infused products to our customers. Our customers place orders for our products pursuant to their purchase orders and we are paid by our customers pursuant to our invoices. Each invoice calls for a fixed payment in a fixed period of time. We recognize revenue by selling our products under our customers’ purchase orders and our related invoices to our customers. Revenue related to the sales of our products to our customers is recognized as the products are sold and amounts are paid, using the straight-line method over the term of the sales transaction. Prepayments, if any, received from customers prior to the products being delivered are recorded as advance from customers. In these cases, when the products are sold, the amount recorded as advance from customers is recognized as revenue.
Income Taxes
We are governed by the income tax laws of the United States. Income taxes are accounted for pursuant to ASC 740 “Accounting for Income Taxes,” which is an asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. The charge for taxes is based on the results for the period as adjusted for items, which are non-assessable or disallowed. It is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method in respect of temporary differences arising from differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax basis used in the computation of assessable tax profit. In principle, deferred tax liabilities are recognized for all taxable temporary differences, and deferred tax assets are recognized to the extent that it is probably that taxable profit will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilized.
Deferred tax is calculated using tax rates that are expected to apply to the period when the asset is realized, or the liability is settled. Deferred tax is charged or credited in the income statement, except when it is related to items credited or charged directly to equity, in which case the deferred tax is changed to equity. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when they related to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and we intend to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock based compensation is accounted for based on the requirements of the Share-Based Payment topic of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 718 which requires recognition in the financial statements of the cost of employee and director services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments over the period the employee or director is required to perform the services in exchange for the award. The Accounting Standards Codification also requires measurement of the cost of employee and director services received in exchange for an award based on the grant-date fair value of the award.
Pursuant to ASC Topic 505-50, for share-based payments to consultants and other third-parties, compensation expense is determined at the “measurement date.” The expense is recognized over the period of services or the vesting period, whichever is applicable. Until the measurement date is reached, the total amount of compensation expense remains uncertain. We record compensation expense based on the fair value of the award at the reporting date. The awards to consultants and other third parties are then revalued, or the total compensation is recalculated based on the then current fair value, at each subsequent reporting date.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-15, Statement of Cash Flows (Topic 230): Classification of Certain Cash Receipts and Cash Payments. This ASU addresses the classification of certain specific cash flow issues including debt prepayment or extinguishment costs, settlement of certain debt instruments, contingent consideration payments made after a business combination, proceeds from the settlement of certain insurance claims and distributions received from equity method investees. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2017, and interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. An entity that elects early adoption must adopt all of the amendments in the same period. We are currently evaluating the impact it may have on our consolidated financial statements.
Other accounting standards that have been issued or proposed by FASB that do not require adoption until a future date are not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements upon adoption. We do not discuss recent pronouncements that are not anticipated to have an impact on or are unrelated to our consolidated financial condition, results of operations, cash flows or disclosures.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 and the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
We did not generate revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Operating Expenses
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
· Our selling and advertising expense mainly includes our marketing and sales staff’s salaries and related benefits, and travel and entertainment costs incurred by our sales department. Selling expense totaled $54,182 for the year ended December 31, 2020, while we incur $600 selling expense for the year ended December 31, 2019.
· Professional fees primarily consisted of accounting fees, legal service fees, consulting fees, investor relations service charges and other fees incurred for service related to becoming and being a public company. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, professional fees amounted to $342,016 and $48,758, respectively, an increase of $293,258. The increase was mainly attributable to an increase in fees of approximately $120,000 incurred for services performed by our marketing consultant, and an increase in legal services fees of approximately $143,819,000, and an increase in accounting expenses of approximately $32,300 resulting from our business expansion. We expect professional fees to increase as we incur significant costs associated with our public company reporting requirements, and costs associated with newly applicable corporate governance requirements, including requirements under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and other rules implemented by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
· Management fees primarily consisted of compensation of our Chief Operating officer and Chief Marketing Officer, and the President of our wholly owned subsidiary, Cannavolve.
Income (Loss) from Operations
As a result of the foregoing, for the year ended December 31, 2020, loss from operations amounted to $726,718, as compared to loss from operations of $252,443 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income Taxes
We did not have any income taxes expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Net Income (Loss)
Net loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $726,718 and $252,443, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared using generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”) applicable for a going concern, which assumes that the Company will realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in the ordinary course of business.
To the extent we are successful in growing our business both organically and through acquisition, we continue to plan our working capital and the proceeds of any financing to finance such acquisition costs.
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate funds to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash balance of approximately $68,047 and $9,024, respectively. These funds are kept in financial institutions located in United States.
Covid 19
A novel strain of coronavirus (“Covid-19”) emerged globally in December 2019 and has been declared a pandemic. The extent to which Covid-19 will impact our customers, business, results and financial condition will depend on current and future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. While the Company’s day-to-day operations beginning March 2020 have been impacted, we have suffered less immediate impact as most staff can work remotely and can continue to develop our product offerings.
That said we have seen our business opportunities develop more slowly as business partners and potential customers are dealing with Covid-19 issues, working remotely and these issues are causing delays in decision making and finalization of negotiations and agreements.
Cash flows from Operating Activities
Operating activities used $709,760 in cash the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with $271,739 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our net loss was $726,718 the main component of our negative operating cash flow in 2020, added by increase in accounts receivables $67,500, and increase in advances to supplier of $11,874, offset mainly by, an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $111,261. In 2019 net loss of $252,443 was the main component of our negative operating cash flow offset by an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $120,806 and advances to suppliers for inventory order of $123,000.
Cash flows from Investing Activities
Investing activities used $39,277 in cash the year ended December 31, 2020 for purchase of various machinery and equipment and in 2019 our investing cash flow used $3,056 purchase of office equipment.
Cash flows from Financing Activities
Cash flows provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $808,061 as compared with $230,690 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our positive cash flow in 2020 consisted mostly of proceeds from the sale of issuance of common stocks $471,560 and proceeds from SBA loans payable of $256,500 and proceeds from notes payable $80,000. Our positive cash flow in 2019 consisted mostly of proceeds from the loan payables $146,562 and loans payable of 84,128.
Our capital requirements for the next twelve months primarily relate to $950,000. In addition, we expect to use cash to pay salaries, consulting fees and fees related to third parties’ professional services. All funds received have been expended in the furtherance of growing the business. The following trends are reasonably likely to result in a material decrease in our liquidity over the near to long term:
● An increase in working capital requirements to finance our current business;
● Addition of administrative and sales personnel as the business grows; and
● The cost of being a public company.
We will need to raise additional funds, particularly if we are unable to generate positive cash flow as a result of our operations. We estimate that based on current plans and assumptions, that our available cash will be insufficient to satisfy our cash requirements under our present operating expectations. Other than working capital and advance received from related parties and funds received pursuant to securities purchase agreements, we presently have no other significant alternative source of working capital. We have used these funds to fund our operating expenses, pay our obligations and grow our company. We will need to raise significant additional capital to fund our operations and to provide working capital for our ongoing operations and obligations. Therefore, our future operation is dependent on our ability to secure additional financing. Financing transactions may include the issuance of equity or debt securities, obtaining credit facilities, or other financing mechanisms. However, the trading price of our common stock and a downturn in the U.S. equity and debt markets could make it more difficult to obtain financing through the issuance of equity or debt securities. Even if we are able to raise the funds required, it is possible that we could incur unexpected costs and expenses or experience unexpected cash requirements that would force us to seek alternative financing. Furthermore, if we issue additional equity or debt securities, stockholders may experience additional dilution or the new equity securities may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing holders of our common stock. The inability to obtain additional capital may restrict our ability to grow and may reduce our ability to continue to conduct business operations. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, we will be required to cease our operations. To date, we have not considered this alternative, nor do we view it as a likely occurrence.
Going Concern.
The Company’s financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and settlement of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred a net loss of $726,718. The Company had an accumulated deficit of $1,864,344 as of December 31, 2020. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.