ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on December 18, 2019 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Business Combination Agreement
On May 6, 2021, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) with LifeSci Acquisition II Merger Sub, Inc. (“Merger Sub”), and Science 37, Inc. (“Science 37”), pursuant to which the Merger Sub will merge with and into Science 37, with Science 37 surviving the merger as our wholly-owned subsidiary (the “Merger”). Our board of directors has unanimously (i) approved and declared advisable the Merger Agreement, the Merger and the other transactions contemplated thereby and (ii) resolved to recommend approval of the Merger Agreement and related matters by our stockholders.
Immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger (the “Effective Time”) and subject to the consent of the holders of a majority of the then outstanding shares of Science 37’s Series A, Series, B, Series C, Series D and Series D-1 preferred stock, par value $0.0001 per share (collectively, the “Science 37 Preferred Stock”), voting together as a single class on an as-converted basis, each issued and outstanding share of Science 37 Preferred Stock will be converted into shares of the common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, of Science 37 (the “Science 37 Common Stock”) at the then-applicable conversion rates (the “Science 37 Preferred Stock Conversion”).
At the Effective Time, each outstanding and unexercised warrant to purchase shares of Science 37 capital stock (“Science 37 Warrant”) that is outstanding and unexercised immediately prior to the Effective Time will be converted into a warrant exercisable to receive our common stock, in accordance with its terms. From and after the Effective Time: (i) each Science 37 Warrant assumed by us may be exercised solely for shares of our common stock; (ii) the number of shares of our common stock subject to each Science 37 Warrant assumed by us will be determined by multiplying (A) the number of shares of Science 37 Common Stock, or the number of shares of Science 37 Common Stock issuable upon exercise of the Science 37 Warrant that were subject to such Science 37 Warrant immediately prior to the Effective Time, by (B) the Exchange Ratio, and rounding the resulting number up to the nearest whole number of shares of our common stock; (iii) the per share exercise price for our common stock issuable upon exercise of each Science 37 Warrant assumed by us will be determined by dividing the per share exercise price of Science 37 Common Stock subject to the Science 37 Warrant, as in effect immediately prior to the Effective Time, by the Exchange Ratio and rounding the resulting exercise price up to the nearest whole cent; and (iv) any restriction on any Science 37 Warrant assumed by us will continue in full force and effect and the terms and other provisions of such Science 37 Warrant will otherwise remain unchanged. The Exchange Ratio is defined in the Merger Agreement to be the quotient of (i) 100,000,000 divided by (ii) the number of shares of Science 37’s Fully Diluted Capital Stock (as defined in the Merger Agreement).
At the Effective Time, following the Science 37 Preferred Stock Conversion, each share of Science 37 Common Stock (including shares of Science 37 Common Stock outstanding as a result of the Science 37 Preferred Stock Conversion, but excluding shares the holders of which perfect rights of appraisal under Delaware law) will be converted into the right to receive such number of shares of our common stock equal to the Exchange Ratio (subject to rounding mechanisms as described in the Merger Agreement) and a number of Earn-Out Shares (as defined below).
At the Effective Time, each outstanding option to purchase shares of Science 37 Common Stock, whether or not then vested and exercisable, will be converted automatically (and without any required action on the part of such holder of outstanding option) into an option to purchase shares of our common stock equal to the number of shares subject to such option prior to the Effective Time multiplied by the Exchange Ratio, with the per share exercise price equal to the exercise price prior to the Effective Time divided by the Exchange Ratio.
Following the closing of the Merger, former holders of shares of Science 37 Common Stock (including shares received as a result of the Science 37 Preferred Stock Conversion) and former holders of Science 37 stock options will be entitled to receive their pro rata share of up to 12,500,000 additional shares of our common stock (the “Earn-Out Shares”) if, within a three-year period following May 6, 2021, the signing date of the Merger Agreement, the closing share price of our common stock equals or exceeds any of two thresholds over any 20 trading days within a 30-day trading period (each, a “Triggering Event”) and, in respect of a former holder of Science 37 stock options, the holder continues to provide services to us or one of our subsidiaries at the time of such Triggering Event.
In connection with the execution of the Merger Agreement, LSAQ entered into subscription agreements (collectively, the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain parties subscribing for shares of LSAQ Common Stock (the “Subscribers”) pursuant to which the Subscribers have agreed to purchase, and LSAQ has agreed to sell to the Subscribers, an aggregate of 20,000,000 shares of LSAQ Common Stock, for a purchase price of $10.00 per share and an aggregate purchase price of $200,000,000. The obligations to consummate the transactions contemplated by the Subscription Agreements are conditioned upon, among other things, customary closing conditions and the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement.
The Merger Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and covenants of the parties thereto. The consummation of the proposed Merger is subject to certain conditions as further described in the Merger Agreement.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our Initial Public Offering, and subsequent to our Initial Public Offering, identifying a target for our initial Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on investments held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective Business Combination candidates.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, we had a net loss of $561,449, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $591,846, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $30,397.
For the period from December 18, 2019 (inception) through June 30, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,000, which consisted of formation and operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 24, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 8,009,041 Public Shares, which includes the partial exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 509,041 Public Shares, at a price of $10.00 per Public Share, generating gross proceeds of $80,090,412. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 3,146,454 Private Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $0.90 per Private Warrant, generating gross proceeds of $2,831,809.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Warrants, a total of $80,090,412 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $1,858,498 in transaction costs, including $1,601,808 of underwriting fees and $256,690 of other costs.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $582,198. Net loss of $561,449 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $30,397. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $9,648 of cash from operating activities.
As of June 30, 2021, we had investments held in the Trust Account of $80,120,809. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable and less deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of June 30, 2021, we had $416,111 of cash held outside of the Trust Account. We will use these funds primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination, and to pay taxes to the extent the interest earned on the Trust Account is not sufficient to pay our taxes. A portion of these funds will also be used to pay our obligations pursuant to the administrative services agreement described below.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsors, or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. Each Working Capital Loan would be evidenced by a promissory note. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity. The warrants would be identical to the Private Warrants.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of June 30, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial support to the Company. We began incurring these fees on November 20, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Warrant Classification
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our Initial Public Offering in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40-15-7D under which the warrants do meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as equity.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Net Loss per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Shares of common stock subject to possible redemption which are not currently redeemable and are not redeemable at fair value, have been excluded from the calculation of basic net loss per share since such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of the Trust Account earnings. Our net income is adjusted for the portion of income that is attributable to common stock subject to possible redemption, as these shares only participate in the earnings of the Trust Account and not our income or losses.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.