ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Certain information contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K constitutes “Forward-Looking Statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, which can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as “may,” “will,” “would,” “intend,” “could,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate” or “continue” or the negative thereof or other variations thereon or comparable terminology. Examples of forward-looking statements, include, without limitation, those relating to the Company’s future business prospects and strategies, financial results, working capital, liquidity, capital needs and expenditures, interest costs, insurance availability and contingent liabilities. Forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause the Company’s actual results and financial condition to differ materially from those indicated in the forward-looking statements, including, but not limited to, the Company’s ability to generate sufficient cash flows from operations, additional proceeds from debt refinancings, and proceeds from the sale of assets to satisfy its short- and long-term debt and lease obligations and to fund the Company’s capital improvement projects to expand, redevelop, and/or reposition its senior living communities; the Company’s ability to obtain additional capital on terms acceptable to it; the Company’s ability to extend or refinance its existing debt as such debt matures; the Company’s compliance with its debt and lease agreements, including certain financial covenants and the terms and conditions of its recent forbearance agreements, and the risk of cross-default in the event such non-compliance occurs; the Company’s ability to complete acquisitions and dispositions upon favorable terms or at all; the risks related to an epidemic, pandemic, or other health crisis, such as the recent outbreak of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19); the risk of oversupply and increased competition in the markets which the Company operates; the risk of increased competition for skilled workers due to wage pressure and changes in regulatory requirements; the departure of the Company’s key officers and personnel; the cost and difficulty of complying with applicable licensure, legislative oversight, or regulatory changes; the risks associated with a decline in economic conditions generally; the adequacy and continued availability of the Company’s insurance policies and the Company’s ability to recover any losses it sustains under such policies; changes in accounting principles and interpretations; and the other risks and factors identified from time to time in the Company’s reports filed with the SEC. On December 9, 2020, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a reverse stock split of the Company’s common stock at a ratio of 1-for-15, which became effective on December 11, 2020. Accordingly, all of the Company’s common share, equity award and per-share amounts have been adjusted to reflect such reverse stock split for all prior periods presented.
Overview
The following discussion and analysis addresses (i) the Company’s results of operations on a historical consolidated basis for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and (ii) liquidity and capital resources of the Company, and should be read in conjunction with the Company’s historical consolidated financial statements and the selected financial data contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The Company is one of the leading owner-operators of senior housing communities in the United States. The Company’s operating strategy is to provide value to its senior living residents by providing quality senior living services at reasonable prices, while achieving and sustaining a strong, competitive position within its geographically concentrated regions, as well as continuing to enhance the performance of its operations. The Company provides senior living services to the 75+ population, including independent living, assisted living, and memory care services at reasonable prices. Many of the Company’s communities offer a continuum of care to meet each of its resident’s needs as they change over time. This continuum of care, which integrates independent living, assisted living, and memory care, which may be bridged by home care through independent home care agencies, sustains our residents’ autonomy and independence based on their physical and mental abilities.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company operated 101 senior housing communities in 22 states with an aggregate capacity of approximately 13,000 residents, including 60 senior housing communities that the Company owned, 17 properties that were in the process of transitioning legal ownership back to Fannie Mae, 12 senior housing communities that the Company leased, and 12 communities that the Company managed on behalf of third parties.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 global pandemic was declared a public health emergency in the United States in the first quarter of 2020 and as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the United States continues to experience the impacts of COVID-19, which has significantly disrupted, the nation’s economy, the senior living industry, and the Company’s business.
In an effort to protect its residents and employees and slow the spread of COVID-19, and in response to quarantines, shelter-in-place orders and other limitations imposed by federal, state and local governments, the Company has restricted or limited access to its communities, including limitations on in-person prospective resident tours and, in certain cases, new resident admissions. As a result, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused a decline in the occupancy levels at the Company’s communities, which has negatively impacted the Company’s revenues and operating results, which depend significantly on such occupancy levels. During March 2020, new resident leads, visits, and move-in activity began to decline compared to historical levels. This trend continued through the end of 2020 and adversely impacted occupancy, resulting in a decrease in consolidated senior housing occupancy from 79.9% for the first quarter of 2020 to 73.3% for the fourth quarter of 2020.
In December 2020, the Company initiated the first round of COVID-19 vaccinations at all of its communities and, as of February 2021, subsequent to year-end, the Company has completed first-round vaccine clinics at 100% and second-round vaccine clinics at 68% of its communities. In communities that have completed second-round vaccine clinics, 75% of its residents and 34% of its staff have received both doses of the COVID-19 vaccine and are fully vaccinated. As of February 2021, subsequent to year-end, COVID-19 incidence rates have declined across our portfolio, and leading indicators, such as leads and tours, are at their highest levels since March 2020, indicating that demand for senior housing and services is beginning to rebound.
During 2020, the Company incurred significant additional operating costs and expenses in order to implement enhanced infection control protocols and enhanced care for its residents. For example, the Company incurred substantial costs for procurement of additional PPE, cleaning and disposable food service supplies, enhanced cleaning, infection control, environmental sanitation costs, and increased labor expenses, including contract labor and for hazard pay at certain communities where residents tested positive for COVID-19. The Company has also incurred costs for COVID-19 testing of residents and employees. In total, the Company incurred approximately $9.4 million in incremental COVID-19 related costs in fiscal year 2020. To mitigate these new expenses, the Company reduced spending on non-essential supplies, travel, and other discretionary items.
In November 2020, the Company accepted $8.1 million of CARES Act Phase 2 Provider Relief funds, which are intended to reimburse the Company for COVID-19 related costs and lost revenue. The $8.1 million Phase 2 Provider Relief Funds have been recorded as a reduction to operating expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company received an additional $8.7 million in the first quarter of 2021, subsequent to year-end, under the CARES Act Phase 3 and expects to fully recognize Phase 3 funds in 2021. The CARES Act Phase 2 and Phase 3 funds are grants that do not have to be repaid provided the Company satisfies the terms and conditions of the CARES Act. In addition, the Company had received approximately $1.9 million in relief from state agencies during the year ended December 31, 2020 under the CARES Act and has applied for additional federal and state funding. The Company is utilizing the payroll tax deferral program under the CARES Act and delayed the employer portion of payroll taxes totaling $7.4 million from April 2020 through December 2020. One-half of the deferred payroll taxes, which amounted to $3.7 million, will be due by December 2021, while the other half will be due by December 2022.
CARES Act Provider Relief Funds are subject to the terms and conditions of the program, including stringent restrictions that funds may only be used to reimburse COVID-19 related expenses or lost revenue that are attributable to COVID-19 and have not been reimbursed from other sources or that other sources are not obligated to reimburse. While we intend to pursue additional funding that may become available, there can be no assurances that we will qualify for, or receive, any additional relief funds in the future.
We cannot, at this time, predict with reasonable certainty the impacts that the COVID-19 pandemic ultimately will have on our business, results of operations, cash flow, and liquidity, and our preparation and response efforts may delay or negatively impact our strategic initiatives, including plans for future growth. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will depend on many factors, many of which cannot be foreseen, including: (i) the duration, severity and geographic concentrations of the COVID-19 pandemic and any resurgence, second waves or new strains of the disease; (ii) the impact of COVID-19 on the nation’s economy and debt and equity markets at large and the local economies in our markets; (iii) the development and availability of COVID-19 infection and antibody testing, therapeutic agents and vaccines, and the prioritization of such resources among businesses and demographic groups; (iv) governmental financial and regulatory relief efforts that may become available to businesses and individuals; (v) concerns over and the perceptions of the safety of senior living communities during and after the pandemic; (vi) changes in demand for senior living communities and our ability to adapt our sales and marketing efforts to meet that demand; (vii) the impact of COVID-19 on our residents’ and their families’ ability to afford our resident fees, including due to
changes in unemployment rates, consumer confidence, and equity markets caused by the COVID-19 pandemic; (viii) changes in the acuity levels of our new residents; (ix) the disproportionate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on seniors generally and those residing in our communities; (x) the duration and costs of our preparation and response efforts, including increased supplies, labor, litigation, and other expenses; (xi) the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our ability to (1) complete equity and debt financings, refinancing, or other transactions (including dispositions) or (2) generate sufficient cash flow to cover required interest and lease payments and to satisfy financial and other covenants in our debt and lease documents; (xii) increased regulatory requirements and enforcement actions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, including those that may limit our collection efforts for delinquent accounts; and (xiii) the frequency and magnitude of legal actions and liability claims that may arise due to the COVID-19 pandemic or our associated response efforts.
Going Concern Uncertainty
Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 205-40, “Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” requires an evaluation of whether there are conditions or events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about an entity’s ability to continue as a going concern within 12 months after the date the financial statements are issued. Initially, this evaluation does not consider the potential mitigating effect of management’s plans that have not been fully implemented. When substantial doubt exists, management evaluates the mitigating effect of its plans to determine if it is probable that (1) the plans will be effectively implemented within one year after the date the financial statements are issued, and (2) when implemented, the plans will mitigate the relevant conditions or events that raise substantial doubt about the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern.
In complying with the requirements under ASC 205-40 to complete an evaluation without considering mitigating factors, the Company considered several conditions or events including (1) uncertainty around the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operations and financial results, (2) $72.5 million of debt maturing and $16.8 million of debt service payments due in the next 12 months, (3) recurring operating losses and projected operating losses for fiscal periods through March 31, 2022, (4) the Company’s working capital deficit and (5) noncompliance with certain financial covenants of the Company’s loan agreements with Fifth Third Bank covering two properties and BBVA covering three properties at December 31, 2020. The above conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for the 12-month period following the date the fiscal year 2020 financial statements are issued.
As discussed below, the Company has implemented plans which encompass strategic and cash-preservation initiatives, that are designed to provide the Company with adequate liquidity to meet its obligations for at least the 12-month period following the date its fiscal year 2020 financial statements are issued. The Company’s primary sources of near- and medium-term liquidity are expected to be (1) cash from operations that will be used in operations and (2) debt forbearance, refinancings and extensions to the extent available on acceptable terms.
Strategic and Cash Preservation Initiatives
The Company has taken or intends to take the following actions, among others, to improve its liquidity position and to address uncertainty about its ability to operate as a going concern:
•
In the first quarter of 2019, the Company implemented a three-year operational improvement plan which began to show improved operating results during 2020, prior to the onset of COVID-19, and is expected to continue to drive incremental profitability improvements.
•
We are in active discussions with Fifth Third Bank and BBVA to resolve our noncompliance with financial covenants at December 31, 2020 for debt totaling $72.5 million, which is included in current portion of notes payable, net of deferred loan costs on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. As a result of default, the loans have become callable.
•
The Company has implemented additional proactive spending reductions to improve liquidity, including reduced discretionary spending and monitoring capital spending.
•
The Company has exited all master lease agreements in order to strengthen the Company’s balance sheet and allow the Company to strategically invest in certain existing communities (see “Note 5- Dispositions and Other Significant Transactions”).
•
On November 24, 2020 the Company closed on the sale of one senior housing community located in Canton, Ohio, for a total purchase price of $18.0 million and received approximately $6.4 million in net proceeds after
retiring outstanding mortgage debt of $10.8 million and paying customary transaction and closing costs. The Company recorded a $2.0 million gain on the sale of the property, which is included in gain (loss) on disposition of assets, net in the year ended December 31, 2020. In November 2020, the Company entered into a management agreement with the successor owner to manage the senior living community, subject to a management fee based on the gross revenues of the property.
•
In May 2020, the Company entered into short-term debt forbearance agreements with a number of its lenders (see “Note 9- Notes Payable”). In October 2020, the Company entered into an additional short-term forbearance agreement with Protective Life Insurance Company.
•
In November 2020, the Company accepted $8.1 million of CARES Act Phase 2 Provider Relief funds, which are intended to reimburse the Company for COVID-19 related costs and lost revenue. The $8.1 million Phase 2 Provider Relief Funds have been recorded as a reduction to operating expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company received an additional $8.7 million in the first quarter of 2021, subsequent to year-end under the CARES Act Phase 3 and expects to fully recognize Phase 3 funds in 2021. The CARES Act Phase 2 and Phase 3 funds are grants that do not have to be repaid provided the Company satisfies the terms and conditions of the CARES Act. In addition, the Company had received approximately $1.9 million in relief from state agencies during the year ended December 31, 2020 under the CARES Act and has applied for additional federal and state funding.
•
The Company elected to utilize the CARES Act payroll tax deferral program and delayed payment of a portion of payroll taxes incurred from April 2020 through December 2020. One-half of the deferral amount will become due on each of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2022. At December 31, 2020, the Company had deferred $7.4 million in payroll taxes, of which, $3.7 million is included in accrued expenses and $3.7 million is included in other long-term liabilities in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets.
•
In July 2020, the Company initiated a process which is intended to transfer the operations and ownership of 18 communities that are either underperforming or are in underperforming loan pools to Fannie Mae, the holder of nonrecourse debt on such communities. In conjunction with the agreement, the Company discontinued recognizing revenues and expenses on the properties as of August 1, 2020, but continues to manage the communities on behalf of Fannie Mae. The Company earns a management fee for providing such services. As a result of events of default and the appointment of a receiver to take possession of the communities, the Company concluded that, in accordance with ASC 610-20, “Gains and Losses from the Derecognition of Nonfinancial Assets” a $199.6 million loss should be taken due to the derecognition of the assets as a result of the loss of control of the assets, which occurred during the year ended December 31, 2020. See “Note 9- Notes Payable.” Once legal ownership of the properties transfers to Fannie Mae and the liabilities relating to such communities is extinguished, the Company expects to recognize a gain related to the extinguishment in accordance with ASC 470, “Debt.” At December 31, 2020, the Company included $218.4 million in outstanding debt in the current portion of notes payable, net of deferred loan costs, and $8.7 million of accrued interest in accrued expenses on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets related to these properties.
•
The Company is evaluating possible debt and capital options.
The Company’s plans are designed to provide the Company with adequate liquidity to meet its obligations for at least the 12-month period following the date its financial statements are issued; however, the remediation plan is dependent on conditions and matters that may be outside of the Company’s control or may not be available on terms acceptable to the Company, or at all, many of which have been made worse or more unpredictable by the COVID-19 pandemic. Accordingly, management could not conclude that it was probable that the plans will mitigate the relevant conditions or events that raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. If the Company is unable to successfully execute all of these initiatives or if the plan does not fully mitigate the Company’s liquidity challenges, the Company’s operating plans and resulting cash flows along with its cash and cash equivalents and other sources of liquidity may not be sufficient to fund operations for the 12-month period following the date the financial statements are issued.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern, which contemplates continuity of operations, realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business for the 12-month period following the date the financial statements are issued. As such, the accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of assets and their carrying amounts, or the amount and classification of liabilities that may result should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Significant Financial and Operational Highlights
The Company primarily derives its revenue by providing senior living and healthcare services to seniors. In the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company generated resident revenue of approximately $357.1 million compared to resident revenue of approximately $447.1 million in the prior year representing a decrease of approximately $90.0 million. The decrease in revenue is generated from significant property dispositions throughout 2020, including: (1) the sale of two owned properties, one of which transitioned to a management agreement with the successor owner; (2) the transition of 22 leased communities to different operators in conjunction with exiting its master lease agreements; (3) the conversion of six previously-leased communities to management agreements; and (4) the process of transferring legal ownership of 18 communities to Fannie Mae, the holder of nonrecourse debt related to such communities. Together, these actions accounted for a decrease in revenue of approximately $83.2 million. The remaining decrease of was primarily due to a decrease in total occupancies at the Company’s remaining senior housing communities and small reductions in average monthly rent. The decrease in the total occupancy was primarily due to reduced move-in activity, which began in March 2020 and continued through the end of 2020, related to the COVID-19 pandemic and our response efforts. The decreases in resident revenue were partially offset by increases in management fees and community reimbursement revenue of $1.8 million and $24.9 million, respectively, which were due to the Company’s management of 32 communities which commenced during 2020.
Facility Lease Transactions
As of December 31, 2019, the Company leased 46 senior housing communities from certain real estate investment trusts. During 2020, the Company exited all master lease agreements with its landlords (as further described below) and after giving effect to such transactions, as of December 31, 2020, the Company leased 12 senior living communities. All 12 remaining leases were subsequently converted to management agreements as of January 1, 2021. See “Note 18- Subsequent Events.”
Ventas
As of December 31, 2019, the Company leased seven senior housing communities from Ventas. The term of the Ventas lease agreement was previously scheduled to expire on September 30, 2025. On March 10, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement with Ventas (as amended, the “Ventas Agreement”), providing for the early termination of its Master Lease Agreement with Ventas covering all seven communities. Pursuant to the Ventas Agreement, the Company agreed to pay Ventas rent of approximately $1.0 million per month from February 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020 for such communities, as compared to approximately $1.3 million per month that would otherwise have been due and payable under the Master Lease Agreement. In addition, the Ventas Agreement provided that the Company would not be required to comply with certain financial covenants of the Master Lease Agreement during the forbearance period, which terminated on December 31, 2020. In conjunction with the Ventas Agreement, the Company released to Ventas $4.1 million in security deposits and $2.5 million in escrow deposits held by Ventas, and Ventas reduced the amounts and term of the Company’s lease payments, and effectively eliminated the Company’s lease termination obligation, which was $11.4 million at December 31, 2019. Pursuant to the Ventas Agreement, the Master Lease Agreement terminated on December 31, 2020.
In accordance with ASC Topic 842, the reduction in the monthly minimum rent payable to Ventas and the modification of the lease term pursuant to the Ventas Agreement was determined to be a modification of the Master Lease Agreement. As such, the Company reassessed the classification of the Master Lease Agreement with Ventas based on the modified terms and determined that the lease continued to be classified as an operating lease until the communities transitioned to a different operator or management agreement, at which time the lease would terminate. The modification resulted in a reduction to the lease termination obligation, lease liability and operating lease right-of-use asset recorded in the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets by approximately $11.4 million, $51.6 million, and $47.8 million, respectively, during the first quarter of 2020. The Company recognized a net gain of approximately $8.4 million on the transaction, which is included in gain on facility lease modification and termination, net on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for the year ended December 31, 2020, and
was primarily due to the impact of the change in lease term on certain of the right-of-use asset balances. As a result of the lease modification, the Company assessed the operating lease right-of-use assets for impairment during the first quarter of 2020. See “Note 4- Impairment of Long-Lived Assets.”
Under the terms of the Master Lease Agreement, Ventas elected on December 31, 2020 to enter into a property management agreement with the Company as manager that provides for a management fee based on gross revenues of the applicable community payable to the Company and other customary terms and conditions. As a result of these transactions, the Company had no remaining lease transactions with Ventas as of January 1, 2021. See “Note 18- Subsequent Events.”
Welltower
As of December 31, 2019, the Company leased 24 senior housing communities from Welltower. The initial terms of the Welltower lease agreements were previously scheduled to expire on various dates from April 2025 through April 2026. On March 15, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement with Welltower (the “Welltower Agreement”), providing for the early termination of three Master Lease Agreements between the Company and Welltower covering all 24 communities. Pursuant to the Welltower Agreement, among other things, from February 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020, the Company agreed to pay Welltower rent of approximately $2.2 million per month for such communities as compared to approximately $2.8 million per month that would otherwise have been due and payable under the Master Lease Agreements. In addition, the Welltower Agreement provided that the Company was not required to comply with certain financial covenants of the Master Lease Agreements during the forbearance period, which terminated on December 31, 2020. In conjunction with the Welltower Agreement, the Company agreed to release $6.5 million in letters of credit to Welltower, which were released during the second quarter of 2020. The Welltower Agreement provided that Welltower could terminate such agreement; with respect to any or all communities upon 30 days’ notice, but no later than December 31, 2020. Upon termination, Welltower could elect to enter into a property management agreement with the Company as manager or to transition the properties to a new operator. The Welltower Agreement also provided that the Company was not obligated to fund certain capital expenditures under the Master Lease Agreements during the applicable forbearance period and that Welltower would reimburse the Company for certain specified capital expenditures.
In accordance with ASC Topic 842, the reduction in the monthly minimum rent payable to Welltower under the then existing Master Lease Agreements with Welltower and modification to the lease term pursuant to the Welltower Agreement was determined to be a modification of the Master Lease Agreements. As such, the Company reassessed the classification of the Master Lease Agreements based on the modified terms and determined that each of the leases continued to be classified as an operating lease until the applicable communities transitioned to a different operator or management agreement, at which time such lease would terminate. The modification resulted in a reduction to the lease liability and operating lease right-of-use asset recorded in the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets by approximately $129.9 million, and $121.9 million, respectively, during the first quarter of 2020. The Company recognized a gain of approximately $8.0 million on the transaction, which is included in gain (loss) on facility lease modification and termination, net on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result of the lease modification, the Company assessed the operating lease right-of-use assets for impairment during the first quarter of 2020. See “Note 4- Impairment of Long-Lived Assets.”
During the third quarter of 2020, Welltower elected to terminate the Welltower Agreement with respect to five communities, all of which transferred to a different operator on September 10, 2020. During the fourth quarter of 2020, Welltower elected to terminate the Welltower Agreement with respect to 14 communities. The Company recorded a loss of approximately $0.7 million, which is included in gain on facility lease modification and termination, net on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Master Lease Agreements with respect to the remaining leased properties terminated on December 31, 2020, and Welltower elected to enter into a property management agreement with the Company which (i) provides that the Company will serve as manager and receive a management fee based on gross revenues of the applicable community and (ii) contains other customary terms and conditions. As a result of these transactions, the Company had no remaining lease transactions with Welltower as of January 1, 2021. See “Note 18- Subsequent Events.”
Healthpeak
On March 1, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement with Healthpeak (the “Healthpeak Agreement”), effective February 1, 2020, providing for the early termination of one of its Master Lease Agreements with Healthpeak, which was previously scheduled to mature in April 2026. Such Master Lease Agreement terminated and was converted into a Management Agreement under a Real Estate Investment Trust Investment Diversification and Empowerment Act structure (a “RIDEA structure”) pursuant to which the Company agreed to manage the six communities that were subject to the Master Lease Agreement until such communities are sold by Healthpeak. Pursuant to the Management Agreement, the Company will receive a management fee based on gross revenues realized at the applicable senior living communities plus reimbursement for its direct costs and expenses related to such communities. In conjunction with the Healthpeak Agreement, the Company released to Healthpeak approximately $2.6 million of security deposits held by Healthpeak. The Company remeasured the lease liability and operating lease right-of-use asset recorded in the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2019 to zero, resulting in a net loss of $7.0 million on the transaction, which is included in gain on facility lease modification and termination, net on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for year ended December 31, 2020.
On May 20, 2020, the Company entered into an additional agreement with Healthpeak (the “Healthpeak Agreement”) effective from April 1, 2020 until the end of the lease term. Pursuant to the Healthpeak Agreement, the Company began paying Healthpeak rent of approximately $0.7 million per month for eight senior housing communities subject to a Master Lease Agreement with Healthpeak in lieu of approximately $0.9 million of monthly rent due and payable under the Master Lease Agreement covering such communities. The rents paid to Healthpeak represent approximately 75% of their scheduled rates, with the remaining rent being subject to payment by the Company pursuant to a three-year note payable with final payment including accrued interest from November 1, 2021, to be made on or before November 1, 2023. At December 31, 2020, the Company had deferred $2.1 million in rent payments, which is included in notes payable, net of deferred loan costs and current portion on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. Given that the total minimum lease payments and the lease term remain unchanged, the Company has elected not to evaluate the deferral as a rent concession and did not account for the deferral as a modification to the existing lease agreement. The Company concluded the concessions provided to the Company were not contemplated by the existing lease. The Company accounted for the concession in the form of a deferral as if the lease terms were unchanged. Accordingly, accrued interest on the deferral amount is recorded in interest expense and accrued interest payable on the portion of the deferral amount that has yet to be paid on a monthly basis until such interest payments become due.
Effective November 1, 2020, upon the expiration of the Master Lease agreement, the Company entered into a short-term excess cash flow lease pursuant to which the Company agreed to manage the seven communities that were subject to the Master Lease Agreement until such communities are sold by Healthpeak. Pursuant to such agreement, the Company began paying Healthpeak monthly rent of any excess cash flow of the communities and earning a management fee for continuing to manage the communities. In December 2020, Healthpeak sold two of the properties and in January 2021, subsequent to year-end, Healthpeak sold one additional property and terminated all agreements for those three properties. See “Note 18- Subsequent Events.”
Dispositions and Other Significant Transactions
Disposition of Boca Raton, Florida Community
Effective January 15, 2020, the Company’s leased senior living community located in Boca Raton, Florida transitioned to a new operator. In conjunction with the transition, the Company paid the lessor, Healthpeak, a one-time $0.3 million termination payment as a prepayment against the remaining lease payments and was relieved of any additional obligation to Healthpeak with regard to such property and the lease was terminated as to the property. The Company recorded a gain on the transaction of $1.8 million, which is included in gain on facility lease modification and termination, net on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for year ended December 31, 2020.
Disposition of Merrillville, Indiana Community
Effective March 31, 2020, the Company sold one community located in Merrillville, Indiana for a total purchase price of $7.0 million and received approximately $6.9 million in cash proceeds after paying customary closing costs. The community was unencumbered by any mortgage debt. The Company recognized a loss of $7.4 million on the disposition, which is included in gain (loss) on disposition of assets, net on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Disposition of Canton, Ohio Community
On November 24, 2020, the Company closed on the sale of one senior housing community located in Canton, Ohio, for a total purchase price of $18.0 million and received approximately $6.4 million in net proceeds after retiring outstanding mortgage debt of $10.8 million and paying customary transaction and closing costs. The Company recorded a $2.0 million gain on the sale of the property, which is included in gain (loss) on disposition of assets, net in the year ended December 31, 2020. In November 2020, the Company entered into a management agreement with the successor owner to manage the senior living community, pursuant to which the Company receives a management fee based on the gross revenues of the property.
Transactions Involving Certain Fannie Mae Loans
Among other provisions, the CARES Act permitted borrowers with mortgages from Government Sponsored Enterprises who experienced a financial hardship related to COVID-19 to obtain forbearance of their loans for up to 90 days. On May 7, 2020, the Company entered into forbearance agreements with Berkadia Commercial Mortgage LLC, as servicer of 23 of its Fannie Mae loans covering 20 properties. On May 9, 2020, the Company entered into a forbearance agreement with Wells Fargo Bank (“Wells Fargo”), as servicer of one Fannie Mae loan covering one property. On May 20, 2020, the Company entered into forbearance agreements with KeyBank, as servicer of three Fannie Mae loans covering two properties. The forbearance agreements allowed the Company to withhold the loan payments due under the loan agreements for the months of April, May and June 2020 ("Deferred Payments") and Fannie Mae agreed to forbear in exercising its rights and remedies during such period. During this three-month loan payment forbearance, the Company agreed to pay to Fannie Mae monthly all net operating income, if any, as defined in the forbearance agreement, for the properties receiving forbearance.
On July 8, 2020, the Company entered into forbearance extension agreements with Fannie Mae, which provided for a one-month extension of the forbearance agreements between the Company and Fannie Mae covering 23 properties. The forbearance extension agreements extended the forbearance period until July 31, 2020, and Fannie Mae agreed to forbear in exercising its rights and remedies during such period. By July 31, 2020, the Company was required to repay to Fannie Mae the deferred payments, less payments made during the forbearance period.
On July 31, 2020, the Company made required payments to Fannie Mae totaling $0.6 million, which included the deferred payments, less payments made during the forbearance period, for five properties with forbearance agreements. The Company elected not to pay $3.8 million on the loans for the remaining 18 properties as of that date as the Company initiated a process that is intended to transfer the operations and ownership of such properties to Fannie Mae. Therefore, the Company was in default on such loans.
As a result of the default, Fannie Mae filed a motion with the United States District Court (the “District Court”) requesting that a receiver be appointed over the 18 properties, which was approved by the District Court. The Company agreed to continue to manage the 18 communities, in exchange for a management fee, until legal ownership of the properties is transferred to Fannie Mae or another party. In conjunction with the receivership order, the Company must obtain approval from the receiver for all payments, but will receive reimbursements from Fannie Mae for any payments made on behalf of any of the 18 communities under the receivership order. As a result of the events of default and receivership order, the Company discontinued recognizing revenues and expenses related to the 18 properties effective August 1, 2020, which was the date of default. Management fees earned from the properties are recognized as revenue when earned. In addition, the Company concluded it was no longer entitled to receive any existing accounts receivable or revenue related to the properties, all amounts held in escrow by Fannie Mae had been forfeited, and that the Company no longer has control of the properties in accordance with ASC 610-20. As such, the Company derecognized the assets and recorded a loss of $199.6 million on the transaction for the year ended December 31, 2020. Once legal ownership of the properties transfers to Fannie Mae and the liabilities relating to such communities have been extinguished, the Company expects to recognize a gain related to the extinguishment in accordance with ASC 470, which is expected to occur in 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company included $218.4 million in outstanding debt and $8.7 million of accrued interest on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets related to these properties. In the fourth quarter of 2020, one community was transitioned to a successor operator, although the legal ownership has not yet transferred back to Fannie Mae for this community. At December 31, 2020, the Company continued to manage 17 communities on behalf of Fannie Mae. In the first quarter of 2021, subsequent to year-end, the legal ownership of four properties was transferred to Fannie Mae. See “Note- 18 Subsequent Events.”
Debt Forbearance Agreement on BBVA Loan
The Company also entered into a loan amendment with another lender, BBVA related to a loan covering three properties pursuant to which the Company deferred monthly debt service payments for April, May and June 2020, which deferred payments are added to and due in June 2021.
Debt Forbearance Agreement on HUD Loan
The Company also entered into a debt forbearance agreement with ORIX Real Estate Capital, LLC (“ORIX”), related to a U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) loan covering one property pursuant to which the Company deferred monthly debt service payments for April, May and June 2020, which deferred payments are added to the regularly scheduled payments in equal installments for one year following the forbearance period.
Protective Life Amendments to Loan Agreements and Loan Modification and Temporary Deferral Agreements
On May 21, 2020, the Company entered into amendments to its loan agreements with one of its lenders, Protective Life Insurance Company, related to loans covering ten properties. These amendments allowed the Company to defer principal and interest payments for April, May and June 2020, and to defer principal payments for July 2020 through March 2021. The Company made all required debt service payments in July, August, and September 2020. On October 1, 2020, the Company entered into further amendments to its loan agreements with Protective Life Insurance Company. These amendments allow the Company to defer interest payments for October, November, and December 2020, and to extend the deferral period of principal payments through September 1, 2021, with all such deferral amounts being added to principal due at maturity in either 2025, 2026 or 2031, depending upon the loan.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the accompanying financial statements and related notes. Management bases its estimates and assumptions on historical experience, observance of industry trends and various other sources of information and factors, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from these estimates. Critical accounting policies are defined as those that are reflective of significant judgments and uncertainties, and potentially could result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. The Company believes the following are our most critical accounting policies and/or typically require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Self-Insurance Liability Accruals
The Company offers full-time employees an option to participate in its health and dental plans. The Company is self-insured up to certain limits and is insured if claims in excess of these limits are incurred. The cost of employee health and dental benefits, net of employee contributions, is shared between the Company’s corporate office and its senior housing communities based on the respective number of plan participants. Funds collected are used to pay the actual program costs including estimated annual claims, third-party administrative fees, network provider fees, communication costs and other related administrative costs incurred by the plans. Claims are paid as they are submitted to the Company’s third-party administrator. The Company records a liability for outstanding claims and claims that have been incurred but not yet reported. This liability is based on the historical claim reporting lag and payment trends of health insurance claims. Management believes that the liability for outstanding losses and expenses is adequate to cover the ultimate cost of losses and expenses incurred at December 31, 2020; however, actual claims and expenses may differ. Any subsequent changes in estimates are recorded in the period in which they are determined.
The Company uses a combination of insurance and self-insurance for workers’ compensation. Determining the reserve for workers’ compensation losses and costs that the Company has incurred as of the end of a reporting period involves significant judgments based on projected future events, including potential settlements for pending claims, known incidents that result in claims, estimates of incurred but not yet reported claims, changes in insurance premiums, estimated litigation costs and other factors. The Company regularly adjusts these estimates to reflect changes in the foregoing factors. However, since this reserve is based on estimates, the actual expenses incurred may differ from the amounts reserved. Any subsequent changes in estimates are recorded in the period in which they are determined.
Long-Lived Assets and Impairment
Property and equipment are stated at cost and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. At each balance sheet date, the Company reviews the carrying value of its property and equipment to determine if facts and circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset group may not be recoverable, or that the depreciation period may need to be changed. The Company considers internal factors such as net operating losses along with external factors relating to each asset, including contract changes, local market developments, and other publicly available information to determine whether impairment indicators exist.
If an indicator of impairment is identified, recoverability of an asset group is assessed by comparing its carrying amount to the estimated future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset group through operation or disposition, calculated utilizing the lowest level of identifiable cash flows. If this comparison indicates that the carrying amount of an asset group is not recoverable, we estimate fair value of the asset group and record an impairment loss when the carrying amount exceeds fair value.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company determined that the modifications of certain of its Master Lease Agreements (see “Note 5- Dispositions and Other Significant Transactions”) and adverse impacts on the Company’s operating results resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic were indicators of potential impairment of its long-lived assets.
Due to the modification of the lease term and the expected impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company evaluated certain owned communities and all leased communities for impairment and tested the recoverability of these assets by comparing projected undiscounted cash flows associated with these assets to their respective historical carrying values. For communities in which the historical carrying value was not recoverable, the Company compared the estimated fair value of the assets to their carrying amount and recorded an impairment charge for the excess of carrying amount over fair value. For the operating lease right-of-use assets, fair value was estimated utilizing a discounted cash flow approach based on historical and projected cash flows and market data, including management fees and a market supported lease coverage ratio. The fair values of the property and equipment, net of these communities, were primarily determined utilizing the cost approach, which determines the current replacement cost of the property being appraised and then deducts for the loss in value caused by physical deterioration, functional obsolescence, and economic obsolescence the amount required to replace the asset as if new and adjusts to reflect usage. These fair value measurements are considered Level 3 measurements within the valuation hierarchy. During the first quarter of 2020, the Company recorded non-cash impairment charges of $6.2 million and $29.8 million to operating lease right-of-use assets, net and property and equipment, net, respectively.
During the third quarter of 2020, the Company recorded non-cash impairment charges of $1.3 million and $1.1 million to operating lease right-of-use assets, net and property and equipment, net, respectively, due to a change in the useful life of 15 of its communities, all of which transferred to new operators during the fourth quarter of 2020. Due to the changes in useful lives, the Company concluded the assets related to those properties had indicators of impairment and the carrying values were not fully recoverable. The fair values of the right-of-use assets were estimated, using level 3 inputs as defined in the accounting standards codification, utilizing a discounted cash flow approach based upon historical and projected cash flows and market data, including management fees and a market supported lease coverage ratio. In addition, during the third quarter of 2020 the Company recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $0.8 million to property and equipment, net of one owned community. The fair value of the property and equipment, net of this community was determined using the sales comparison approach, which utilizes the sales of comparable properties, and the income capitalization approach, which reflects the property’s income-producing capabilities. This impairment charge is primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic and lower than expected operating performance at the community and reflects the amount by which the carrying amount of these assets exceeded their fair value.
At December 31, 2020, the Company reviewed the carrying value of its property and equipment and determined that impairment indicators existed for one of its properties due to the challenged occupancy at the property driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company compared the carrying value of the community’s assets to the anticipated undiscounted cash flows and determined that the carrying value was not recoverable. The Company determined the fair value of the fixed assets using inputs classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy, which are unobservable inputs based on the Company’s assumptions, and recorded a $2.6 million impairment in the fourth quarter of 2020.
In total, the Company recognized non-cash impairment charges of property and equipment, net and operating lease right of use assets of $34.3 million and $7.5 million, respectively for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded impairment charges of property and equipment, net and operating lease right of use assets of $1.6 million and $1.4 million, respectively.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, for property and equipment and operating lease right of use assets where indicators of impairment were identified, tests of recoverability were performed and the Company has concluded its property and equipment is recoverable and does not warrant adjustment to the carrying value or remaining useful lives, except for the property noted above.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See “Note 3- Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for a discussion of new accounting pronouncements.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth, for the periods indicated, selected historical Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss data in thousands of dollars and expressed as a percentage of total revenues.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
In the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company generated total revenues of $383.9 million, which included approximately $357.1 million of resident revenue compared to resident revenue of approximately $447.1 million in the prior year. The decrease in resident revenue is generated from significant property dispositions in fiscal year 2020, including (1) the sale of two owned properties, one of which transitioned to a management agreement with the successor owner, (2) the transition of 22 of the Company’s leased communities to different operators in conjunction with exiting the Company’s master lease agreements, (3) the conversion of 12 previously-leased communities to management agreements, and (4) the process of transferring legal ownership of 18 communities to Fannie Mae, the holder of
nonrecourse debt. Together, these actions accounted for a decrease in revenue of approximately $83.2 million. The remaining decrease of was primarily due to a decrease in total occupancies at the Company’s remaining senior housing communities and small reductions in average monthly rent. The decrease in the total occupancy was primarily due to reduced move-in activity, which began in March 2020 and continued through the end of 2020, related primarily to the COVID-19 pandemic and our associated response efforts. The decreases in resident revenue were partially offset by increases in management fees and community reimbursement revenue of $1.8 million and $24.9 million, respectively, which were due to the Company’s management of 32 properties which commenced in 2020.
Expenses
Total expenses were $439.5 million during fiscal year 2020 compared to $464.8 million during fiscal year 2019, representing a decrease of $25.3 million. This decrease was primarily the result of the 2020 property dispositions, as described above, which reduced operating expense and facility lease expense, a $0.8 million decrease in stock-based compensation expense, coupled with reductions in depreciation and amortization expense of $3.9 million. These decreases were offset by increases of $38.8 million long-lived asset impairment charges, a $0.4 million increase in general and administrative expense and increases of $24.9 million in community reimbursement expense in 2020 as compared to 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating expenses were lower than the prior year by $56.0 million. The decrease in operating expenses primarily results from the disposition of communities during the year ended December 31, 2020 as described above which drove reductions of $24.6 million in labor and employee-related expenses, $4.2 million decrease in food expenses, a $3.2 million decrease in promotion expenses, a $4.2 million decrease in property tax expense, a $5.9 million decrease in utilities and repairs and maintenance, and a $10.1 million decrease in all other operating expenses, all of which were primarily due the property disposals described above and reduced occupancy levels at our continuing communities.
General and administrative expenses remained relatively flat year over year as increases in transaction and conversion costs and increases in contract labor and consulting expenses incurred to supplement and maintain current staffing levels in a competitive labor market were mostly offset by decreases in separation, placement, and retention costs primarily due to the replacement of the Company’s CEO and the separation of the Company’s COO during the first quarter of 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded non-cash impairment charges of $41.8 million. These impairment charges included $3.4 million of non-cash impairment charges related to property and equipment for two owned communities as a result of lower than expected operating performance at the communities driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, a $30.9 million non-cash impairment charge related to property and equipment for certain leased communities as a result of lease transactions, and a $7.5 million non-cash impairment charge related to operating lease right-of-use assets.
The decrease in facility lease expense is primarily attributable to the Company transitioning six communities to property management agreements, effective March 1, 2020, and the re-negotiation of lease agreements with two of the Company’s landlords, which resulted in reduced rent obligations and impairments of operating lease right-of-use assets. During 2020, the Company transitioned 22 lease agreements to successor operators.
Community reimbursement expense includes reimbursements due from the owners of communities for which the Company began providing management services during 2020, and as such, there are no comparable amounts in 2019.
Other income and expense.
Interest income generally reflects interest earned on the investment of cash balances and escrowed funds or interest associated with certain income tax refunds or property tax settlements.
Interest expense decreased in the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the prior comparable period primarily due to the early repayment of mortgage debt associated with the closing of the Company’s sale of communities located in Kokomo, Indiana, Springfield, Missouri, and Peoria, Illinois, in 2019, and a decrease in variable interest rates year-over-year.
The $10.7 million increase in gain on facility lease modification and termination, net, is due to the Company recognizing an $8.4 million gain on the Ventas Agreement, an $8.0 million gain on the Welltower Agreement, and a $1.8 million gain on the transition of a property to a different operator, partially offset by a $6.8 million loss on the
Healthpeak Agreement, and a $0.7 million loss on the transition of properties to a different operator during the third quarter of 2020.
The $205.5 million gain (loss) on disposition of assets, net was due to the Company recognizing a $7.4 million loss on the sale of a senior housing community located in Merrillville, Indiana during the first quarter of 2020, a $2.0 million gain on the sale of one of the Company’s communities located in Canton, Ohio in the fourth quarter of 2020 and a $199.6 million loss on the disposition of 18 communities during the fiscal year 2020, which occurred in conjunction with the Company’s planned transition of the legal ownership of such communities to Fannie Mae. The Company wrote off all fixed assets, accounts receivable, and amounts held in escrow with respect to the communities, and will extinguish the debt and certain liabilities once legal ownership of the properties transfers to Fannie Mae.
Benefit (provision) for income taxes
The provision for income taxes was $0.4 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The effective tax rates for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 differ from the statutory tax rates due to state income taxes, permanent tax differences, and changes in the deferred tax asset valuation allowance. The Company is impacted by the Texas Margin Tax (“TMT”), which effectively imposes tax on modified gross revenues for communities within the State of Texas. During each of fiscal years 2020 and 2019 the Company consolidated 16 and 38, respectively, Texas communities and the TMT increased the overall provision for income taxes.
Management regularly evaluates the future realization of deferred tax assets and provides a valuation allowance, if considered necessary, based on such evaluation. As part of the evaluation, management has evaluated taxable income in carryback years, future reversals of taxable temporary differences, feasible tax planning strategies, and future expectations of income. Based upon this evaluation, adjustments to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance of $69.1 million and $4.4 million were recorded during fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively, to reduce the Company’s net deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
Net loss and comprehensive loss
As a result of the foregoing factors, the Company reported net loss and comprehensive loss of $295.4 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net loss and comprehensive loss of $36.0 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In addition to approximately $17.9 million of unrestricted cash balances on hand as of December 31, 2020, the Company’s principal sources of liquidity are expected to be cash flows from operations, additional proceeds from debt refinancing activities, COVID-19 relief funding (including $8.1 million and $8.7 million of cash the Company accepted pursuant to the Provider Relief Fund’s Phase 2 and Phase 3 General Distribution in November 2020 and January 2021, respectively), equity issuances, and/or proceeds from the sale of owned assets.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in active discussions with existing and potential lending sources to refinance its two bridge loans totaling $72.5 million, that are scheduled to mature in December 2021. The Company has implemented plans, which includes strategic and cash-preservation initiatives, which are designed to provide the Company with adequate liquidity to meet its obligations for at least the 12-month period following the date its fiscal year 2020 financial statements are issued. See “Going Concern Uncertainty.” If we are unable to extend or refinance our indebtedness prior to scheduled maturity dates, our liquidity and financial condition could be adversely impacted. Even if we are able to extend or refinance our maturing bridge loans, the terms of the new financing may not be as favorable to us as the terms of the existing financing. In addition, the amount of mortgage financing available for our communities is generally dependent on their respective appraised values and performance. Decreases in the appraised values of our communities, including due to adverse changes in real estate market conditions, or their performance, could result in available mortgage refinancing amounts that are less than the communities' maturing indebtedness. Our inability to obtain refinancing proceeds sufficient to cover maturing indebtedness could adversely impact our liquidity, and may cause us to seek alternative sources of financing, which may be less attractive or unavailable.
The Company, from time to time, considers and evaluates financial and capital raising transactions related to its portfolio including equity issuances, purchases and sales of assets, and reorganizations and other transactions. If capital were obtained through the issuance of Company equity, the issuance of Company securities would dilute the ownership of the Company’s existing stockholders and any newly issued securities may have rights, preferences, and/or privileges senior to those of the Company’s common stock.
Our actual liquidity and capital funding requirements depend on numerous factors, including our operating results, our capital expenditures for community investment, and general economic conditions, as well as other factors described in "Item 1A. Risk Factors". General disruptions to the financial markets may have an adverse impact on our liquidity by making it more difficult for us to obtain financing or refinancing.
Recent changes in the current economic environment, and other future changes, could result in decreases in the fair value of assets, slowing of transactions, and tightening liquidity and credit markets. These impacts could make securing debt or refinancings for the Company or buyers of the Company’s properties more difficult or on terms not acceptable to the Company or any of its counterparties.
In summary, the Company’s cash flows were as follows (in thousands):
Operating Activities
The net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily results from a net loss of $295.4 million, decreases in cash flows from current assets of $2.9 million, offset by increases from current liabilities of $13.0 million, and net non-cash charges of $278.4 million. The net cash provided by operating activities for fiscal year 2019 primarily results from net non-cash charges of $39.4 million, an increase in accrued expenses of $4.3 million, an increase in deferred resident revenue of $0.6 million, and a decrease in tax and insurance deposits of $0.5 million, partially offset by a net loss of $36.0 million, a decrease in accounts payable of $0.7 million, and increases in prepaid expenses, accounts receivable, and other assets of $1.0 million, $1.3 million, and $0.5 million, respectively.
Investing Activities
The net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily results from ongoing capital improvements and refurbishments at the Company’s senior housing communities of $15.6 million, offset by $24.1 million in proceeds from the disposition of assets. The net cash provided by investing activities for fiscal year 2019 primarily results from the Company’s receipt of $68.1 million in proceeds from the disposition of assets, partially offset by capital expenditures associated with ongoing capital renovations and refurbishments of the Company’s senior housing communities of $20.3 million.
Financing Activities
The net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily results from proceeds from notes payable of $7.6 million, repayments of notes payable of $23.1 million, and payments on financing obligations of $0.4 million. The net cash used in financing activities for fiscal year 2019 primarily results from notes payable proceeds of $37.5 million, of which approximately $31.5 million resulted from mortgage debt refinancings and supplemental mortgage debt financings and the remaining $6.0 million related to insurance premium financing, which was offset by repayments of notes payable of $95.1 million, inclusive of $4.4 million in debt prepayment penalties, and deferred financing charges paid of $1.2 million and payments on financing leases and financing obligations of $1.5 million.
Debt Covenants
Certain of our debt agreements contain restrictions and financial covenants, such as those requiring us to maintain prescribed minimum debt service coverage ratios, in each case on a multi-community basis. The debt service coverage ratios are generally calculated as revenues less operating expenses, including an implied management fee, divided by the debt (principal and interest). Furthermore, our debt is secured by our communities and if an event of default has occurred under any of our debt, subject to cure provisions in certain instances, the respective lender would have the right to declare all the related outstanding amounts of indebtedness immediately due and payable, to foreclose on our mortgaged communities, and/or pursue other remedies available to such lender. We cannot provide assurance that we would be able to pay the debts if they became due upon acceleration following an event of default.
At December 31, 2020, we were not in compliance with certain financial covenants of our loan agreements with Fifth Third Bank covering two properties and BBVA covering three properties, which constitutes a default. As a result of default, these loans are callable. We are in active discussions with Fifth Third Bank and BBVA to resolve these defaults. However, we cannot give any assurance that a mutually agreeable resolution will be reached.
Except as noted above, the Company was in compliance with all aspects of its outstanding indebtedness at December 31, 2020.
Impact of Inflation
To date, inflation has not had a significant impact on the Company. However, inflation could affect the Company’s future revenues and results of operations because of, among other things, the Company’s dependence on senior residents, many of whom rely primarily on fixed incomes to pay for the Company’s services. As a result, during inflationary periods, the Company may not be able to increase resident service fees to account fully for increased operating expenses. In structuring its fees, the Company attempts to anticipate inflation levels, but there can be no assurances that the Company will be able to anticipate fully or otherwise respond to any future inflationary pressures.