Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Our Business Overview
We are a late-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on developing and commercializing products to treat rare diseases where there is an unmet medical need. We maintain two active business segments: Specialized BioTherapeutics and Public Health Solutions.
Our Specialized BioTherapeutics business segment is developing and moving toward potential commercialization of SGX301 as a novel photodynamic therapy utilizing safe visible light for the treatment of CTCL. With a successful Phase 3 study completed, regulatory approval is being sought and commercialization activities for this product candidate are being advanced initially in the U.S. Development programs in this business segment also include our first-in-class IDR technology, dusquetide (SGX942) for the treatment of inflammatory diseases, including oral mucositis in head and neck cancer, and proprietary formulations of oral BDP for the prevention/treatment of GI disorders characterized by severe inflammation including pediatric Crohn's disease (SGX203) and acute radiation enteritis (SGX201).
Our Public Health Solutions business segment includes active development programs for RiVax®, our ricin toxin vaccine candidate and SGX943, our therapeutic candidate for antibiotic resistant and emerging infectious disease and our vaccine programs targeting filoviruses (such as Marburg and Ebola) and CiVaxTM, our vaccine candidate for the prevention of COVID-19 (caused by SARS-CoV-2). The development of our vaccine programs incorporates the use of our proprietary heat stabilization platform technology, known as ThermoVax®. To date, this business segment has been supported with government grant and contract funding from NIAID, BARDA and DTRA.
An outline of our business strategy follows:
● Following positive primary endpoint results for the Phase 3 clinical trial of SGX301, as well as further statistically significant improvement in response rates with longer treatment (18 weeks compared to 12 and 6 weeks of treatment), pursue New Drug Application (“NDA”) filing and commercialization in the U.S. while continuing to explore ex-U.S. partnership.
● Continue to analyze the full dataset from the Phase 3 clinical trial of SGX942 to better understand why the study did not achieve the statistically significant benefit expected, despite demonstrating clinically meaningful reductions in oral mucositis consistent with the previous Phase 2 study. Any clarity gained from further analysis, especially with respect to specific subsets of patients that may benefit from SGX942 therapy, will be communicated to and discussed with the United States Food and Drug Administration and the EMA.
● Continue development of RiVax® (ricin toxin vaccine) and CiVaxTM (COVID-19 vaccine) in combination with our ThermoVax® technology to develop a new heat stable vaccine in biodefense with NIAID funding support.
● Continue development of our therapeutic SGX943 and our vaccine programs targeting filoviruses (such as Marburg and Ebola) with DTRA and NIAID funding support.
● Continue to apply for and secure additional government funding for each of our Specialized BioTherapeutics and Public Health Solutions programs through grants, contracts and/or procurements.
● Pursue business development opportunities for our pipeline programs, as well as explore merger/acquisition strategies.
● Acquire or in-license new clinical-stage compounds for development.
Corporate Information
We were incorporated in Delaware in 1987 under the name Biological Therapeutics, Inc. In 1987, we merged with Biological Therapeutics, Inc., a North Dakota corporation, pursuant to which we changed our name to “Immunotherapeutics, Inc.” We changed our name to “Endorex Corp.” in 1996, to “Endorex Corporation” in 1998, to “DOR BioPharma, Inc.” in 2001, and finally to “Soligenix, Inc.” in 2009. Our principal executive offices are located at 29 Emmons Drive, Suite B-10, Princeton, New Jersey 08540 and our telephone number is (609) 538-8200.
Our Product Candidates in Development
The following tables summarize our product candidates under development:
Specialized BioTherapeutics Product Candidates*
Public Health Solutions*†
* Timelines subject to potential disruption due to COVID-19 outbreak.
† Contingent upon continued government contract/grant funding or other funding source.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, costs and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenues are primarily generated from government contracts and grants. The revenue from government contracts and grants is based upon subcontractor costs and internal costs incurred that are specifically covered by the contracts and grants, plus a facilities and administrative rate that provides funding for overhead expenses and management fees. These revenues are recognized when expenses have been incurred by subcontractors or when we incur reimbursable internal expenses that are related to the government contracts and grants.
Research and Development Costs
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contract and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated costs incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advanced payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
● contract research organizations (“CROs”) in connection with performing research activities on our behalf and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf;
● investigative sites or other service providers in connection with clinical trials;
● vendors in connection with preclinical and clinical development activities; and
● vendors related to product manufacturing and development and distribution of preclinical and clinical supplies.
We base our expenses related to preclinical studies and clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple CROs that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed, enrollment of patients, number of sites activated and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or amount of prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not made any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Use of Estimates and Assumptions
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires management to make estimates and assumptions such as the fair value of warrants and stock options and recovery of the useful life of intangibles that affect the reported amounts in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Material Changes in Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $17,688,522 as compared to a net loss of $9,355,592 for the prior year, representing an increased loss of $8,332,930 or 89%. The increase in net loss is primarily due to increased expenditures incurred to support both the pivotal Phase 3 trial of SGX301 in the treatment of CTCL and the pivotal Phase 3 trial of SGX942 in the treatment of oral mucositis in head and neck cancer. In addition, we had additional costs in 2020 relating to the issuance of $5,000,000 worth of fully vested shares of common stock to Hy Biopharma, Inc. (“Hy Biopharma”) in connection with the achievement of a development milestone. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had revenues of $2,359,447 as compared to $4,629,916 for the prior year, representing a decrease of $2,270,469 or 49%. The decrease in revenues was primarily a result of the completion of the two Phase 3 trials of SGX301 and SGX942.
We incurred costs related to contract and grant revenues in the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 of $1,820,949 and $3,567,415, respectively, representing a decrease of $1,746,466 or 49%. The decrease in costs was primarily the result of grants ending in 2020.
Our gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $538,498 or 23% as compared to $1,062,501 or 33% of total revenue for the prior year, representing a decrease of $524,003 or 49% in respects to the change in gross profit. The decrease in revenues and gross profit were primarily the result of the closing of the CTCL study.
Research and development expenses increased by $2,023,168 or 25% to $10,145,778 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $8,122,610 for the prior year. The increase in research and development spending for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to expenditures incurred in the Phase 3 of the clinical trials of SGX942 and SGX301.
General and administrative expenses increased by $498,315 or 14%, to $3,979,227 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $3,480,912 for the prior year. This increase is primarily related to employee compensation increases.
Other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $61,092 as compared to $574,753 for the prior year, reflecting a decrease of $513,661 or 89%. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in the UK research and development tax credit, a decrease in interest income earned on our cash balances due to decreased interest rates on invested cash in 2020 and interest expense in 2020 on the new convertible debt agreement.
The State of New Jersey’s Technology Business Tax Certificate Program allows certain high technology and biotechnology companies to sell unused net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards to other New Jersey-based corporate taxpayers. We sold NOLs resulting in the recognition of income tax benefits of $836,893 and $610,676 for the years ending December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We have applied for and received preliminary confirmation for NOLs related to the tax year ended December 31, 2019 in the amount of approximately $865,000, which will not be recognized until a certificate for the refund is received. We have not yet sold our tax year 2020 New Jersey NOLs but may do so in the future. We will continue to explore opportunities to sell unused NOL carryforwards for the tax year ended December 31, 2020. However, there can be no assurance as to the continuation or magnitude of this program in future years.
Business Segments
We maintain two active business segments for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019: Public Health Solutions and Specialized BioTherapeutics.
Revenues for the Public Health Solutions business segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $2,242,078 as compared to $3,402,014 for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a decrease of $1,159,936 or 34%. The decrease in revenues was primarily the result of grants and contracts coming to an end during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenues for the Specialized BioTherapeutics business segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $117,369 as compared to $1,227,902 for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a decrease of $1,110,533 or 90%. The decrease was due to less reimbursable development activity under the oral mucositis juvenile toxicology grant to support the evaluation of SGX942 (dusquetide) in pediatric indications during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss from operations for the Public Health Solutions business segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $435,028 as compared to income of $153,969 for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increased loss of $588,997 or 383%. The loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 is attributable to the expiration of grants and contracts. Loss from operations for the Specialized BioTherapeutics business segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13,610,715 as compared to $6,738,284 for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increased loss of $6,872,431 or 102%. This is primarily attributed to the additional expense incurred in patient enrollments in the Phase 3 clinical trial of SGX301 and the $5,000,000 HyBiopharma milestone expense.
Financial Condition and Liquidity
Cash and Working Capital
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $18,676,663 as compared to $5,420,708 as of December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $13,255,955 or 245%. As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital of $13,386,485, representing an increase of $12,205,236 as compared to working capital of $1,181,249 for the prior year. The increase in cash and cash equivalents was primarily related to our usage of the At Market Issuance Sales Agreement (“FBR Sales Agreement”) with B. Riley FBR, Inc. (“FBR”) and the loan proceeds from Pontifax Medison Finance.
Based on our current rate of cash outflows, cash on hand, proceeds from government contract and grant programs, cash available from the loan from Pontifax Medison Finance, and proceeds available from the FBR Sales Agreement, management believes that its current cash will be sufficient to meet the anticipated cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next twelve months from issuance of the financial statements.
Our plans with respect to our liquidity management include, but are not limited to, the following:
● We have up to $2.16 million in active government contract funding still available as of December 31, 2020 to support our associated research programs through 2021 and beyond, provided the federal agencies do not elect to terminate the contracts for convenience. We plan to submit additional contract and grant applications for further support of our programs with various funding agencies;
● We have continued to use equity instruments to provide a portion of the compensation due to vendors and collaboration partners and expect to continue to do so for the foreseeable future;
● We will continue to pursue Net Operating Loss (“NOL”) sales in the state of New Jersey pursuant to its Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer Program if the program is available;
● We plan to pursue potential partnerships for pipeline programs; however, there can be no assurances that we can consummate such transactions;
● We have up to $10.0 million remaining available from the loan and security agreement with Pontifax Medison Finance as of March 30, 2021, which includes an immediately available $5 million line of credit and a $5 million late withdrawal loan that is contingent upon the initial filing of the NDA for CTCL;
● We have up to $2.1 million remaining from the FBR Sales Agreement as of March 30, 2021 under the prospectus supplement updated August 28, 2020; and
● We may seek additional capital in the private and/or public equity markets, pursue government contracts and grants as well as business development activities, to continue our operations, respond to competitive pressures, develop new products and services, and to support new strategic partnerships. We are currently evaluating additional equity/debt financing opportunities on an ongoing basis and may execute them when appropriate. However, there can be no assurances that we can consummate such a transaction, or consummate a transaction at favorable pricing.
Expenditures
Under our budget and based upon our existing product development agreements and license agreements pursuant to letters of intent and option agreements, we expect our total research and development expenditures for the year ending December 31, 2021 to be approximately $10.7 million before any contract or grant reimbursements, of which $9.8 million relates to the Specialized BioTherapeutics business and $0.9 million relates to the Public Health Solutions business. We anticipate contract and grant reimbursements for the same period of approximately $0.8 million to offset research and development expenses in the Specialized BioTherapeutics and Public Health Solutions business segments.
The table below details our costs for research and development by program and amounts reimbursed for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Contractual Obligations
We have licensing fee commitments of approximately $500,000 for the next five years for several licensing agreements with entities, consultants and universities. Additionally, we have collaboration and license agreements, which upon clinical or commercialization success may require the payment of milestones of up to $7.9 million and/or royalties up to 6% of net sales of covered products, if and when achieved. However, there can be no assurance that clinical or commercialization success will occur.
We currently lease approximately 6,200 square feet of office space at 29 Emmons Drive, Suite B-10 in Princeton, New Jersey pursuant to a lease that expires in to October 2022. This office space currently serves as our corporate headquarters, and both of our business segments (Specialized BioTherapeutics and Public Health Solutions), operate from this space. The rent for the remainder of the term will be $11,108, or approximately $21.50 per square foot. Our office space is sufficient to satisfy our current needs.
On September 3, 2014, we entered into an asset purchase agreement with Hy Biopharma pursuant to which we acquired certain intangible assets, properties and rights of Hy Biopharma related to the development of Hy BioPharma’s synthetic hypericin product. As consideration for the assets acquired, we initially paid $275,000 in cash and issued 184,912 shares of common stock with a fair value based upon our stock price on the date of grant of $3,750,000. These amounts were charged to research and development expense during the third quarter of 2014 as the assets will be used in our research and development activities and do not have alternative future use pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S.
In January 2020, our Board of Directors authorized an amendment to Dr. Schaber’s employment agreement to increase the number of shares of common stock from 5,000 to 500,000, issuable to Dr. Schaber immediately prior to the completion of a transaction, or series or a combination of related transactions, negotiated by our Board of Directors whereby, directly or indirectly, a majority of our capital stock or a majority of our assets are transferred from us and/or our stockholders to a third party.
On March 20, 2020, we filed a prospectus supplement covering the offer and sale of up to 1,956,182 shares of our common stock, which were issued to Hy Biopharma. We were required to issue the shares to Hy Biopharma as payment following the achievement of a milestone under the asset purchase agreement, specifically, the Phase 3 clinical trial of SGX301 being successful in the treatment of CTCL. The number of shares of our common stock issued to Hy Biopharma was calculated using an effective price of $2.56 per share, based upon a formula set forth in the asset purchase agreement.
Provided the final success-oriented milestone is attained, we will be required to make a payment of up to $5.0 million, if and when achieved. The potential future payment will be payable in our common stock, not to exceed 19.9% of our outstanding stock.
On December 16, 2020, we entered into a $20 million convertible debt financing agreement with Pontifax Medison Finance (“Pontifax”), the healthcare-dedicated venture and debt fund of the Pontifax life science funds. Under the terms of the agreement with Pontifax, we have access to up to $20 million in convertible debt financing in three tranches, which will mature on June 15, 2025 and have an interest only period for the first two years with a rate of 8.47% on borrowed amounts and a 1% rate on amounts available but not borrowed. Upon the closing of this transaction, we borrowed the first tranche of $10 million, and have the option to draw the second tranche of $5 million at any time over the next 12 months and the third tranche of $5 million upon filing of the SGX301 new drug application, subject to certain conditions. Interest expense incurred and paid in 2020 totaled $34,406.
Pontifax may elect to convert the outstanding loan drawn under the first two tranches into shares of our common stock at any time prior to repayment at a conversion price of $4.10 per share. We also have the ability to force the conversion of the loan into shares of our common stock, subject to certain conditions.
As a result of the above agreements, we have future contractual obligations over the next five years as follows:
CARES Act Loan
On April 13, 2020, we were advised that one of our principal banks, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., had approved a $417,830 loan (the “Loan”) under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act that was signed into law on March 27, 2020.
As a U.S. small business, we qualified for the PPP, which allows businesses and nonprofits with fewer than 500 employees to obtain loans of up to $10 million to incentivize companies to maintain their workers as they manage the business disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The PPP provides for loans for amounts up to 2.5 times of the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The PPP loan proceeds may be used for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities.
The Loan, has a term of two years, is unsecured, and is guaranteed by the Small Business Administration. The short -term portion of the Loan is $324,979 and the long-term portion of the Loan is $92,851 with accrued interest expense of $2,730 as of December 31, 2020. The Loan bears interest at a fixed rate of 0.98% per annum, with the first ten months of interest and principal deferred. Some or all of the Loan may be forgiven if at least 60% of the Loan proceeds are used by us to cover payroll costs, including benefits and if we maintain our employment and compensation within certain parameters during the eight-week or twenty-four-week period following the Loan origination date and comply with other relevant conditions. We used the proceeds for purposes consistent with the PPP and expect to meet the conditions when we apply for forgiveness of the Loan, although forgiveness is not guaranteed.
Contingencies
We follow subtopic 450-20 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification to report accounting for contingencies. Certain conditions may exist as of the date the financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss to but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. We assess such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment. A liability is only recorded if management determines that it is both probable and reasonably estimable.
COVID-19
Based on the current outbreak of SARS-CoV-2, the pathogen responsible for COVID-19, which has already had an impact on financial markets, there could be additional repercussions to our operating business, including but not limited to, the sourcing of materials for product candidates, manufacture of supplies for preclinical and/or clinical studies, delays in clinical operations, which may include the availability or the continued availability of patients for trials due to such things as quarantines, conduct of patient monitoring and clinical trial data retrieval at investigational study sites.
The future impact of the outbreak is highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, and we cannot provide any assurance that the outbreak will not have a material adverse impact on our operations or future results or filings with regulatory health authorities. The extent of the impact to us, if any, will depend on future developments, including actions taken to contain the coronavirus.
Emergent BioSolutions Legal Proceedings
On July 1, 2020, we filed a demand for arbitration against Emergent BioSolutions, Inc. and certain of its subsidiaries with the American Arbitration Association in Mercer County, New Jersey. We allege in the arbitration various breaches of contracts and warranties as well as acts of fraud. Emergent has answered that demand for arbitration denying the allegations and asserting affirmative defenses. (see Part I, Item 3 - Legal Proceedings).
We are seeking to recover damages in excess of $19 million from Emergent. While we intend to vigorously pursue this arbitration, we cannot offer any assurances that it will recover any damages from Emergent.
We have received invoices from Emergent related to the above matter. No accrual has been made for these invoices as management deems them invalid and not probable of being required to pay them based on the numerous breaches sited in the pending arbitration. These invoices total approximately $331,000.