Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the summary of significant accounting policies and notes included herein this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains “forward-looking statements” that reflect our future plans, estimates, forecasts, guidance, beliefs and expected performance. The “forward-looking statements” are dependent upon events, risks and uncertainties that may be outside our control. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these “forward-looking statements”. Please read “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a publicly-traded limited partnership formed in 2005 focused on the acquisition, development and ownership of infrastructure critical to the transition of energy supply to lower carbon sources. We own natural gas gathering systems, pipelines, and processing facilities in South Texas and continue to pursue energy transition infrastructure opportunities. Our common units are currently listed on the NYSE American under the symbol “SNMP.”
On February 26, 2021, in connection with our management team’s focus on expanding our business strategy to focus on the ongoing energy transition in the industries in which we operate, we changed our name to Evolve Transition Infrastructure LP and our general partner changed its name to Evolve Transition Infrastructure GP LLC.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide and the United States declared a national emergency with respect to COVID-19. As a result, extraordinary and wide-ranging actions were taken by international, federal, state and local public health and governmental authorities to reduce the spread of COVID-19, including quarantines, government restrictions on movement, business closures and suspensions, canceled events and activities, self-isolation, and other voluntary or mandated changes in behavior. Such actions have also resulted in significant business and operational disruptions, including supply chain disruptions, travel restrictions, stay-at-home orders and limitations on the availability of workforces. COVID-19 and the ongoing response to mitigate its impact have contributed to a massive economic shutdown and decreased demand for crude oil and natural gas.
Also in the first quarter of 2020, Saudi Arabia and Russia increased production of crude oil as the two countries competed for market share. As a result, the global supply of crude oil significantly exceeded demand and led to a collapse in crude oil prices. The collapse in crude oil prices and the related impact on crude oil drilling resulted in crude oil, natural gas and NGL production being curtailed in the second quarter of 2020.
While crude oil prices have started to rebound from the lows reached during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, the volatility in oil prices and impact of the Mesquite Chapter 11 Case have caused a negative impact on our net cash flows during the year ended December 31, 2020. If Mesquite should decide to shut-in any of the wells connected to our midstream facilities or otherwise becomes unable to make future payments under the Gathering Agreement, it could have a material and adverse impact on our business. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business and operations will depend on the severity, location and duration of the effects and spread of COVID-19, the actions undertaken by national, regional and local governments and health officials to contain the virus or treat its effects, and how quickly and to what extent economic conditions improve and normal business and operating conditions resume. Please read “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Mesquite Bankruptcy - Settlement Agreement and Rejection Lawsuits
On August 11, 2019, the SN Debtors filed the Mesquite Chapter 11 Case in the Bankruptcy Court.
On June 6, 2020, the Partnership, our general partner and certain of our subsidiaries entered into the Settlement Agreement. On June 30, 2020, the Bankruptcy Court entered an order approving the Settlement Agreement and the parties to the Settlement Agreement entered into or amended certain commercial contracts, including but not limited to, (i) Amendment No. 2, (ii) the Seco Catarina Agreement, and (iii) that the Seco Comanche Agreement. Each such agreement will become effective only upon satisfaction of certain closing conditions described in the Settlement Agreement.
On June 23, 2020, certain affiliates of each Occidental Petroleum Corp., The Blackstone Group and GSO Capital Partners each filed a complaint (collectively, the “Rejection Lawsuits”) against Mesquite and certain of its subsidiaries requesting, among other things, that the Bankruptcy Court not approve the rejection of certain commercial agreements, as set forth in the Settlement Agreement, in connection with Mesquite’s Comanche Asset.
On June 30, 2020, the SN Debtors emerged from the Mesquite Chapter 11 Case, with Mesquite becoming a privately held corporation.
The commercial agreements contemplated by the Settlement Agreement will not become effective until, among other things, the Rejection Lawsuits have been resolved in favor of the SN Debtors and the Bankruptcy Court has approved the rejection of the certain commercial agreements underlying the Rejection Lawsuits. The Rejection Lawsuits were not resolved by October 1, 2020, and as a result the parties to the Settlement Agreement may terminate the Settlement Agreement at any time pursuant to its terms. To date, none of the parties of the Settlement Agreement have provided notice of termination.
Stonepeak Transactions
On September 7, 2020, SP Capital Holdings, LLC (“SP Capital”), SP Common Equity LLC (“SPCE”), and Stonepeak Catarina, entered into a Contribution and Exchange Agreement (the “Contribution Agreement”), pursuant to which (i) SP Capital contributed 100% of the issued and outstanding membership interest in SP Holdings to Stonepeak Catarina, (ii) SPCE irrevocably committed to contribute 100 % of the issued and outstanding membership interests in SP Common Equity Subsidiary LLC (“SPCE Sub”) to Stonepeak Catarina, and (iii) as consideration for the contributions, Stonepeak Catarina issued 10,000 Class B Units in Stonepeak Catarina to SP Capital and 5,000 Class C Units in Stonepeak Catarina to SPCE. Such transactions were completed in their entirety on October 5, 2020. As a result of these transactions, Stonepeak gained control of our general partner and SP Holdings.
Pursuant to our partnership agreement, the general partner conducts, directs and manages all activities of the Partnership under the authority of the Board. Pursuant to the Limited Liability Company Agreement of our general partner, dated March 2, 2015, as amended, SP Holdings appoints all of the members of the Board, other than two directors which Stonepeak is entitled to designate pursuant to the Representation and Standstill Agreement.
On October 6, 2020, Amendment No. 8 to Schedule 13D (the “Catarina 13D”) was filed on behalf of each of (i) SPCE Sub, (ii) Stonepeak Catarina, (iii) Stonepeak Catarina Upper Holdings LLC, (iv) Stonepeak Infrastructure Fund (Orion AIV) LP, (v) Stonepeak Associates LLC, (vi) Stonepeak GP Holdings LP, (vii) Stonepeak GP Investors LLC, (viii) Stonepeak GP Investors Manager LLC, (ix) Michael Dorrell, and (x) Trent Vichie, in it was disclosed that SP Holdings began engaging in non-binding discussions with the Board about terminating or, alternatively, amending and restating the Shared Services Agreement. The Shared Services Agreement can be terminated (i) by either party at any time by 180 days’ prior written notice to the other party, (ii) by SP Holdings if there is an uncured material breach thereunder by the Partnership, or (iii) by the Partnership, subject to Board approval, if (1) there is an uncured material breach thereunder by SP Holdings or (2) there is a change in control of SP Holdings. Pursuant to the Standstill Agreement, the Partnership must obtain Stonepeak Catarina’s consent to its termination of the Shared Services Agreement. The Shared Services Agreement provides that if there is a termination other than by either party at the end of the Service Agreement’s term, by the Partnership for an uncured breach by SP Holdings, or by the Partnership upon a change of control of SP Holdings, then the Partnership will owe a termination payment to SP Holdings in an amount equal to $5,000,000 plus 5% of the transaction value of all asset acquisitions theretofore consummated. We estimate that this amount was in excess of $35.0 million as of December 31, 2020. Such termination fee may be payable in cash or common units. If the Partnership terminates upon 180 days’ prior notice then the Partnership must also pay to SP Holdings all costs and expenses of SP Holdings that result from such termination. The Catarina 13D reports that SP Holdings may terminate the Shared Services Agreement upon 180 days’ prior written notice to the Partnership and such termination would trigger the Partnership’s obligation to pay the termination fee in an amount equal to $5,000,000 plus 5% of the transaction value of all asset acquisitions theretofore consummated. To date, no notice of termination of the Shared Services Agreement has been delivered by SP Holdings.
On November 11, 2020, the Board declared that after establishing a cash reserve for the payment of certain amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement, the Partnership did not have any available cash and, as a result, there would be no cash distribution on the Partnership’s common units. Section 5.9(b)(ii) of the Amended Partnership Agreement requires
that the quarterly distribution on the Class C Preferred Units be paid in cash, Class C Preferred PIK Units or a combination thereof. On November 16, 2020, the Partnership and Stonepeak Catarina entered into a letter agreement (the “Stonepeak Letter Agreement”) wherein the parties agreed that the distribution on the Class C Preferred Units for the three months ended September 30, 2020 would be paid in common units instead of Class C Preferred PIK Units, cash or a combination thereof. The Stonepeak Letter Agreement also provides that Stonepeak Catarina will be able to elect to receive distributions on the Class C Preferred Units in common units for any quarter following the third quarter of 2020 by providing written notice to the Partnership no later than the last day of the calendar month following the end of such quarter. The Stonepeak Letter Agreement and the transactions completed therein, including the distribution for the three months ended September 30, 2020 (the “Letter Agreement Transactions”), was referred to the Conflicts Committee of the Board. The Conflicts Committee approved the Letter Agreement Transactions, recommended that the Board approve and authorize the execution and performance of the Letter Agreement Transactions, and verified that their approvals constituted “Special Approval” of the Letter Agreement Transactions under and pursuant to our partnership agreement. Following the approval and recommendation from the Conflicts Committee, the Board approved the Letter Agreement Transactions. The aggregate distribution of 22,274,869 common units was made to Stonepeak Catarina on February 1, 2021, following the satisfaction of certain issuance conditions, including, among other things, the delivery by the Partnership of a fully executed supplemental listing application from the NYSE American approving the issuance of the Stonepeak Common Distribution Units and the compliance by the Partnership and Stonepeak Catarina with any applicable federal securities laws applicable to the issuance of the Stonepeak Common Distribution Units.
On January 28, 2021, Stonepeak Catarina provided us with its notice of election to receive a Common Unit PIK Distribution for the fourth quarter of 2020. The aggregate distribution of 12,445,491 common units was made to Stonepeak Catarina on February 25, 2021, following the satisfaction of certain issuance conditions.
We refer to the foregoing transactions collectively as the “Stonepeak Transactions.”
As a result of the Stonepeak Transactions, as of March 16, 2021, Stonepeak owned (i) 39,623,443 common units, representing approximately 72.7% of our outstanding common units, (ii) all of our issued and outstanding Class C Preferred Units, (iii) the Warrant that entitled Stonepeak Catarina to receive junior securities of the Partnership (including common units) representing 10% of all junior securities deemed outstanding when exercised, (iv) the non-economic general partner interest in the Partnership and (v) all of our incentive distribution rights.
Pursuant to Section 15.1 of our partnership agreement, if at any time Stonepeak holds more than 80% of our outstanding common units and completes the Stonepeak LCR Transfer, Stonepeak will be able to cause our general partner or a controlled affiliate of our general partner to exercise its right to acquire all, but not less than all, of our common units held by persons other than our general partner and its controlled affiliates (the “limited call right”). Stonepeak would effect any such exercise by first transferring all of the common units held by it to our general partner or a controlled affiliate of our general partner (the “Stonepeak LCR Transfer”) and then causing our general partner to exercise its limited call right at a price equal to the greater of (1) the average of the daily closing price of our common units over the 20 trading days preceding the date three days before notice of exercise of the limited call right is first mailed and (2) the highest per-unit price paid by our general partner or any of its controlled affiliates for common units during the 90-day period preceding the date such notice is first mailed. As a result, common unitholders may be required to sell their common units at an undesirable time or price and may not receive any return or a negative return on their investment. Common unitholders may also incur tax liability upon a sale of their units. Our general partner is not obligated to obtain a fairness opinion regarding the value of common units to be repurchased upon exercise of the limited call right. Furthermore, there is no restriction in our partnership agreement that prevents our general partner from causing us to issue additional common units, including common units issued pursuant to the Stonepeak Letter Agreement or as a result of the termination or renegotiation of the Shared Services Agreement, and then exercising its limited call right. If our general partner exercises its limited call right, the effect would be to take the Partnership private and, if the common units are subsequently deregistered, the Partnership will no longer be subject to the reporting requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. As of March 16, 2021, the General Partner and its controlled affiliates do not own any Common Units.
Our Relationship with Stonepeak
We have had a relationship with Stonepeak since 2015. Stonepeak has a significant ownership interest in us and our affiliates, including our general partner and SP Holdings, controls us and our general partner and has the ability to appoint all of the members of the Board.
Stonepeak Catarina is indirectly managed by Stonepeak Partners LP, a leading North American infrastructure private equity firm (“Stonepeak Partners”). Stonepeak Partners’ significant infrastructure and midstream energy expertise and deep financial resources are reflected in over $31 billion of assets under management, with to date including, among others, preferred and common interests in the Partnership, MPLX LP, Phillips 66 Partners LP, Plains All American Pipeline, L.P. and Targa Resources Corp. We believe that, as a result of Stonepeak’s significant ownership interest in us, Stonepeak is incentivized to support and promote our business plan and to encourage us to pursue projects that enhance the overall value of our business. While our relationship with Stonepeak is a significant strength, it is also a source of potential risks and conflicts. Please read “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Inherent in an Investment in Our Common Units” and “Part III, Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence.”
Business Strategy
Our primary business objective is to create long-term value by generating stable and predictable cash flows that allow us to reduce the amount of our indebtedness and pursue energy transition infrastructure opportunities. We plan to achieve this objective by executing the following business strategy:
● grow our business through the acquisition and development of infrastructure critical to the transition of energy supply to lower carbon sources;
● pursue organic investments in our existing operating areas to support growth;
● pursue strategic relationships with third-party producers and other companies with operations in the area in which we operate in order to maximize the utilization of our midstream facilities or provide other revenue-generating services; and
● maintain financial flexibility and a strong capital structure.
Business Segments
Our business activities are conducted under two operating segments for which we provide information in our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. These two segments are based on the nature of the operations that are undertaken by each segment and are our:
● midstream business, which includes Western Catarina Midstream, the Carnero JV and Seco Pipeline (each as defined below); and
● production business, which includes non-operated oil and natural gas interests located in the Eagle Ford Shale in South Texas and in other areas of Texas and Louisiana.
For information about our segments’ revenues, profits and losses and total assets, see Note 17 “Reporting Segments” of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Significant Operational Factors in 2020
Some key highlights of our business activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 were:
● On Western Catarina Midstream, the Partnership continued the implementation of two tariff rate increases on throughput volumes from the portion of Mesquite’s Catarina Asset which is not currently dedicated under the Gathering Agreement; and
● For the year ended December 31, 2020, we reduced cash related general and administrative expense by $1.6 million, or 16%, compared to the same period in 2019.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
We evaluate our business on the basis of the following key measures:
● our throughput volumes on gathering systems upon those assets;
● our operating expenses; and
● our Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure (for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to the most comparable GAAP financial measure please read “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Adjusted EBITDA”).
Throughput Volumes
Our management analyzes our performance based on the aggregate amount of throughput volumes on the gathering system. We must connect additional wells or well pads within Mesquite’s Catarina Asset, which is in Dimmit, La Salle and Webb counties in Texas, in order to maintain or increase throughput volumes on Western Catarina Midstream. Our success in connecting additional wells is impacted by successful drilling activity by Mesquite on the acreage dedicated to Western Catarina Midstream, our ability to secure volumes from Mesquite or third parties from new wells drilled on non-dedicated acreage, our ability to attract hydrocarbon volumes currently gathered by our competitors and our ability to cost-effectively construct or acquire new infrastructure. Construction of the Seco Pipeline was completed in August 2017, however, Mesquite does not currently transport any volumes on the Seco Pipeline following termination of the Seco Pipeline Transportation Agreement effective February 12, 2020. Future throughput volumes on the pipeline are dependent on execution of a new transportation agreement with Mesquite or execution of an agreement with a third party.
Operating Expenses
Our management seeks to maximize Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, in part by minimizing operating expenses. These expenses are, or will be, comprised primarily of field operating costs (which generally consists of lease operating expenses, labor, vehicles, supervision, transportation, minor maintenance, tools and supplies expenses, among other items), compression expense, ad valorem taxes and other operating costs, some of which will be independent of our oil and natural gas production or the throughput volumes on the midstream gathering system, but fluctuate depending on the scale of our operations during a specific period.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Adjusted EBITDA
To supplement our financial results and guidance presented in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we use Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, in this Form 10-K. We believe that non-GAAP financial measures are helpful in understanding our past financial performance and potential future results, particularly in light of the effect of various transactions effected by us. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted by: (i) interest (income) expense, net, which includes interest expense, interest expense net (gain) loss on interest rate derivative contracts, and interest (income); (ii) income tax expense (benefit); (iii) depreciation, depletion and amortization; (iv) asset impairments; (v) accretion expense; (vi) (gain) loss on sale of assets; (vii) unit-based compensation expense; (viii) unit-based asset management fees; (ix) distributions in excess of equity earnings; (x) (gain) loss on mark-to-market activities; (xi) commodity derivatives settled early; (xii) (gain) loss on embedded derivatives; and (xiii) acquisition and divestiture costs.
Adjusted EBITDA is used as a quantitative standard by our management and by external users of our financial statements such as investors, research analysts, our lenders and others to assess: (i) the financial performance of our assets without regard to financing methods, capital structure or historical cost basis; (ii) the ability of our assets to generate cash sufficient to pay interest costs and support our indebtedness; and (iii) our operating performance and return on capital as compared to those of other companies in our industry, without regard to financing or capital structure.
We believe that the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors in assessing our financial condition and results of operations. The GAAP measure most directly comparable to Adjusted EBITDA is net income (loss). Our non-GAAP financial measure of Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to GAAP net income (loss). Adjusted EBITDA has important limitations as an analytical tool because it excludes some but not all items that affect net income (loss). Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because Adjusted EBITDA may be defined differently by other companies in our industry, our definition of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies, thereby diminishing its utility.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), its most directly comparable GAAP performance measure, for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Significant Operational Factors
Throughput. The following table sets forth selected throughput data pertaining to the Midstream segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Production. Our production for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately 241 MBoe, or an average of 658 Boe/d, compared to approximately 309 MBoe, or an average of 847 Boe/d, for the same period in 2019.
Capital Expenditures. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we spent approximately $1.9 million in capital expenditures, of which $1.7 million related to the development of the Seco Pipeline. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we spent approximately $0.5 million in capital expenditures, consisting of $0.5 million related to the development of Western Catarina Midstream and less than $0.1 million related to the development of the Seco Pipeline.
Hedging Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the non-cash mark-to-market loss for our commodity derivatives was approximately $0.8 million, compared to a loss of approximately $4.7 million for the same period in 2019.
Results of Operations by Segment
Midstream Operating Results
The following table sets forth the selected financial and operating data pertaining to the Midstream segment for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Gathering and transportation sales. Gathering and transportation sales decreased by approximately $6.0 million, or 88%, to approximately $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $6.8 million during the same period in 2019. This decrease was due to the termination of the Seco Pipeline Transportation Agreement effective February 12, 2020.
Gathering and transportation lease revenues. Gathering and transportation lease revenues decreased by approximately $14.4 million, or 24%, to approximately $44.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $59.1 million during the same period in 2019. This decrease was primarily the result of a decrease in the natural gas transported on Western Catarina Midstream.
Lease operating expenses. Lease operating expenses, which include ad valorem taxes, decreased approximately $0.6 million, or 41%, to approximately $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $1.5 million during the same period in 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in throughput volumes between the comparative periods.
Transportation operating expenses. Our transportation operating expenses generally consist of gathering and transportation operating expenses, labor, vehicles, supervision, minor maintenance, tools, supplies, and integrity management expenses. Our transportation operating expense decreased approximately $2.2 million, or 19%, to approximately $9.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $11.6 million during the same period in 2019. The decrease in transportation operating expenses was due to a decrease in throughput volumes between the comparative periods.
Depreciation and amortization expense. Gathering and transportation assets are stated at historical acquisition cost, net of any impairments, and are depreciated using the straight-line method over the useful lives of the assets, which range from 5 to 15 years for equipment, up to 36 years for gathering facilities, and up to 40 years for transportation assets. Our depreciation and amortization expense decreased approximately $0.7 million, or 3%, to approximately $20.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $21.4 million during the same period in 2019. This decrease was due to the impairment of the Seco Pipeline as of December 31, 2019 to a fair value of zero. As a result of this impairment, there was no depreciation recorded on the Seco Pipeline during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Impairment expense. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our non-cash impairment charge to impair the Seco Pipeline was approximately $0.9 million. During 2020 we made an agreed upon cash settlement related to the original construction of the Seco Pipeline which was impaired to a fair value of zero. For the year ended December 31, 2019, our non-cash impairment charge to impair the Seco Pipeline was approximately $32.1 million. We received a written notice from Mesquite terminating the Seco Pipeline Transportation Agreement effective as of February 12, 2020.
Earnings from equity investments. Earnings from equity investments increased approximately $1.6 million, or 58%, to earnings of approximately $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to earnings of approximately $2.8 million for the same period in 2019. This increase in earnings was primarily the result of a reduction in operating expenses at one of the natural gas processing facilities during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Production Operating Results
The following tables set forth the selected financial and operating data pertaining to the Production segment for the periods indicated (in thousands, except net production and average sales and costs):
(a) Variances deemed to be Not Meaningful “NM.”
(a) Field operating expenses include lease operating expenses (average production costs) and production taxes.
Production, For the year ended December 31, 2020, 79% of our production was oil, 10% was NGLs and 11% was natural gas compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, where 74% of our production was oil, 14% was NGLs and 12% was natural gas.
Sales of natural gas, NGLs and oil. Unhedged oil sales decreased $6.5 million, or 48%, to $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $13.5 million for the same period in 2019. Sales of NGLs decreased approximately $0.3 million, or 53%, to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $0.5 million for the same period in 2019. Unhedged natural gas sales decreased approximately $0.1 million, or 20%, to approximately $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $0.4 million for the same period in 2019. The total decrease in sales of natural gas, NGLs and oil for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily the result of a decrease in average sales prices.
Including hedges and mark-to-market activities, our total production-related revenue increased approximately $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily the result of a reduction in oil sales of approximately $6.5 million offset by an increase in hedge and mark-to-market gains of approximately $7.8 million.
The following tables provide an analysis of the impacts of changes in production volumes and average realized prices between the periods on our unhedged revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 (in thousands, except average sales prices and volumes):
A 10% increase or decrease in our average realized sales prices, excluding the impact of derivatives, would have increased or decreased our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 by approximately $0.8 million.
Hedging and mark-to-market activities. We apply mark-to-market accounting to our derivative contracts; therefore, the full volatility of the non-cash change in fair value of our outstanding contracts is reflected in oil and natural gas revenues. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the non-cash mark-to-market gains were approximately $0.8 million, compared to losses of approximately $4.7 million for the same period in 2019. Cash settlements received for our commodity derivatives were approximately $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to settlements received of approximately $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Field operating expenses. Our field operating expenses generally consist of lease operating expenses, labor, vehicles, supervision, transportation, minor maintenance, tools and supplies expenses, as well as production and ad valorem taxes.
Lease operating expenses. Lease operating expenses decreased approximately $0.5 million, or 9%, to approximately $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $5.9 million for the same period in 2019.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense includes the depreciation, depletion and amortization of acquisition costs and equipment costs. Depletion is calculated using units-of-production under the successful efforts method of accounting. Assuming other variables remain constant, as the production of natural gas, NGLs and oil increases or decreases, our depletion expense would increase or decrease as well, respectively.
Our depreciation, depletion and amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $2.2 million, compared to approximately $3.9 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily the result of asset impairments in 2020 reducing our depletion rate.
Impairment expense. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our non-cash proved property impairment charge was approximately $23.4 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we did not record impairment on our oil and natural gas properties.
Consolidated Earnings Results
The following table sets forth the reconciliation of segment operating income to net income (loss) for periods indicated (in thousands):
(a) Variances deemed to be Not Meaningful “NM”
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses include indirect costs billed by SP Holdings in connection with the Shared Services Agreement, field office expenses, professional fees and other costs not directly associated with field operations. General and administrative expenses increased approximately $0.7 million, or 4%, to approximately $18.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $17.6 million for the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily the result of non-cash charges associated with the Shared Services Agreement.
Unit-based compensation expense. Unit-based compensation expense increased approximately $1.3 million, or 93%, to approximately $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $1.4 million for the same period in 2019. This increase was the result of a grant in 2020 to officers of the Partnership.
Interest expense, net. Interest expense increased approximately $56.1 million, to approximately $95.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $39.8 million for the same period in 2019. This increase was the result of the issuance of the Class C Preferred Units and the Warrant on August 2, 2019. The accrual of distributions on the Class C Preferred Units as well as the mark-to-market impact of the Warrant are charges to interest expense. Cash interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $5.1 million compared to approximately $9.2 million for the same period in 2019. See Note 16. “Partner’s Capital” of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to Class C Preferred Units and the Warrant.
Other income (expense). Other income for the year ended December 31, 2019 was approximately $5.9 million, resulting from changes in the fair value measurement of the earnout derivative.
Income tax expense. Income tax expense was approximately $24 thousand and $202 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $1.7 million in cash and cash equivalents and $9.0 million available for borrowing under the Credit Agreement in effect on such date, as discussed further below. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we paid approximately $5.2 million and $9.2 million, respectively, in cash for interest on borrowings under our Credit Agreement, of which approximately $0.1 million was related to the fee on undrawn commitments during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2020 were funded with cash on hand. In the future, capital and liquidity are anticipated to be provided by operating cash flows, borrowings under our Credit Agreement and
proceeds from the issuance of additional common units or other limited partner interests. We expect that the combination of these capital resources will be adequate to meet our short-term working capital requirements, long-term capital expenditures program and quarterly cash distributions, if any.
We expect that our future cash requirements relating to working capital, maintenance capital expenditures and quarterly cash distributions, if any to our partners will be funded from cash flows internally generated from our operations. Our expansion capital expenditures will be funded by borrowings under our Credit Agreement or from potential capital market transactions. However, there can be no assurance that operations and other capital resources will provide cash in sufficient amounts to maintain our current debt level, planned levels of capital expenditures, operating expenses or any cash distributions that we may make to unitholders.
Credit Agreement
We have entered into the Credit Agreement with Royal Bank of Canada, as administrative agent and collateral agent, and the lenders party thereto. The Credit Agreement provides a quarterly amortizing term loan of $155.0 million (the “Term Loan”) and a maximum revolving credit amount of $17.5 million, which is reduced to the lesser of (i) $15.0 million through May 14, 2021 and (ii) from and after May 15, 2021, the positive difference of the Borrowing Base minus the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the Term Loan(the “Revolving Loan”). The Term Loan and Revolving Loan both have a maturity date of September 30, 2021. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement are secured by various mortgages of both midstream and upstream properties that we own as well as various security and pledge agreements among us, certain of our subsidiaries and the administrative agent.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement are available for limited direct investment in oil and natural gas properties, midstream properties, acquisitions, and working capital and general business purposes. The Credit Agreement has a sub-limit of up to $2.5 million which may be used for the issuance of letters of credit. Pursuant to the Credit Agreement, the initial aggregate commitment amount under the Term Loan is $155.0 million, subject to quarterly $10.0 million principal and other mandatory prepayments. The borrowing base is equal to the sum of the rolling four quarter EBITDA of our midstream operations and the amount of distributions received from the Carnero JV multiplied by 4.5 or a lower number dependent upon natural gas volumes flowing through Western Catarina Midstream. Outstanding borrowings in excess of our borrowing base must be repaid within 45 days after the first occurrence of such borrowing base deficiency, subject to certain adjustments based on previous voluntary and mandatory prepayments. As of December 31, 2020, the borrowing base under the Credit Agreement was $129.1 million and we had $111.0 million of debt outstanding, consisting of $105.0 million under the Term Loan and $6.0 million under the Revolving Loan, providing us with $9.0 million in unused borrowing capacity under the Revolving Loan. We are required to make mandatory payments of outstanding principal on the Term Loan of $10.0 million per fiscal quarter. If a borrowing base deficiency exists at any time during the period from April 1, 2021 through and including May 14, 2021, we will be required to make a mandatory payment in an amount sufficient to eliminate any continuing borrowing base deficiency, subject to certain adjustments. If a borrowing base deficiency exists on or after May 15, 2021, and such borrowing base deficiency has not been eliminated on or before the 45th day after such deficiency, we will be required to pay an amount sufficient to eliminate any borrowing base deficiency on the 45th day after such borrowing base deficiency. There were no letters of credit outstanding under our Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2020.
At our election, interest for borrowings under the Credit Agreement are determined by reference to (i) the London interbank offered rate (“LIBOR”) plus an applicable margin between 2.50% and 3.00% per annum based on net debt to EBITDA or (ii) a domestic bank rate (“ABR”) plus an applicable margin between 1.50% and 2.00% per annum based on net debt to EBITDA plus (iii) a commitment fee of 0.500% per annum based on the unutilized maximum revolving credit. Interest on the borrowings for ABR loans and the commitment fee are generally payable quarterly. Interest on the borrowings for LIBOR loans are generally payable at the applicable maturity date.
The Credit Agreement contains various covenants, including the Transaction Covenant described below, that limit, among other things, our ability to incur certain indebtedness, grant certain liens, merge or consolidate, sell all or substantially all of our assets, make certain loans, acquisitions, capital expenditures and investments, and pay distributions.
In addition, we are required to maintain the following financial covenants:
● current assets to current liabilities of at least 1.0 to 1.0 at all times; and
● senior secured net debt to consolidated adjusted EBITDA for the last twelve months, as of the last day of any fiscal quarter, of not greater than 3.5 to 1.0.
The Credit Agreement also includes customary events of default, including events of default relating to non-payment of principal, interest or fees, inaccuracy of representations and warranties when made or when deemed made, violation of covenants, cross-defaults, bankruptcy and insolvency events, certain unsatisfied judgments, loan documents not being valid and a change in control. A change in control is generally defined as the occurrence of one of the following events: (i) our existing general partner ceases to be our sole general partner or (ii) certain specified persons shall cease to own more than 50% of the equity interests of our general partner or shall cease to control our general partner. If an event of default occurs, the lenders will be able to accelerate the maturity of the Credit Agreement and exercise other rights and remedies.
Our partnership agreement prohibits us from paying any distributions on our common units until we have redeemed all of the Class C Preferred Units. Following such redemption, the Credit Agreement further limits our ability to pay distributions to unitholders.
The Partnership’s inability to generate sufficient liquidity to meet future debt obligations raises substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern. The Credit Agreement matures September 30, 2021 and our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to either (i) refinance or extend the maturity of the Credit Agreement, or (ii) obtain adequate new debt or equity financing to repay the Credit Agreement in full at maturity. The Tenth Amendment provides that the Partnership’s audited annual financial statements may be delivered with a “going concern” or like qualification or exception, if such qualification or exception results from the fact that the final maturity date of the Amended Credit Agreement is less than one year after the date of such report, and does not otherwise include any qualification or exception as to the scope of such audit.
The Tenth Amendment contains the Transaction Covenant, which provides that we must either (i) engage an Advisory Firm to advise us with respect to a Qualifying Transaction, or, (ii) without an Advisory Firm, take material steps towards engaging in a Qualifying Transaction. If we engage an Advisory Firm, then the target closing date for a Qualifying Transaction must be no later than August 31, 2021. If we take material steps on our own, then the target closing date for a Qualifying Transaction must be on or before June 30, 2021 or we must hire an Advisory Firm. In either event, the net cash proceeds must be reasonably expected to be greater than the full amount due under the Credit Agreement on the maturity date. If we are unable to comply with the Transaction Covenant it will be deemed an immediate event of default under the Credit Agreement, which could cause all of our existing indebtedness to become immediately due and payable. Please read “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors-Our Credit Agreement has substantial prepayment requirements, other restrictions and financial covenants and requires periodic borrowing base redeterminations.”
At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the financial covenants contained in the Credit Agreement. We monitor compliance on an ongoing basis. If we are unable to remain in compliance with the financial covenants contained in our Credit Agreement or maintain the required ratios discussed above, the lenders could call an event of default and accelerate the outstanding debt under the terms of the Credit Agreement, such that our outstanding debt could become then due and payable. We may request waivers of compliance from the violated financial covenants from the lenders, but there is no assurance that such waivers would be granted.
Sources of Debt and Equity Financing
As of December 31, 2020, we had $6.0 million of debt outstanding under the Revolving Loan, leaving us with $9.0 million in unused borrowing capacity. There were no letters of credit outstanding under our Credit Agreement at December 31, 2020. Our Credit Agreement matures on September 30, 2021.
Operating Cash Flows
We had net cash flows provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, of approximately $37.9 million, compared to net cash flows provided by operating activities of approximately $58.0 million for the same period in 2019. This decrease was primarily related to the decrease in throughput between the periods which accounted for approximately $17.6 million of the decrease.
Our operating cash flows are subject to many variables, the most significant of which is the volume of oil and natural gas transported through our midstream assets, volatility of oil and natural gas prices and our level of production of oil and natural gas. Oil and natural gas prices are determined primarily by prevailing market conditions, which are dependent on regional and worldwide economic activity, weather and other factors beyond our control. Our future operating cash flows will depend on oil and natural gas transported through our midstream assets, as well as the market prices of oil and natural gas and our hedging program.
Investing Activities
We had net cash flows used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of approximately $1.9 million, consisting of approximately $1.8 million related to midstream activities, including pipeline construction, and contributions to Carnero JV totaling approximately $0.1 million.
Our net cash flows used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 were approximately $1.4 million, consisting of approximately $1.0 million related to midstream activities, including pipeline construction, and contributions to Carnero JV totaling approximately $0.2 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash flows used in financing activities was approximately $39.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repaid $39.0 million of borrowings under the Credit Agreement.
Net cash flows used in financing activities were approximately $54.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we distributed approximately $17.7 million to Stonepeak Catarina, as the holder of all of our outstanding Class B Preferred Units, and approximately $5.2 million to our common unitholders. Additionally, we paid approximately $0.2 million in offering costs and repaid $34.0 million of borrowings under the Credit Agreement.
Going Concern
Our historical consolidated financial statements have been prepared under the assumption that we will continue as a going concern. The report on our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, issued by our independent registered public accounting firm included in this Form 10-K, includes an explanatory paragraph referring to our inability to generate sufficient liquidity to meet future debt obligations which raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to either (i) refinance or extend the maturity of the Credit Agreement, or (ii) obtain adequate new debt or equity financing to repay the Credit Agreement in full at maturity. Our consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. The outcome of these matters cannot be predicted with any certainty at this time and raise doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern. Our consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to the amount and classification of assets and liabilities that may be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements with third parties, and we maintain no debt obligations that contained provisions requiring accelerated payment of the related obligations in the event of specified levels of declines in credit ratings.
Credit Markets and Counterparty Risk
We actively monitor the credit exposure and risks associated with our counterparties. Additionally, we continue to monitor global credit markets to limit our potential exposure to credit risk where possible. Our primary credit exposures result from the generation of substantially all of our midstream business segment revenues from a single customer, Mesquite, the sale of oil and natural gas and our use of derivatives.
On August 11, 2019, the SN Debtors filed voluntary petitions for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy code in the Bankruptcy Court, jointly administered under Case No. 19-34508 (the “Mesquite Chapter 11 Case”). On January 13, 2020, we received written notice of termination from Mesquite terminating the Seco Pipeline Transportation Agreement, effective February 12, 2020. On June 30, 2020, the SN Debtors emerged from the Mesquite Chapter 11 Case, with Mesquite Company becoming a privately held corporation. Given our midstream focus, our primary credit exposure relates to the creditworthiness of the counterparties under our gathering and processing agreements including, among other counterparties, Mesquite.
On June 6, 2020 the Partnership, our general partner and certain of our subsidiaries entered into the Settlement Agreement. On June 30, 2020, the Bankruptcy Court entered an order approving the Settlement Agreement and the parties to the Settlement Agreement entered into or amended certain commercial contracts, which will become effective only upon satisfaction of certain closing conditions described in the Settlement Agreement unless terminated earlier.
On June 23, 2020, certain affiliates of each Occidental Petroleum Corp., The Blackstone Group and GSO Capital Partners filed the Rejection Lawsuits against Mesquite and certain of its subsidiaries requesting, among other things, that the Bankruptcy Court not approve the rejection of certain commercial agreements, as set forth in the Settlement Agreement, in connection with Mesquite’s Comanche Asset. The commercial agreements contemplated by the Settlement Agreement that the Partnership and its subsidiaries entered into on June 30, 2020 will not become effective until, among other things, the Rejection Lawsuits have been resolved in favor of the SN Debtors and the Bankruptcy Court has approved the rejection of the certain commercial agreements underlying the Rejection Lawsuits. The Rejection Lawsuits were not resolved by October 1, 2020, and as a result the parties to the Settlement Agreement may terminate the Settlement Agreement at any time pursuant to its terms. To date, none of the parties of the Settlement Agreement have provided notice of termination.
Any development that materially and adversely affects Mesquite’s operations or financial condition, including the failure to favorably resolve the Rejections Lawsuits or termination of the Settlement Agreement, could have a material adverse impact on us, including but not limited to impairment losses on fixed assets. For additional information on the risks associated with our relationships with Mesquite, please read “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Credit Agreement
As of December 31, 2020, the banks and their percentage commitments in our Credit Agreement were: Royal Bank of Canada (13%), BBVA USA f/k/a Compass Bank (12%), Truist Bank f/k/a SunTrust Bank (12%), Capital One, National Association (12%), Comerica Bank (12%), Citibank, N.A. (9%), Credit Suisse AG, Cayman Islands (9%), ING Capital LLC (9%), CIT Bank, N.A. (9%) and Macquarie Investments US Inc. (5%). As of December 31, 2020, each of these financial institutions had an investment grade credit rating.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of the financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The most significant estimates pertain to proved oil and natural gas reserves and related cash flow estimates used in the calculation of depletion and impairment of oil and natural gas properties, the fair value of commodity derivative contracts and asset retirement obligations, accrued oil and natural gas revenues and expenses and the allocation of general and administrative expenses. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates.
The policies disclosed included the accounting for oil and natural gas properties, oil and natural gas reserve quantities, revenue recognition and hedging activities. Please read Note 2 “Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of additional accounting policies and estimates made by management.
Oil and Natural Gas Properties
We follow the successful efforts method of accounting for our oil and natural gas production activities. Under this method of accounting, costs relating to leasehold acquisition, property acquisition and the development of proved areas are capitalized when incurred. If proved reserves are found on an undeveloped property, leasehold cost is transferred to proved properties. Under this method of accounting, costs relating to the development of proved areas are capitalized when incurred.
Depreciation and depletion of producing oil and natural gas properties is recorded at the field level, based on the units-of-production method. Unit rates are computed for unamortized drilling and development costs using proved developed reserves and for unamortized leasehold and proved property acquisition costs using all proved reserves. As more fully described in Note 7 “Oil and Natural Gas Properties and Related Equipment” to our consolidated financial statements, proved reserves estimates are subject to future revisions when additional information becomes available.
All other properties, including gathering and transportation assets, are stated at historical acquisition cost, net of any impairments, and are depreciated using the straight-line method over the useful lives of the assets, which range from 3 to 15 years for furniture and equipment, up to 36 years for gathering facilities, and up to 40 years for transportation assets.
Estimated asset retirement costs are recognized when the asset is acquired or placed in service. Costs associated with oil and natural gas properties are amortized over proved reserves using the units-of-production method. Costs associated with gathering and transportation assets are depreciated using the straight-line method over the useful lives of the asset. Asset retirement costs are estimated by our engineers using existing regulatory requirements and anticipated future inflation rates.
Oil and natural gas properties are reviewed for impairment when facts and circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. We assess impairment of capitalized costs of proved oil and natural gas properties by comparing net capitalized costs to estimated undiscounted future net cash flows using expected prices. If net capitalized costs exceed estimated undiscounted future net cash flows, the measurement of impairment is based on estimated fair value, which would consider estimated future discounted cash flows. Cash flow estimates for the impairment testing are based on third party reserve reports and exclude derivative instruments. Refer to Note 7 “Oil and Natural Gas Properties and Related Equipment” to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Gathering and transportation assets are reviewed for impairment when facts or circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. Asset recoverability is measured by comparing the carrying value of the asset or asset group with its expected future pre-tax undiscounted cash flows. These cash flow estimates require us to make projections and assumptions for many years into the future for pricing, demand, competition, operating cost and other factors. If the carrying amount exceeds the expected future undiscounted cash flows, we recognize an impairment equal to the excess of net book value over fair value. The determination of the fair value using present value techniques requires us to make projections and assumptions regarding the probability of a range of outcomes and the rates of interest used in the present value calculations. Any changes we make to these projections and assumptions could result in significant revisions to our evaluation of recoverability of our gathering and transportation assets and the recognition of additional impairments. Refer to Note 7 “Oil and Natural Gas Properties and Related Equipment” to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Reserves of Natural Gas, NGLs and Oil
Our estimate of proved reserves is based on the quantities of natural gas, NGLs and oil that engineering and geological analyses demonstrate, with reasonable certainty, to be recoverable from established reservoirs in the future under current operating and economic parameters. Management estimates the proved reserves attributable to our ownership based on various factors, including consideration of the reserve report prepared by Ryder Scott, an independent oil and
natural gas consulting firm. On an annual basis, our proved reserve estimates and the reserve report prepared by Ryder Scott are reviewed by the Audit Committee and the Board. Our financial statements for 2020 and 2019 were prepared using Ryder Scott’s estimates of our proved reserves.
Reserves and their relation to estimated future net cash flows impact our depletion and impairment calculations. As a result, adjustments to depletion and impairment are made concurrently with changes to reserve estimates. The accuracy of our reserve estimates is a function of many factors including the following: the quality and quantity of available data, the interpretation of that data, the accuracy of various mandated economic assumptions and the judgments of the individuals preparing the estimates.
Our proved reserve estimates are a function of many assumptions, all of which could deviate significantly from actual results. As such, reserve estimates may materially vary from the actual quantities of oil and natural gas eventually recovered.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements and Accounting Changes
See Note 2 “Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements included in this report for information on new accounting pronouncements.