Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this Form 10-K, including “Risk Factors,” and the Financial Statements. The various sections of this discussion contain a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risk factors described throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See “Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
As used in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation,” except where the context otherwise requires, the term “we,” “us,” “our,” or “the Company,” refers to the business of Sun Power Holdings Corp.
Organizational Overview
Utilizing managements history in general contracting, coupled with our subject matter expertise and intellectual property (“IP”) knowledge of solar panels and other leading-edge technologies, Sun Pacific Holding (“the Company”) is focused on building a “Next Generation” green energy company. The Company offers competitively priced “Next Generation” solar panel and lighting products by working closely with design, engineering, integration and installation firms in order to deliver turnkey solar and other energy efficient solutions. We provide solar bus stops, solar trashcans and “street kiosks” that utilize our unique advertising offerings that provide State and local municipalities with costs efficient solutions and we have started, through a partnership, with ownership terms to be defined upon securing financing, the opportunity to develop and build a solar farm in Durango Mexico.
Our green energy solutions can be customized to meet most enterprise and/or government mandated regulations and advanced system requirements. Our portfolio of products and services allow our clients to select a solution that enables them to establish a viable standard product offering that focuses on the goals of the client’s entire organization.
Currently, the Company has six (6) subsidiary holdings. Sun Pacific Power Corp which was the initial company that specialized in solar, electrical and general construction, Bella Electric, LLC that in conjunction with the Company operates our electrical contracting work. Bella Electric, LLC is a Pennsylvania limited liability company. The Company also formed Sun Pacific Security Corp., a New Jersey corporation. Currently the Company has not begun operations in the security sector but is reviewing plans to provide residential and commercial security solutions, including installation and monitoring. The Company also formed National Mechanical Group Corp, a New Jersey corporation focused on plumbing operations in the New Jersey and Pennsylvania areas. Currently the Company is exploring migrating National Mechanical Group Corp from plumbing operations to partnering on a Solar Farm project in Durango Mexico in which it will partner with Soluciones De Energia Diversificada Internacional, S.A.P.I. (“SEDI”), a subsidiary of Blissful Holdings, LLC. The partnership has identified, received preliminary terms, and is proceeding with due diligence including a site visit in December with a project funding source/partner in support of its partnership with SEDI to build and develop the Durango Mexico Solar Farm Project. The proposed project funding would be for up to $80 million in capital to build a 40 plus megawatt solar farm in which NMG and SEDI would own a thirty percent equity interest in the completed project. The Company also formed Street Smart Outdoor Corp, a Wyoming corporation that acts as a holding company for the Company’s state specific operations in unique advertising through solar bus stops, solar trashcans and “street kiosks.” MedRecycler, LLC, is a wholly owned subsidiary duly formed in the state of Nevada. MedRecycler, LLC was created in 2018 to act as a holding company for potential waste to energy projects. MedRecycler, LLC, currently owns 51% of MedRecycler RI, Inc. a Rhode Island Corporation. MedRecycler RI, Inc. was created for the Medical Waste to Energy facility that the Company is attempting to finance and operate in West Warrick, Rhode Island. MedRecycler RI, Inc. is currently exploring permanent financing options to fund its operations that meet the underwriting requirements of various bond/debt investors and issuing authorities, which if put into place would require changes to MedRecycler RI, Inc.’s and or the Company’s organizational structure. The Company is exploring creative solutions that would meet the requirements of the various financing parties and still provide equivalent profit sharing arrangements between the parties that allow Sun Pacific to also undertake other projects as it focuses on the best organizational structure to allow it to fund and grow its green energy objectives.
As of today, our principal source of revenues is derived from Street Smart Outdoor Corp. operations in the outdoor advertising business with contracts in place in Rhode Island and Tallahassee, Florida, along with some other minor contracting work that we are currently reviewing to determine if we shall continue pursuing in the future. We are currently in discussions with a nationally known outdoor advertising firm to manage and expand our operations, either through a joint venture, partnership, and or a management arrangement as a result of the company’s insufficient working capital and as an option to allow for the expansion of our technologies and or contracts by working with other parties that can bring management expertise and or other resources that may allow us to further optimize our growth strategies.
Sun Pacific Power Corp. is in the process of providing limited general contacting services and are reviewing continuing general contracting in the region as we shift our focus to other green energy opportunities.
Bella Electric, LLC and Sun Pacific Security Corp. have generally ceased operations, but we maintain the subsidiaries in case we find opportunities to relaunch our operations.
MedRecycler, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Sun Pacific Holding Company currently holds fifty one percent (51%) of MedRecycler-RI, Inc., a corporation formed in the state of Rhode Island for the development of waste to energy projects in the state of Rhode Island. Currently, MedRecycler-RI, Inc. has entered into an Indenture of Trust in the amount of $6,025,000.00 as bridge financing for a project in West Warwick, Rhode Island (the “Rhode Island Project”). This was extended and amended to include an additional $2,700,000.00 as the approval process of permanent bond financing has been delay in the state of Rhode Island and again amended and extended with the addition of $500,000 in additional convertible debt being added by a new senior secured lender with such $500,000 in debt converting into equity in the project upon the completion of permanent financing that is further being augmented with the ability of the $500,000 in senior convertible debt expanding up to $2,000,000 with the conversion of up to 40% equity in MedRecycler RI, Inc. The original plan was for a facility in Johnston, Rhode Island, but through our negotiations, determined that the West Warwick location was more suitable. The Indenture of Trust has been secured by all equity holdings in MedRecycler-RI, Inc., all personal holdings of equity in the Company held by Nick Campanella, our CEO and member of the Board of Directors. Mr. Campanella has further pledged personal property located in Manapalan in excess of $1,000,000. Payment for the Indenture of Trust is further guaranteed by the Company and Street Smart Outdoor Corp. Currently, MedRecycler-RI, Inc. has entered into a lease agreement in West Warwick, Rhode Island, has taken preliminary steps to order the equipment, and is beginning to engage specialists and staff for building out the Rhode Island Project. In order to secure actual operations of the Rhode Island Project, we estimate that MedRecycler-RI, Inc. must still secure enough long term financing that will extinguish is short-term debt and fund the permanent financing of its operations. MedRecycler-RI, Inc. is currently negotiating with the state of Rhode Island and potential bond financiers to secure the long-term financing for the Rhode Island Project. Although we anticipate, assuming the long-term financing is secured, the Rhode Island Project may be fully operational as early as the first quarter of 2021, but, at this time, that schedule could slip as a result of delays in closing on long-term financing and other regulatory requirements. All initial operational earnings will be earmarked for interest, principal repayment, and the fulfillment of other covenants of the long-term financing until all reserves have been met. As we have not secured long term financing, we can make no statement regarding the long term success of the Rhode Island Project, though, even in a best case scenario, the Rhode Island Project may not be cash flow positive until fully operational and proceeds fulfill covenants under the terms of the yet to be finalized debt financing. Through MedRecycler, LLC, the Company currently owns fifty-one percent (51%) of MedRecycler-RI, Inc., which was pledged by the Company to Mr. Campanella pursuant to a forbearance agreement related to debts owed to Mr. Campanella. The remaining forty nine percent (49%) of MedRecycler-RI, Inc. is held by Nicholas Campanella, personally, Marmac Corporate Advisors, LLC, and Eilers Law Group, P.A., holding thirty nine percent (39%), eight percent (8%), two percent (2%), respectfully. With the new senior secured convertible debt as issued these ownership percentages may change. Mr. Campanella received his ownership as consideration for his personal pledges securing the Indenture of Trust, Marmac Corporate Advisors, LLC and Eilers Law Group, P.A. received their respective ownership as consideration for efforts and services performed. One hundred percent (100%) of the ownership of MedRecycler-RI, Inc. has been pledged to bridge financing, including any pledge rights held by Mr. Campanella in MedRecycler, LLC. MedRecycler RI, Inc. is currently exploring permanent financing options to fund its operations that meet the underwriting requirements of various bond/debt investors and issuing authorities, which if put into place would require changes to MedRecycler RI, Inc.’s and or the Company’s organizational ownership structure. It has been made clear by the Rhode Island authorities approving long term bond facilities for the MedRecycler-RI, Inc. project, that the Company cannot have an ownership interest given its poor creditworthiness and insolvency. The approving authority has expressed a desire to sever all economic interest in the Rhode Island Project from the Company, However, we have proposed, and have received initial approval, whereby in exchange for releasing all guarantees and other security interests of the Company and its subsidiaries, and forgoing direct ownership in MedRecycler-RI, Inc., the Company shall receive an economic interest equal to a percentage of profits derived from MedRecycler-RI, Inc. and as calculated by the equity ownership as determined by the respective parties upon the closing of its permanent financing. This will free collateral and cashflow for the development of new projects of the Company and its subsidiaries, while also removing the debt of MedRecycler-RI, Inc. from the balance sheet of the Company. At the same time, once MedRecycler-RI, Inc. becomes profitable, and has met all requirements of long term financing related to reserve allocations and profit thresholds, the Company should receive a recurring income from the MedRecycler-RI, Inc. without the limitations on its assets and additional overhead costs related to maintaining the subsidiary and financial reporting. Any final agreement will be subject to final approval of the Rhode Island authority, who has provided tentative approval of the economic interest structure. Rhode Island Project, while also balancing the requirements of those parties approving permanent financing.
Currently the Company is also exploring migrating its subsidiary, National Mechanical Group Corp from plumbing operations to partnering on a Solar Farm project in Mexico in which it will partner with other subject matter experts and seek project financing. If successful, National Mechanical Group Corp would own equity in the partnership that would own a portion of the project and also receive compensation for its work in project management and other professional services.
On September 19, 2019, the United States Patent and Trademark Office published patent US 2019 288 139 A1 for the Frame-Less Encapsulated Photo-Voltaic (PV) Solar Power Panel Supporting Solar Cell Modules Encapsulated Within Optically-Transparent Epoxy-Resin Material Coating a Phenolic Resin Support Sheet issued to National Mechanical Group Corp. Originally designed for application in the solar bus shelters operated by Street Smart Outdoor Corp, as a glassless solar panel, the Company has developed a patent protected product and process for creating solar panels that can be integrated directly into the design of products as a molded, weather resistant plastic. The Company will begin work developing a business plan for expanding on either manufacturing or licensing of the technology in the future.
Currently, the Company has been and is insolvent if you factor in the Company’s debt obligations. Over its history and to augment the Company’s strategy, it has sought out partnerships and other arrangements with professionals and companies at the operating subsidiary level to counter its insolvent state, coupled with the Company’s use of debt and equity financings. The Company continues to look for opportunities that will allow it to partner with others in the form of debt and or equity and other contributions at the subsidiary level, and where possible attempt to keep control of at least fifty one percent (51%) of those subsidiaries. While it will also look for the means to correct its insolvent state at the holding company level, given its current negative economic condition, many parties continue to prefer to work with the Company at an operational subsidiary level. The Company is currently exploring other equity and or debt opportunities to correct its overall insolvent state. Although we continue operations through our subsidiary holdings, revenues generated do not fully produce cash flows sufficient to meet our basic capital requirements. In order to meet our reporting requirements, we may have to seek additional capital through debt or equity financing and/or request deferred payment or other in-kind payments for services. Street Smart Outdoor is undercapitalized making expansion of our advertising products highly unlikely or difficult to expand without the use of potential partnerships and or commission only sales representatives. Neither the Company nor Street Smart Outdoor have secured additional financing to support operations. We are attempting to partner or otherwise develop a capital strategy to allow us to grow the outdoor advertising business that includes financing outdoor structures with other parties, in which we arrange financing arrangements, and we continue to look for other professional organizations that we can partner with in expanding our contracts.
On January 29, 2021, MedRecycler-RI, Inc., a subsidiary of Sun Pacific Holding Corp., (the “Company”) entered into an amendment to the Indenture of Trust with UMB Bank, extending the term of the two (2) bond’s representing bridge financing for the Rhode Island medical waste to energy project for a period of up to one year from the date of signing. The extension of the bonds shall accrue interest, including a capitalized extension fee of five (5%) percent, at twelve (12%) per annum. In addition, the Company has been issued an extension for the term of a secured convertible loan to Pyro SS, LLC, as reported in the Company’s Form 10Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2020, until July 28, 2021 and that were subsequently further extended through January 29, 2022. The bonds are intended to be paid and extinguished from proceeds from permanent financing
It has been made clear by the Rhode Island authorities approving long term bond facilities for the MedRecycler-RI, Inc. project, that the Company cannot have an ownership interest given its poor creditworthiness and insolvency. The approving authority has expressed a desire to sever all economic interest in the Rhode Island Project from the Company, However, we have proposed, and have received initial approval, whereby in exchange for releasing all guarantees and other security interests of the Company and its subsidiaries, and forgoing direct ownership in MedRecycler-RI, Inc., the Company shall receive an economic interest equal to 51% of all profits derived from the MedRecycler-RI, Inc. This will free collateral and cashflow for the development of new projects of the Company and its subsidiaries, while also removing the debt of MedRecycler-RI, Inc. from the balance sheet of the Company. At the same time, once MedRecycler-RI, Inc. becomes profitable, and has met all requirements of long term financing related to reserve allocations and profit thresholds, the Company should receive a recurring income from the MedRecycler-RI, Inc. without the limitations on its assets and additional overhead costs related to maintaining the subsidiary and financial reporting. Any final agreement will be subject to final approval of the Rhode Island authority, who has provided tentative approval of the economic interest structure. The Company will engage independent counsel to negotiate the terms to avoid any potential risks of conflict of interest.
Strategic Vision
Our objective is to grow our business profitably as a premier green energy-based provider of both product and services to the public and private sectors. We are working to deploy our strategy in building upon our general and other contracting expertise in conjunction with our intellectual property and subject matter expertise in green energy that may allow us to grow a group of profitable business lines in solar, waste to energy, efficient lighting, and other unique energy related areas.
Recent advances in a multitude of different yet converging technologies have significantly improved the ability to integrate energy efficient products and solutions into infrastructure related projects. These technological advances decrease the requirements needed to jointly operate a multitude of differing assets, devices, and tools that create new ways to integrate evolving new technologies. This technological change and convergence in energy efficient devices, integrated communications among devices, and societal needs to more effectively and environmentally friendly we believe presents a significant opportunity for us in providing and supporting simple to complex integrated solutions.
Our challenges continue to be reaching critical mass in our solar shelter business, expanding into other green energy related projects, completion of the Rhode Island Project and securing operational capital. Except for the bridge financing for the Rhode Island Project, we do not have any material existing financing arrangements in place. While the Company has never been adequately funded from inception, the Company has attempted to use debt, equity, and other opportunistic in-kind compensation to further the Company’s strategic vision.
Going Concern
The Company has an accumulated deficit of $9,417,865 and a working capital deficit of $3,985,435 as of December 31, 2020. The Company’s continuation as a going concern is dependent on its ability to generate sufficient cash flows from operations to meet its obligations, which it has not been able to accomplish to date, and/or obtain additional financing from its stockholders and/or other third parties.
In order to further implement its business plan and satisfy its working capital requirements, the Company will need to raise additional capital. There is no guarantee that the Company will be able to raise additional equity or debt financing at acceptable terms, if at all.
There is no assurance that the Company will ever be profitable. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Those material accounting estimates that we believe are the most critical to an investor’s understanding of our financial results and condition are discussed immediately below and are particularly important to the portrayal of our financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by our management to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates.
Use of estimates in the preparation of financial statements
Preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates include the allowance for doubtful accounts and impairment assessments related to long-lived assets.
Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned, and less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries of which the Company holds a controlling interest. All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated. Amounts attributable to minority interests in the Company’s less-than-wholly owned subsidiary are presented as non-controlling interest on the accompanying condensed consolidated balance sheets and statements of operations.
Cash and cash equivalents
For purposes of the consolidated statements of cash flows, cash includes demand deposits and short-term liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less when purchased. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) provided insurance coverage of up to $250,000, per depositor, per institution. At December 31, 2020, none of the Company’s cash balances were in excess of federally insured limits. Any and all withdrawals are strictly controlled by the lending institution and use of proceeds must be approved prior to release of funds.
Accounts Receivable
In the normal course of business, we decide to extend credit to certain customers without requiring collateral or other security interests. Management reviews its accounts receivable at each reporting period to provide for an allowance against accounts receivable for an amount that could become uncollectible. This review process may involve the identification of payment problems with specific customers. Periodically we estimate this allowance based on the aging of the accounts receivable, historical collection experience, and other relevant factors, such as changes in the economy and the imposition of regulatory requirements that can have an impact on the industry. These factors continuously change and can have an impact on collections and our estimation process. The Company’s allowance for doubtful accounts totaled $0 and $22,835 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Leases
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02 (Topic 842). Topic 842 amends several aspects of lease accounting, including requiring lessees to recognize leases with a term greater than one year as a right-of-use asset and corresponding liability, measured at the present value of the lease payments. In July 2018, the FASB issued supplemental adoption guidance and clarification to Topic 842 within ASU 2018-10 “Codification Improvements to Topic 842, Leases” and ASU 2018-11 “Leases (Topic 842): Targeted Improvements.” The new guidance aims to increase transparency and comparability among organizations by requiring lessees to recognize lease assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet and requiring disclosure of key information about leasing arrangements. A modified retrospective application is required with an option to not restate comparative periods in the period of adoption.
The Company, effective January 1, 2019 has adopted the provisions of the new standard. The Company has operating leases for warehouses and offices. Management evaluates each lease independently to determine the purpose, necessity to its future operations in addition to other appropriate facts and circumstances.
We adopted Topic 842 using a modified retrospective approach for all existing leases at January 1, 2019. The adoption of Topic 842 impacted our balance sheet by the recognition of the operating lease right-of-use assets and the liability for operating leases. Accordingly, upon adoption, leases that were classified as operating leases under the previous guidance were classified as operating leases under Topic 842. The lease liability is based on the present value of the remaining lease payments, discounted using a market based incremental borrowing rate as the effective date of January 1, 2019 using current estimates as to lease term including estimated renewals for each operating lease. As of January 1, 2019, the Company recorded an adjustment of approximately $1,339,000 to operating lease right-of-use assets (“ROU”) and the related lease liability (Note 7).
Deposits
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company made deposits of approximately $5,000,000 pursuant to a purchase of equipment costing approximately $7,200,000. We are currently estimating the commencement of operations as early as of the 4th quarter of 2021 at MedRecycler-RI, Inc.’s West Warwick, Rhode Island facility.
Contingencies
Certain conditions may exist as of the date financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss, but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or do not occur. We assess such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment. In assessing loss contingencies related to pending legal proceedings that are pending against us or unasserted claims that may result in such proceedings, we evaluate the perceived merits of any legal proceedings or unasserted claims as well as the perceived merits of the amount of relief sought or expected to be sought therein. If the assessment of a contingency indicates that it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be estimated, then the estimated liability would be accrued in our consolidated financial statements. If the assessment indicates that a potentially material loss contingency is not probable but is reasonably possible, or is probable but cannot be estimated, then the nature of the contingent liability, together with an estimate of the range of possible loss if determinable would be disclosed.
Fair value of financial instruments
The carrying amounts of the Company’s accounts payable, accrued expenses, and accrued expenses due to related parties approximate fair value due to their short-term nature. The Company’s long-term debt approximates fair value based on prevailing market rates.
Property and equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost. Additions and improvements that significantly add to the productive capacity or extend the life of an asset are capitalized. Maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over three to five years for vehicles and five to ten years for equipment. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the lesser of the estimated remaining useful life of the asset or the remaining lease term. Interest costs incurred that are directly related to the construction of long term assets are capitalized during the construction period. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, $892,400 and $651,828, respectively, is included in proprerty plant and equipment.
Impairment of long-lived assets
The Company periodically reviews for the impairment of long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be realizable. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition is less than its carrying amount. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company has not identified any such impairment losses.
Income taxes
Under ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes”, the Company is required to account for its income taxes through the establishment of a deferred tax asset or liability for the recognition of future deductible or taxable amounts and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax expense or benefit is recognized as a result of timing differences between the recognition of assets and liabilities for book and tax purposes during the year.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Deferred tax assets are recognized for deductible temporary differences and operating losses, and tax credit carry forwards. A valuation allowance is established to reduce that deferred tax asset if it is “more likely than not” that the related tax benefits will not be realized.
Revenue recognition
100% of the Company’s revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is recognized based on the Company’s satisfaction of distinct performance obligations identified in each agreement, generally at a point in time as defined by Topic 606, as amended.
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. This standard replaced most existing revenue recognition guidance and is codified in FASB ASC Topic 606. Effective January 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASU No. 2014-09 using the modified retrospective method. Under the new guidance, the Company recognizes revenue from contracts based on the Company’s satisfaction of distinct performance obligations identified in each agreement. The adoption of the guidance under ASU No. 2014-09 did not result in a material impact on the Company’s consolidated revenues, results of operations, or financial position. As part of the implementation of ASC 606 the Company must present disaggregation of revenues from contracts with customers into categories that depict how the nature, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows are affected by economic factors. Quantitative disclosures on the disaggregation of revenue are as follows:
Earnings Per Share
Under ASC 260, “Earnings Per Share” (“EPS”), the Company provides for the calculation of basic and diluted earnings per share. Basic EPS includes no dilution and is computed by dividing income or loss available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted EPS reflects the potential dilution of securities that could share in the earnings or losses of the entity. For the Year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, basic and diluted loss per share are the same as the calculation of diluted per share amounts would result in an anti-dilutive calculation. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, all potential shares have been excluded from the calculation of diluted loss per share because their impact was anti-dilutive.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 as Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
During the year ended December 31, 2020, revenues decreased by $11,705, from $300,733 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $289,028 in 2020, as a result of lesser advertising revenues and reduce General Contracting services as the Company migrates away from General Contracting services and towards the development of Green Energy Projects including the sale of Solar powered shelters and other energy related projects that derive income from advertising sources. Advertising revenue declined as a result of a transition to commissioned advertising sales personnel during the quarter. The Company has entered into revenue sharing agreements with the City of Tallahassee, the State of Rhode Island Transportation Authority, and the State of New Jersey, along with others to provide and manage up to approximately 1,000 marketing faces and other related products for a period of up to Ten (10) years that may include providing WiFi Signal Boosters and Advertising in conjunction with the shelters and other related other outdoor related products. Depending upon the timing of installation and advertising revenue generated per shelter and or other advertising-based product, the Company’s Revenue may increase materially from this green energy offering. The Company has recently raised capital to build and deploy up to 20 bus shelters in Rhode Island as part of an income sharing arrangement with an investment group. The Company has recently had 20 bus shelters delivered and is in the process of deploying the bus shelters into the marketplace. The Company is currently in discussion with the State of Rhode Island on the specific details related to those bus shelters. The State of Rhode Island is also exploring options of purchasing those bus shelters from the Company. The Company is also presently in the process of adding up to 60 bus benches in the City of Tallahassee and has engaged two new commissioned sales individuals to assist the company in increasing its advertising revenues in the City of Tallahassee market place, along with adding improved sales advertising capabilities in an effort to improve advertising utilization. The Company’s current Waste to Energy and Durango Solar Farm Project may or may not impact future revenues depending upon the capital structure and other conditions that will be required of the Company by its financing partners and or other regulatory authorities upon closing of its permanent financing for those projects. These items along with other revenue generating opportunities that is under review by the Company may cause dramatic shifts in the Company’s comparative revenue profile of the products and services that the Company provides in the future.
Cost of Revenues
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of revenues decreased by $176,088, from $214,896 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $38,808 in 2020, as a result of a higher mix of higher margin advertising generated revenues. Costs of revenues may shift dramatically depending upon how the Company’s comparative revenue profile of the products and services shift in the future.
Operating Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating expenses increased by $22,799, from $1,301,269 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1,324,068 in 2020 due materially to increases in professional fees offset slightly by decreases in wages, fees, and other general and administrative expenses that were associated with project development costs for the Company’s Medical Waste to Energy initiative and other development projects associated with green energy development initiatives that the Company is currently exploring. The Company’s Operating Expenses may vary quarter to quarter as a result in upfront development costs for permits, engineering reviews, and other costs associated with the Company’s new development projects related to its Medical Waste to Energy project as well as other projects that it is currently reviewing.
Other Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2020, Other Expenses increased by $225,762 from $564,734 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $790,496 in 2020 as a result of greater amounts of interest expense as a result of the issuance of convertible debt and other capital related events. Given the Company’s financing requirements in developing its new business models, the Company’s other (income) expenses may increase over time as the Company explores the use of additional debt financing.
Net Loss
As a result of the above, Net Loss inclusive of the net loss attributable of non-controlling interest of $789,992 decreased $619,068 from $1,693,420 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1,074,352 in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Net Working Capital
We have, since inception, financed operations and capital expenditures through the sale of stock and convertible notes and debt. Our immediate sources of liquidity include cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, and unbilled receivables.
At December 31, 2020, we had a net working capital deficit of approximately $3,985,435 compared to $1,788,368 at December 31, 2019. We relied on temporary financing for the MedRecycler project and proceeds from advertising project financing in 2020. We relied on proceeds from the sale of common stock, convertible promissory notes and advances from related parties throughout fiscal 2019.
We must successfully execute our business plan to increase profitability in order to achieve positive cash flows to sustain adequate liquidity without requiring additional funds from external sources to meet minimum operating requirements. We may need to raise additional capital to fund our operations and there can be no assurance that additional capital will be available on acceptable terms or at all.
Generally, the Company has insufficient capital to maintain operations. Cashflows from operations of the Company and all its subsidiary holdings will not sustain the Company’s operations, let alone its filing requirements, unless there is substantial influx of cash flow through either debt and/or equity financing.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities provides an indication of our ability to generate sufficient cash flow from our recurring business activities. Fixed costs such as labor, direct materials, and office rent represent a significant portion of the Company’s continuing operating costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operations was approximately $1,324,513 driven primarily by current year operating loss, offset primarily increases in accrued officer compensation and accrued expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operations was approximately $550,010 driven by current year operating loss, offset primarily by non-cash expenses for the loss on settlement of accrued officer compensation, accrued expenses, an increase in accounts payable, and loss on the conversion of debt.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company invested approximately $0.7 million in its MedRecycler project, consisting of $446,492 of equipment purchases and deposits in equipment of $195,515.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company invested approximately $6.1 million in its MedRecycler project, consisting of $538,242 of equipment purchases and deposits in equipment of $5,682,329, offset by $42,000 in proceeds from the sale of vehicles.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by (used in) financing activities provides an indication of our debt financing and proceeds from capital raise transactions.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was approximately $500,000, primarily from the issuance of convertible debt of $500,000.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities was approximately $8,445,588, primarily from the temporary financing for the MedRecycler project of $8,453,624, and the issuance of convertible debt of $200,000, offset by the repayment of convertible debt of $150,000 and vehicles loans of $60,667.
In the short term, we must raise additional capital through debt or equity financing to support our business operations and grow our business. Over the long term, we must successfully execute our growth plans to increase profitable revenue and income streams to generate positive cash flows to sustain adequate liquidity without impairing growth initiatives or requiring the infusion of additional funds from external sources to meet minimum operating requirements. We may need to raise additional capital to fund our operations and there can be no assurance that additional capital will be available on acceptable terms or at all.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet financing arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
Not required of smaller reporting companies.