Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition, Results of Operations and Critical Accounting Policies.
The following commentary should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes thereto contained in Part IV of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based on current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under Item 1A.,"Risk Factors," included in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Company Overview
We are a leading U.S. provider of ultra-rugged mobile devices, including phones, barcode scanners and accessories designed specifically for task workers physically engaged in their work environments, often in mission-critical roles. We currently sell our ruggedized mobile phones and accessories to the three largest wireless carriers in the United States- AT&T, T-Mobile (which acquired Sprint in 2020) and Verizon-as well as the three largest wireless carriers in Canada-Bell, Rogers and Telus Mobility. We also sell our ruggedized phones, barcode scanners and accessories through distribution channels in North America, South America and Europe. Our devices and accessories connect workers with voice, data and workflow applications in two end markets: industrial enterprise and public sector.
We generate revenues primarily from sales of our (i) mobile phones, (ii) barcode scanners, and (iii) industrial-grade accessories. We sell our mobile phones and accessories primarily to wireless carriers in both the United States and Canada, who then resell our products in conjunction with network services to end customers. We sell our barcode scanners globally through partnerships with major distributors.
Because our U.S. sales channel is primarily comprised of large wireless carriers, the number of customers that we sell to is limited. For the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately 90% of our revenues came from large wireless carriers and 77% came from our top four customers. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our smartphones accounted for approximately 41% of our revenues and our feature phones accounted for approximately 55% of our revenues. To help control and manage the quality, cost and reliability of our supply chain, we directly manage the procurement of all final assembly materials used in our products, which include LCDs, housings, camera modules and antennas. To help contain costs and improve the efficiency of our operations, we have outsourced substantially all of our manufacturing functions, software development and quality control functions to third parties, transferring the employees who previously performed this work. In order to continue to develop differentiated products to attract and retain customers, we have made significant investments in research and development through our partnerships with ODMs. We expect this investment to result in a new generation of feature phone and barcode scanner products which will deliver the majority of the Company’s revenue by the end of 2021.
Additional Sonim Subsidiary
On August 21, 2019, Sonim Technologies (Canada), Inc. was incorporated, a fully owned subsidiary of the Company, to aide with sales and post sales services. During the year ended December 31, 2020, this subsidiary was dissolved.
Restructuring and Reduction in Force
During 2020, we have continued to reduce our headcount to better align our expenses with our revenue profile. The Company executed a reduction in force of approximately 10% of its U.S. employees in February 2020 and has also reduced headcount in certain international locations in India and Shenzhen. Our headcount at December 31, 2020 was 317. During 2020, we decided to proceed with future product co-development and manufacturing with ODM partners. To ensure the efficient manufacturing of our legacy products through this transition, we outsourced our final assembly to a supply chain partner and transferred twenty two employees to that partner to enhance their efficiency in taking over our production work. We have also relocated our headquarters from San Mateo, California to Austin, Texas, a lower cost location. We recorded costs related to restructuring totaling $1.5 million, of which $1.0 million was paid out in 2020, and $0.1 million is included in cost of revenues in 2020.
In September 2019, the Board of Directors approved, and management commenced and completed, a restructuring plan to reduce operating costs and better align its workforce with the needs of its business. Under the plan, the Company reduced its workforce by 16 employees. In connection with the restructuring, the Company accrued $0.7 million in aggregate restructuring charges related to one-time termination severance payments and other employee-related costs. $0.2 million of the cash payments related to the personnel-related restructuring charges were paid during the second half of 2019, with the remaining $0.5 million was paid in the second quarter of 2020. The Company may also incur additional costs not currently contemplated due to events that may occur as a result of, or that are associated, with the workforce reductions.
Public Offerings
In June 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 36,800,000 shares our common stock at a public offering price of $0.75 per share. The net proceeds from this offering were approximately $25.1 million, after deduction of underwriting discount and other estimated offering expenses.
On May 9, 2019, our registration statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-230887) related to our IPO was declared effective by the SEC, and our common stock began trading on The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC or Nasdaq on May 10, 2019. Our IPO closed on May 14, 2019. As a result, our consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2019 reflects the impact of our IPO.
Key Metrics
We review a variety of key financial metrics to help us evaluate growth trends, establish budgets, measure the effectiveness of our business strategies and assess operational efficiencies. In addition to our financial results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP and operational measures are useful in evaluating our performance related metrics.
Units Sold
Our smartphones include the XP6, XP7, and XP8 models. The number of smartphone units sold during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by 51%, primarily due to a slower than expected sales of our XP8 product at several carriers and an inventory build-up at a major U.S. carrier. As of December 31,2020, XP6 and XP7 have reached end of life in terms of new sales. Our XP8 smartphone has been upgraded to the Android 10 operating system, which is expected to extend its life through the end of 2021.
Our feature phones include the XP3, XP5, and XP5s models. The number of feature phone units sold during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by 20%, primarily due to decreased demand for the XP5s from several carriers offset by an increased demand for the XP3. Our current versions of the XP3 and XP5 are approaching end of life. We are currently developing and expect to launch updated versions of the XP3 and XP5 in 2021.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted to exclude the impact of stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization, interest expense, income taxes, and one-time restructuring costs. Adjusted EBITDA is a useful financial metric in assessing our operating performance from period to period by excluding certain items that we believe are not representative of our core business, such as certain material non-cash items and other adjustments such as stock-based compensation.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA, viewed in addition to, and not in lieu of, our reported GAAP results, provide useful information to investors regarding our performance and overall results of operations for various reasons, including:
•
non-cash equity grants made to employees at a certain price do not necessarily reflect the performance of our business at such time, and as such, stock-based compensation expense is not a key measure of our operating performance; and
•
costs associated with certain events, such as restructuring costs, are not considered a key measure of our operating performance.
We use Adjusted EBITDA:
•
as a measure of operating performance;
•
for planning purposes, including the preparation of budgets and forecasts;
•
to allocate resources to enhance the financial performance of our business;
•
to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies;
•
in communications with our board of directors concerning our financial performance; and
•
as a consideration in determining compensation for certain key employees.
Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as analytical tools, and should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations include:
•
they do not reflect all cash expenditures, future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•
they do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, working capital needs;
•
they do not reflect interest expense on our debt or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments; and
•
other companies in our industry may define and/or calculate these metrics differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
Set forth below is a reconciliation from net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the respective periods:
Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
We believe that the growth and future success of our business depend on many factors. While these factors present significant opportunities for our business, they also pose important challenges that we must successfully address in order to improve our results of operations.
Research and Development
We believe that our performance is significantly dependent on the investments we make in research and development and that we must continue to develop and introduce innovative new products on a two to three-year cycle. Our partnerships with ODMs are expected to enable us to shift between different types and numbers of devices under development without the need to adjust the size of our internal team.
While the hardware design of our phones is generally the same for all wireless carriers, each device must be configured to conform to the requirements of each wireless carrier’s network, resulting in higher development expenses as the number of wireless carriers we sell through increases. In addition to the design and configuration costs, each device must undergo a multi-month technical approval process at each carrier before it can be certified to be stocked at each carrier. The approval process for each device for each carrier has historically cost between $1-2 million. Prior to commencement of development of a product for certification, we generally do not receive any purchase orders or commitments. Following a carrier’s review of product concepts, we may receive a product award letter from that carrier to move forward with the development and certification process, at which time we may begin receiving advance purchase orders or commitments. Since the timing of when we seek technical approval with our wireless carriers tends to be cyclical in nature, quarter-over-quarter expenditures may vary significantly depending on the number of approvals in process during the quarter. If we fail to innovate and enhance our product offerings, our brand, market position and revenues may be adversely affected. If our research and development efforts are not successful, we will not recover these investments that we make.
New Customer Acquisitions
We are focused on continuing to acquire new customers, both in North America and overseas, to support our long-term growth. Historically, we have been dependent on a small number of wireless carriers distributing our products. We have invested, and expect to continue to invest, in our sales and marketing efforts to drive new customer acquisition. A key part of our strategy is to further expand the use of our solutions over cellular networks in the public safety market. We also intend to continue to invest in and expand our international sales teams. As a result, we expect our sales and marketing costs to increase as we seek to acquire new customers. Sales and marketing investments will often occur in advance of any sales benefits from these activities, and it may be difficult for us to determine if we are efficiently allocating our sales and marketing resources.
Seasonality and New Product Introduction
We have historically experienced lower net revenue in our first quarter compared to other quarters in our fiscal year due to seasonal demand associated with the introduction of new products to our lead customers. New product introductions can significantly impact net revenue, gross profit and operating expenses. The timing of product introductions can also impact our net revenue as our wireless carrier customers prepare for a new product launch, and channel inventory of an older product often declines as the launch of a newer product approaches. Net revenue can also be affected when consumers and distributors anticipate a new product introduction. However, neither historical seasonal patterns nor historical patterns of product or service introductions should be considered reliable indicators of our future pattern of product or service introductions, future net sales or financial performance.
Components of Our Results of Operations
The following describes the line items set forth in our consolidated statements of operations.
Revenues
Revenues are recognized on the date that the customer receives the products sold. Any discounts, marketing development funds, product returns or other revenue reductions are treated as offsets to revenues, which is presented on a net basis. We have also historically entered into customer agreements with channel partners that include a combination of products and non-recurring engineering services, or NRE services. When a customer agreement includes NRE services which involve significant design modification and customization of the product software that is essential to the functionality of the hardware, revenues are also recognized according to the contractual milestones in the agreements when or as control transfers to the customer under ASC 606. If a milestone is deemed non-substantive, we defer, if applicable, and recognize such non-substantive milestones over the estimated period of performance applicable to each agreement on a straight-line basis, as appropriate. All of our revenues are derived from a single segment.
The Company recognizes revenue primarily from the sale of products, including our mobile phones and accessories, and the majority of the Company’s contracts include only one performance obligation, namely the delivery of product. A performance obligation is a commitment in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is defined as the unit of account for revenue recognition under ASC 606. The Company also recognizes revenue from other contracts that may include a combination of products and NRE services or from the provision of solely NRE services. Where there is a combination of products and NRE services, the Company accounts for the commitments as individual performance obligations if they are both capable of being distinct and distinct within the context of the contract.
Our customer agreements with channel partners set forth the terms pursuant to which our channel partners purchase our products for distribution on a purchase order basis. While these arrangements are typically long term, they generally do not contain any firm purchase volume commitments. As a result, our channel partners are not contractually obligated to purchase from us any minimum number of products. However, while our channel partners provide us with demand forecasts under these sales arrangements, we are generally required to satisfy any and all purchase orders delivered to us within specified delivery windows, with limited exceptions (such as orders significantly in excess of forecasts). Our sales arrangements also generally include technical performance standards for our mobile phones and accessories sold, which vary by channel partner. If a technical issue with any of our covered products exceeds certain preset failure thresholds for the relevant performance standard or standards, the channel partner typically has the right to cease selling the product, cancel open purchase orders and levy certain monetary penalties. In addition, our channel partners retain sole discretion in which of their stocked products to offer their customers.
We also offer our channel partners channel marketing and other limited promotional incentives, such as sales volume incentives, in exchange for retail price reductions. Under certain of our customer agreements, we may also offer NRE services in the form of third-party design services relating to the design of materials and software licenses used in the manufacturing of our products.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit/Gross Margin
Cost of revenues primarily consists of the following:
•
Direct costs consist of raw materials, supplies and sub-assemblies used in the production of our products. We purchase all materials and sub-assemblies from our supply chain directly and do all final assembly and testing at our facility in Shenzhen, China. Direct materials represent the majority of our direct manufacturing expenses.
•
Direct labor costs expended in the final assembly and testing of our products. Labor is charged to each product based on the actual time required to build that specific product.
•
Other direct costs related to the shipment of the final product to the customer, including such items as shipping costs, royalties on third-party technology included in the product, warranty cost accruals and packaging and handling costs.
•
Indirect manufacturing expense associated with producing our products, such as rent on production facilities, depreciation on production equipment and tooling, engineering and support salaries and other indirect manufacturing costs.
Amortization of NRE expenses is now part of cost of goods as a result of the adoption of ASC 606 in 2019.Gross profit is defined as revenues less cost of revenues. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of revenues. We expect that our gross margin may fluctuate from period to period, primarily as a result of changes in average selling price, revenue mix among our devices, and manufacturing costs. In addition, we may reserve against the value at which we carry our inventory based upon the device’s lifecycle and conditions in the markets in which we sell.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of the following categories:
Research and development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation and employee benefits, as well as outsourced costs incurred through our ODM partnerships. Research and development expenses also include the costs of developing new products and supporting existing products. Research and development activities include the design of new products, refinement of existing products and design of test methodologies to ensure compliance with required specifications, as well as all costs associated with achieving technical acceptance with each product at each carrier. All research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We expect our research and development expenses to fluctuate over time as we experience the various product cycles of our devices.
Sales and marketing. Sales expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation, commissions to independent sales representatives, travel costs and employee benefits, as well as field support and customer training costs. Marketing expenses include all social media and collateral print media, and brand development expenses. We expect our sales and marketing costs to increase in absolute dollars as we seek to expand our product lines and customer base and increase brand awareness with end customers.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation, travel costs and employee benefits, as well as professional and consulting fees, legal fees, trade shows, depreciation expense and occupancy costs. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our organization to better support our customers and our anticipated growth. Additionally, these expenses will increase as we continue to establish the necessary infrastructure to operate effectively as a public company. As the company grows, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue will begin to decrease due to economies of scale.
Income taxes. As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements we are required to estimate our taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. We account for income taxes in accordance with the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on temporary differences between the financial reporting and income tax bases of assets and liabilities and the tax effects of operating loss and credit carryforwards using the enacted tax rates expected to apply in the periods of expected settlement. In addition, this method requires a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets if, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We recognized an income tax benefit of $0.5 million during 2020 as compared to an expense of $1.4 million during 2019. The decrease in tax expense in 2020 was primarily due to the Company's decrease in earnings in our foreign subsidiaries and a release of uncertain tax position accrual. In 2020, the Company released $0.8 million of the prior years’ uncertain tax accrual.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The following tables present key components of our results of operations for the respective periods (In thousands):
Net revenues. Net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $52.2 million, or 45%, to $64 million compared to $116.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net revenues was primarily attributable to a decrease in unit sales resulting in a decrease of $33.3 million, along with a decrease in the average selling price of $16.1 million as a result of the change in product mix in 2020 compared to 2019. There were also lower unit sales also correlating to lower accessory revenue of $2.3 million.
Cost of revenues. Total cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $32.9 million, or 40.3%, to $48.8 million, or 76.2% of revenues, compared to $81.7 million, or 70.3% of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to related decrease in net revenues.
Gross profit and margin. Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $19.3 million, or 55.9%, to $15.2 million, or 23.8% of revenues, from $34.5 million, or 29.7% of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to lower revenues of 45% and the product mix resulting in lower average sales price. The gross profit percentage decreased by 5.91 percentage points for the year ended December 31, 2020 over the same period of 2019 as a result of expenses incurred during the temporary shut-down of our manufacturing facility in Shenzhen in the first quarter of 2020, a one-time event, and manufacturing variances related to lower productivity of 3%.
Research and development. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $9.8 million or 37.8%, to $16.2 million compared to $26.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. These expenses decreased primarily due to the $5.4 million decrease in employee headcount related expenses, a decrease in NRE related costs of $2.7 million as 2019 included the cost of the product launch of the XP3, a decrease in consultant expense of $0.8 million, a decrease in travel of $0.6 million and decreases in other expenses of $0.3 million. These decreases were mainly due to our cost cutting measures and a reduction in travel due to the global pandemic.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $3.5 million, or 25.1% to $10.4 million compared to $13.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. These decreases were primarily attributable to a $1.2 million decrease in travel related expenses, a decrease in marketing related expenses of $0.8 million, a decrease in employee headcount related expenses of $0.7 million a decrease in consultant expense of $0.5 million and a decrease in other expenses of $0.3 million. These decreases were mainly due to our cost cutting measures, as well as a decrease in commissions due to lower sales volumes.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $5.2 million, or 34.8% to $9.3 million compared to $15.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. These expenses decreased by the decrease of the IPO related bonus in 2019 of $5 million, a decrease in travel related expenses of $0.4 million, a decrease in employee headcount related expenses of $0.3 million, a decrease in consultant and board fees of $0.4 million and a decrease in other related expenses of $0.1 million offset by an increase in corporate insurance of $0.7 million, an increase in bad debt expense of $0.3 million related to other receivables.
Legal expenses. Legal expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $5.4 million to $6.5 million compared to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. These expenses increased $3.2 million as a result of the SEC investigation and the Securities Class Action litigation and by $2 million associated with the settlement of the shareholder litigation,
Restructuring costs. In September 2019, our Board of Directors approved, and our management commenced and completed, a restructuring plan to reduce operating costs and better align our workforce with the needs of our business. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded costs related to restructuring totaling $1.6 million, of which $0.1 million is included in cost of revenues. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded $0.7 million in restructuring costs.
Interest expense/Other expense, net. Interest expense/other expense decreased by $0.8 million to $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is a result of settlement of the long-term debt in June 2020.
Other expense, net. We recorded $0.4 million in foreign exchange loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $0.5 million in foreign exchange loss for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income tax expense. Income tax expense decreased by $1.9 million, or -137.5%, to $(0.5) million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $1.4 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is a result of a release of $0.08 million of prior years’ uncertain tax position accrual.
Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA was a loss of $24.3 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a loss of $12.4 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net loss. The net loss for December 31, 2020 was $29.9 million compared to net loss of $25.8 million for December 31, 2019.The increase in net loss is a result of a decrease in revenues of $52.3 million and a decrease in gross profit of $19.3 million offset by decreases in operating expenses of $12.4 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Historically, the Company has funded operations from a combination of private equity financings, convertible loans from existing investors and borrowings under loan agreements. As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any convertible loans or any other borrowing structures outstanding. As of December 31, 2019, the Company had an aggregate of $10.1 million, of principal and deferred accrued interest outstanding under the B. Riley Convertible Note.
Under the B. Riley Convertible Note issued by the Company pursuant to the Subordinated Term Loan and Security agreement, the Company had borrowed an aggregate principal amount of $12.0 million on a subordinated secured basis. Borrowings bear interest at 10% per year; interest amounts accrued and compounded into principal outstanding until October 2018, following which we were required to pay periodic interest in cash. In June 2020, we repaid $4.0 million of the B. Riley Convertible Note in cash. In addition, we converted the remaining $6.17 million of principal and accrued interest at $0.75 per share pursuant to an offer of settlement.
In prior years, the Company maintained a loan and security agreement with East West Bank or EWB pursuant to the EWB Loan Agreement. No borrowings were made under this facility in 2019 and 2020, and the facility was cancelled in June 2020.
Cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 was $22.1 million, or $10.6 million higher than net cash of $11.3 million on December 31, 2019. The increase was driven primarily by net proceeds from our public offering of $25.1 million after deducting underwriting discount costs and other offering expenses paid by us.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for the periods presented:
Cash flows from operating activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $10.6 million, primarily attributable to a net loss of $29.9 million, partially offset by a net cash inflow of $14 million from changes in our net operating assets and liabilities and partially offset by non-cash charges of $5.3 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $1.1 million in stock-based compensation, $0.7 million in inventory write-downs, and $2.7 million in depreciation and amortization. The net cash inflow in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $7.5 million decrease in inventory, a $5.5 million decrease in accounts receivable, an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $2.7 million, partially offset by a $1.1 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets, a decrease in income tax payable of $0.7 million and $0.3 million decrease in deferred revenue.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $33.5 million, primarily attributable to a net loss of $25.8 million and a net cash outflow of $20.9 million from changes in our net operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by non-cash charges of $13.5 million, and non-cash revenue of $0.3 million under our trade-in guarantee program. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $6.3 million in stock-based compensation, $3.1 million in inventory write-downs, and $3.5 million in depreciation and amortization. The net cash outflow in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $26.3 million decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses, a $3.8 million increase in other assets, and a $3.7 million decrease in deferred revenue, partially offset by an increase in income tax payable of $1.2 million, a decrease in prepaid expenses of $3.7 million, and decrease in accounts receivable of $8.8 million.
Cash flows from investing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was $0.01 million, primarily attributable to purchases of property and equipment.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in investing activities was $1.4 million, primarily attributable to purchases of property and equipment of $1.0 million and tooling development and purchases of software licenses of $0.4 million.
Cash flows from financing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $21.4 million, primarily attributable to proceeds from issuance of common stock upon PO, net of costs, of $25.1 million, proceeds from stock options and ESPP of $0.5 million, offset by the repayment of long-term debt of $4.1 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $33.1 million, primarily attributable to proceeds from issuance of common stock upon IPO, net of costs, of $36.9 million, proceeds from issuance of common stock, net of costs, of $1.6 million, proceeds from exercise of warrants, stock options and ESPP of $0.3 million, partially offset by the repayment of long-term debt of $3.7 million and taxes paid on net issuance of restricted stock award of $1.9 million.
Our consolidated financial statements account for the continuation of our business due primarily to the $25 million in net proceeds from our June 2020 public offering and redemption of long-term debt of $10.2 million, of which $4.0 million was paid in cash and $6.2 million was settled in shares of common stock, in June 2020. We believe that the proceeds from this capital raise will allow the Company to continue operations for at least the next twelve months. However, our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could deplete our capital resources sooner than we expect. Our principal sources of liquidity as of December 31, 2020, consist of existing cash and cash equivalents totaling $22.1 million, which includes the impact of approximately $25.1 million in proceeds from our public offering of common stock that closed in June 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used approximately $10.8 million of cash for operating activities.
Although we remain subject to the risks and uncertainties associated with the development and release of new products, among others, we believe our operations have been streamlined to enable us to conduct business more effectively and efficiently despite near term economic uncertainty. However, our liquidity may be negatively impacted if sales decline significantly for an extended period due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Further, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and our precautionary measures in response thereto impact our business and liquidity will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be precisely predicted at this time.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we had not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements and did not have any holdings in variable interest entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and work force participation and created significant volatility and disruption in financial markets. The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic initially impacted our supply chain partners and resulted in a shutdown of our manufacturing operations in China, in the first quarter of 2020. In the middle of March 2020, the majority of our offices worldwide had enacted shelter-in-place measures, with employees being mandated to work from home. We expect this to have a negative impact on our sales and our results of operations, the size and duration of which we are currently unable to predict. In preparing our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, we are required to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and the accompanying disclosures. Estimates and assumptions about future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty and therefore require the exercise of judgment. As of the date of issuance of these financial statements, we are not aware of any specific event or circumstance that would require us to update our estimates, judgments or revise the carrying value of our assets or liabilities. These estimates may change, as new events occur and additional information is obtained, and are recognized in the consolidated financial statements as soon as they become known. Actual results could differ from those estimates and any such differences may be material to our financial statements
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this prospectus, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition
The Company adopted the requirements of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), effective January 1, 2019.
Under Topic 606, revenue is recognized when control of promised goods or services is transferred to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for its arrangements, the Company performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. See Note 2, Revenue Recognition, for additional information.
The Company recognizes revenue primarily from the sale of products, including our mobile phones and accessories. The Company also recognizes revenue from other contractual arrangements that may include a combination of products and NRE services or from the provision of solely NRE services.
Revenue recognition incorporates discounts, price protection and customer incentives. In addition to cooperative marketing and other incentive programs, the Company has arrangements with some distributors, which allow for price protection and limited rights of return, generally through stock rotation programs. Under the price protection programs, the Company gives distributors credits for the difference between the original price paid and the Company’s then current price. Under the stock rotation programs, certain distributors are able to exchange certain products based on the number of qualified purchases made during the period.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based payments at fair value. The fair value of stock options is measured using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. For share-based awards that vest subject to the satisfaction of a service requirement, the fair value measurement date for stock-based compensation awards is the date of grant and the expense is recognized on a straight-line basis, over the vesting period. We account for forfeitures as they occur. The fair value of each stock option grant is determined using the methods and assumptions discussed below (see “-Fair Value of Common Stock”). Each of these inputs is subjective and generally requires significant judgment and estimation by management.
•
Expected term. The expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. Our historical share option exercise information is limited due to a lack of sufficient data points and does not provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate an expected term. The expected term for option grants is therefore determined using the simplified method. The simplified method deems the expected term to be the midpoint between the vesting date and the contractual life of the stock-based awards.
•
Expected volatility. We use the Black-Scholes option valuation model for estimating fair value at the date of grant. For share-based awards that vest subject to the satisfaction of a service requirement, the fair value measurement date for stock based compensation awards is the date of grant and the expense is recognized on a straight-line basis, over the vesting period. We account for forfeitures as they occur. We have estimated the expected life of stock options using the “simplified” method, whereby, the expected life equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option. Because our stock has not been publicly traded for a sufficiently long period of time, we use an expected volatility figure based on a review of the historical volatilities, over a period of time, equivalent to the expected life of the instrument being valued, of similarly positioned public companies within our industry. The risk-free interest rate was determined from the implied yields from U.S. Treasury zero-coupon bonds with a remaining term consistent with the expected term of the instrument being valued. We account for restricted stock units (RSUs) issued to employees and non-employees at fair value, based on the market price of our stock on the date of grant. The RSUs are expensed over the vesting period and we account for forfeitures as they occur. RSUs, primarily issued as long term incentives, generally vest annually over four years. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 we recorded $1.1 million and $6.3 million, respectively, of stock-based compensation related to stock options and restricted stock units.
•
Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the date of grant for zero-coupon U.S. Treasury notes with maturities approximately equal to the stock-based awards’ expected term.
•
Expected dividend yield. The expected dividend yield is zero as we have not paid nor do we anticipate paying any dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations in multiple tax jurisdictions. We may be periodically reviewed by domestic and foreign tax authorities regarding the amount of taxes due. These reviews may include questions regarding the timing and amount of deductions and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. In evaluating the exposure associated with various filing positions, we record estimated reserves when it is more likely than not that an uncertain tax position will not be sustained upon examination by a taxing authority. Such estimates are subject to change.
Inventory Valuation
We report inventories at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using a first-in, first-out method, or FIFO, and includes materials, labor, shipping and manufacturing overhead related to the purchase and production of inventories. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal and transportation.
Warranty Reserves
We provide standard warranty coverage on our accessories and devices for one and three years, respectively, providing labor and parts necessary to repair the systems during the warranty period. We account for the estimated warranty cost as a charge to cost of revenues when revenue is recognized. The estimated warranty cost is based on historical product performance and field expenses. We update this estimate periodically. The actual product performance and/or field expense profiles may differ, and in these cases, we adjust warranty accruals accordingly.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements and Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
See “Note 1 - The Company and Its Significant Accounting Policies” of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under the caption Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements and Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements.