Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “Selected Financial Data” and our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that are subject to certain risks and uncertainties and are based on certain assumptions that we believe are reasonable but may prove to be inaccurate. Certain risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report, may cause actual results to differ materially from those projected results discussed in the forward-looking statements appearing in this discussion and analysis. Except as required by law, we assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a bank holding company headquartered in Lubbock, Texas, and our wholly-owned subsidiary, City Bank, is one of the largest independent banks in West Texas. We have additional banking operations in the Dallas, El Paso, Greater Houston, the Permian Basin, and College Station Texas markets, and the Ruidoso and Eastern New Mexico markets. Through City Bank, we provide a wide range of commercial and consumer financial services to small and medium-sized businesses and individuals in our market areas. Our principal business activities include commercial and retail banking, along with insurance, investment, trust and mortgage services.
Acquisitions
The comparability of our consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019 is affected by the acquisition of West Texas State Bank (“WTSB”) on November 12, 2019. Therefore, the results of the acquired operations of WTSB were included in our results of operations during all of 2020 and for a portion of 2019.
Termination of Subchapter S Corporation Status
Beginning January 1, 1998, the Company elected to be taxed for U.S. federal income tax purposes as an S Corporation under the provisions of Sections 1361 to 1379 of the Code. While we were an S Corporation, our net income was not subject to, and we did not pay, U.S. federal income tax, and no provision or liability for U.S. federal income tax was included in our consolidated financial statements. Instead, for U.S. federal income tax purposes our taxable income was “passed through” to our shareholders.
Effective May 31, 2018, the Company revoked its election to be taxed as an S Corporation, we became taxed as a C Corporation under the provisions of Sections 301 to 385 of the Code, and we established a deferred tax asset to reflect the S Corporation revocation. Thus, our net income is now subject to U.S. federal income tax and we bear the liability for those taxes.
As a result of the revocation of our S Corporation election, the net income and earnings per share data presented in our historical financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2016, 2017, and 2018, which do not include any provision for federal income taxes for S Corporation periods, will not be comparable with our historical financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, or our future net income and earnings per share, which will be calculated by including a provision for federal income taxes. Unless otherwise stated, all information in this Report, including consolidated net income, return on average assets, return on average shareholders’ equity and earnings per share, is presented as if we had converted from an S Corporation to a C Corporation at the beginning of each respective period using a statutory tax rate for federal income taxes of 35.0% prior to January 1, 2018 and 21.0% after January 1, 2018.
Recent Developments
COVID-19 Update
The spread of the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) continues to cause significant disruptions in the U.S. economy since it was declared a pandemic in March 2020 by the World Health Organization. The changes have impacted our clients, their industries, as well as the financial services industry. At this time, we cannot predict the impact or how long the economy or our impacted clients will be disrupted.
The Company’s Oversight Committee for Business Continuity and Incident Response, which has monitored the spread of the coronavirus since January, continues to monitor the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, as well as employee and customer communications. The Company’s Pandemic Task Force continues to implement South Plains’ Business Continuity Plan, focusing on the safety of the Company’s employees and customers while maintaining the operational and financial integrity of the Bank. Non-essential employees were transitioned to a work-from-home environment, strict protocols for employees deemed essential were adopted to ensure adequate social distancing and all Bank facilities are receiving incremental cleaning and sanitization. The Company restricted access to its bank lobbies and customers are currently served through appointments only, as well as through the Bank’s drive-through windows and recently upgraded digital platforms.
The Bank also continues to utilize a rigorous enterprise risk management (“ERM”) system that delivers a systematic approach to risk measurement and enhances the effectiveness of risk management across the Bank. The Bank’s ERM system has allowed management to consistently and aggressively review the Bank’s loan portfolio for signs of potential issues during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the Bank continues to closely monitoring its loans to borrowers in the retail, hospitality and energy sectors.
While the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the scope of its impact on the economy is uncertain, the Bank continues to be proactive with its borrowers in those sectors most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and offering loan modifications to borrowers who are or may be unable to meet their contractual payment obligations because of the effects of COVID-19. As previously disclosed, the Bank has assigned its Chairman, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Credit Officer and Chief Lending Officer to partner with the Bank’s lenders on those borrowers most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic to ensure the Company remains proactive in addressing those credits with the appropriate oversight and modifications when warranted. As part of the Bank’s efforts to support its customers and protect the Bank, the Bank has offered varying forms of loan modifications including 90-day payment deferrals, 6-month interest only terms, or in certain select cases periods of longer than 6 months of interest only, to provide borrowers relief. As of December 31, 2020, total active loan modifications attributed to COVID-19 were approximately $64 million, or 2.9%, of the Company’s loan portfolio. The active modification breakdown is: 2% are 6 months interest only, 95% are interest only periods longer than 6 months, primarily in the Bank’s hotel portfolio, and 3% are payment deferrals of one to four months on consumer loans.
The Bank has assisted its customers in accessing the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) administered by the Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) and created under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). As of December 31, 2020, the Bank originated approximately 2,050 PPP loans totaling $215 million. The Economic Aid Act, signed into law on December 27, 2020, authorized new PPP funding and extended the authority of lenders to make PPP loans through March 31, 2021. Under the revised terms of the PPP, loans may be made to first time borrowers as well as certain businesses that previously received a PPP loan and experienced a significant reduction in revenue. The Company is participating in the new round of the PPP by offering first and second draw loans. As of February 28, 2021 the Bank originated approximately $60 million in additional PPP loans. The Bank has utilized its lines of credit with the Federal Home Loan Bank of Dallas and/or the Federal Reserve Bank to supplement funding for origination of PPP loans as needed. Helping City Bank’s customers access PPP loans is just one way that the Bank has been helping its customers and communities during this challenging time. City Bank has also been a supporter of the South Plains and Permian Basin food banks and recently increased its financial support given the challenging economic environment for so many. Finally, as previously announced on November 2, 2020, the Company announced the resumption of its stock repurchase program. The stock repurchase program that commenced in March of 2020 allows for the repurchase of up to $10 million of the Company’s common stock. Repurchases under the stock repurchase program were temporarily suspended in April of 2020 in light of the uncertainties presented by the COVID-19 pandemic and surrounding events. The expiration of the stock repurchase program was also extended from April 15, 2021 until November 5, 2021.
We are currently unable to fully assess or predict the extent of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations as the ultimate impact will depend on factors that are currently unknown and/or beyond our control. Please refer to Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this Report.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $45.4 million, or $2.47 per diluted share, compared to $29.2 million, or $1.71 per diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net income was primarily the result of an improvement of $17.7 million in net interest income and increased noninterest income of $45.0 million, offset by an increase of $20.0 million in noninterest expense, an increase of $22.8 million in the provision for loan losses and an increase of $3.8 million in income tax expense.
Return on average assets was 1.31% and return on average equity was 13.40% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 1.04% and 10.94%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in return on average assets was primarily due to the increase in net income of 55.2%, relative to a smaller increase of 22.8% for total average assets.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is the principal source of the Company’s net income and represents the difference between interest income (interest and fees earned on assets, primarily loans and investment securities) and interest expense (interest paid on deposits and borrowed funds). We generate interest income from interest-earning assets that we own, including loans and investment securities. We incur interest expense from interest-bearing liabilities, including interest-bearing deposits and other borrowings, notably FHLB advances and subordinated notes. To evaluate net interest income, we measure and monitor (i) yields on our loans and other interest-earning assets, (ii) the costs of our deposits and other funding sources, (iii) our net interest spread and (iv) our net interest margin. Net interest spread is the difference between rates earned on interest-earning assets and rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest margin is calculated as the annualized net interest income on a fully tax-equivalent basis divided by average interest-earning assets.
Changes in the market interest rates and interest rates we earn on interest-earning assets or pay on interest-bearing liabilities, as well as the volume and types of interest-earning assets, interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing liabilities, are usually the largest drivers of periodic changes in net interest spread, net interest margin and net interest income.
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, information about: (i) weighted average balances, the total dollar amount of interest income from interest-earning assets and the resultant average yields; (ii) average balances, the total dollar amount of interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities and the resultant average rates; (iii) net interest income; (iv) the interest rate spread; and (v) the net interest margin. For purposes of this table, interest income is shown on a fully tax-equivalent basis.
(1)
Average loan balances include nonaccrual loans and loans held for sale.
(2)
Includes income and average balances for interest-earning deposits at other banks, nonmarketable securities, federal funds sold and other miscellaneous interest-earning assets.
(3)
Net interest margin is calculated as the annual net interest income, on a fully tax-equivalent basis, divided by average interest-earning assets.
Increases and decreases in interest income and interest expense result from changes in average balances (volume) of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as changes in average interest rates. The following tables set forth the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income during the period shown. Information is provided with respect to (i) effects on interest income attributable to changes in volume (change in volume multiplied by prior rate) and (ii) effects on interest income attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). Change applicable to both volume and rate have been allocated to volume.
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $122.3 million compared to $104.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $17.7 million, or 16.9%. The increase in net interest income was comprised of a $5.3 million, or 4.0%, increase in interest income and a $12.4 million, or 43.8%, decrease in interest expense. The growth in interest income was primarily attributable to a $183.3 million, or 9.2%, increase in average loans outstanding for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, partially offset by a 51 basis points decrease in the yield on total loans. The increase in average loans outstanding was primarily the result of a complete year of loans acquired from WTSB and an increase of $44.2 million in average mortgage loans held for sale. The decline in yield was a result of the large drop in rates experienced in the first quarter of 2020 and its continued effects. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had originated approximately 2,100 PPP loans, totaling $218 million, and had received $7.8 million in PPP related SBA fees. These fees were deferred and then accreted into interest income over the life of the applicable loans. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized $3.7 million in PPP related SBA fees. The Company expects that the remaining first round of PPP loans will continue to be forgiven over the next several quarters. At December 31, 2020, there is $4.1 million of deferred fees that have not been accreted to income.
The $12.4 million decrease in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to a 72 basis points decrease in the rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities, partially offset by an increase of $243.7 million in average interest-bearing liabilities. The increase in average interest-bearing liabilities was largely due to a complete year of the deposits acquired from WTSB and growth in deposits from PPP loan funding and other government stimulus payments and programs, and organic growth. Additionally, the decrease in the rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities was the result of the decline in the overall rate environment experienced in the first quarter of 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net interest margin and net interest spread were 3.84% and 3.61%, respectively, compared to 3.98% and 3.61% for the same period in 2019, respectively, which reflects the increases in interest income discussed above relative to the decreases in interest expense.
Provision for Loan Losses
Credit risk is inherent in the business of making loans. We establish an allowance for loan losses through charges to earnings, which are shown in the statements of income as the provision for loan losses. Specifically identifiable and quantifiable known losses are promptly charged off against the allowance. The provision for loan losses is determined by conducting a quarterly evaluation of the adequacy of our allowance for loan losses and charging the shortfall or excess, if any, to the current quarter’s expense. This has the effect of creating variability in the amount and frequency of charges to our earnings. The provision for loan losses and level of allowance for each period are dependent upon many factors, including loan growth, net charge offs, changes in the composition of the loan portfolio, delinquencies, management’s assessment of the quality of the loan portfolio, the valuation of problem loans and the general economic conditions in our market areas. See “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for more detailed discussion.
The provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $25.6 million compared to $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The higher provision in 2020 was primarily a result of the uncertain economic effects from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic as well as the decline in oil and gas prices. Net charge-offs increased $2.5 million during 2020 as compared to 2019. The allowance for loan losses as a percentage of loans held for investment was 2.05% at December 31, 2020 and 1.13% at December 31, 2019. Further discussion of the allowance for loan losses is noted below.
Noninterest Income
While interest income remains the largest single component of total revenues, noninterest income is an important contributing component. The largest portion of our noninterest income is associated with our mortgage banking activities. Other sources of noninterest income include service charges on deposit accounts, bank card services and interchange fees, and income from insurance activities.
The following table sets forth the major components of our noninterest income for the periods indicated:
(1)
Other income and fees includes income and fees associated with the increase in the cash surrender value of life insurance, safe deposit box rental, check printing, collections, wire transfer and other miscellaneous services.
Noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $101.6 million compared to $56.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $45.0 million, or 79.4%. Income from mortgage banking activities increased $39.9 million, or 158.9%, to 65.0 million for the December 31, 2020 from $25.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was due primarily due to an increase of $802.2 million, or 125.2%, in mortgage loan originations for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Our mortgage originations experienced a record level of volume in 2020 as the industry benefited from historic low levels of interest rates. Refinance activity represented 53% of the 2020 originations as compared to 28% in 2019. Refinance activity is expected to taper off in the middle part of 2021 and then return to more historic levels. Additionally, fiduciary income increased $879,000, and income from insurance activities increased $628,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in fiduciary income was primarily due to new customer acquisition with estate executorship and trust management as the primary services in late third quarter 2019. It is expected that fiduciary fees will be $410,000 per quarter lower beginning in the third quarter of 2021, prior to any organic growth, due to the fees on some estates being fully earned at end of the second quarter of 2021. The increase in income from insurance activities is related to new revenue generated from two businesses acquired since September 1, 2019. Further, there was a $2.3 million gain on sale of securities in the first quarter of 2020.
Noninterest Expense
The following table sets forth the major components of our noninterest expense for the periods indicated:
(1)
Other expenses include items such as telephone expenses, postage, courier fees, directors’ fees, and insurance.
Noninterest expense for 2020 was $141.7 million compared to $121.7 million for 2019, an increase of $20.0 million, or 16.4%. Salaries and employee benefits increased $13.8 million, or 18.3%, from $75.4 million for the December 31, 2019 to $89.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in salaries and employee benefits expense was predominantly driven by $10.1 million of additional commissions paid on the higher volume of mortgage loan originations and from the full year of expenses for the personnel in the branches acquired from WTSB. Other noninterest expenses increased $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. This increase was primarily due to the following: a $1.6 million increase in variable mortgage expenses as a result of increased production, a $1.4 million increase in core deposit intangible and other intangibles amortization expense, a $621,000 increase in data conversion expenses related to the WTSB acquisition, and $701,000 in computer equipment purchased in connection with upgrading the equipment at the acquired branches as well as at existing branches and a new phone system. The computer equipment purchases were expensed due to the individual items falling below the Company’s capitalization threshold.
Financial Condition
Our total assets increased $362.0 million, or 11.2%, to $3.60 billion at December 31, 2020 as compared to $3.24 billion at December 31, 2019. Our gross loans held for investment increased $78.0 million, or 3.6%, to $2.22 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $2.14 billion at December 31, 2019. Total deposits increased $277.5 million, or 10.3% to $2.97 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $2.70 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase in total assets, loans, and deposits was primarily the result of organic growth of the Company as well as our participation in the PPP.
Loan Portfolio
Our loans represent the largest portion of earning assets, greater than the securities portfolio or any other asset category, and the quality and diversification of the loan portfolio is an important consideration when reviewing the Company’s financial condition. We originate substantially all of the loans in our portfolio, except certain loan participations that are independently underwritten by the Company prior to purchase.
The following table presents the balance and associated percentage of each major category in our gross loan portfolio at the dates indicated:
Gross loans increased $78.0 million, or 3.6%, to $2.22 billion at December 31, 2020 as compared to $2.14 billion at December 31, 2019. This increase in our gross loans was primarily due to $170.0 million in PPP loans outstanding at December 31, 2020, partially offset by the early payoff of multiple relationships and the slowing of new loan originations during 2020 as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. See below for further discussion of changes by major category.
The following tables show the contractual maturities of our gross loan portfolio and the distribution between fixed and adjustable interest rate loans at the dates indicated:
The Bank is primarily involved in real estate, commercial, agricultural and consumer lending activities with customers throughout Texas and Eastern New Mexico. We have a collateral concentration as 66.5% of our gross loans were secured by real property as of December 31, 2020, compared to 65.5% as of December 31, 2019. We believe that these loans are not concentrated in any one single property type and that they are geographically dispersed throughout the areas we serve. Although the Bank has diversified portfolios, its debtors’ ability to honor their contracts is substantially dependent upon the general economic conditions of the markets in which it operates, which consist primarily of agribusiness, wholesale/retail, oil and gas and related businesses, healthcare industries and institutions of higher education. Commercial real estate loans represent 29.9% of gross loans as of December 31, 2020 and represented 30.7% of gross loans as of December 31, 2019. Further, these loans are geographically diversified, primarily throughout the state of Texas as well as Eastern New Mexico.
We have established concentration limits in the loan portfolio for commercial real estate loans and unsecured lending, among other loan types. All loan types are within established limits. We use underwriting guidelines to assess the borrowers’ historical cash flow to determine debt service, and we further stress test the debt service under higher interest rate scenarios. Financial and performance covenants are used in commercial lending to allow us to react to a borrower’s deteriorating financial condition, should that occur.
Commercial Real Estate. Our commercial real estate portfolio includes loans for commercial property that is owned by real estate investors, construction loans to build owner-occupied properties, and loans to developers of commercial real estate investment properties and residential developments. Commercial real estate loans are subject to underwriting standards and processes similar to our commercial loans. These loans are underwritten primarily based on projected cash flows for income-producing properties and collateral values for non-income-producing properties. The repayment of these loans is generally dependent on the successful operation of the property securing the loans or the sale or refinancing of the property. Real estate loans may be adversely affected by conditions in the real estate markets or in the general economy. The properties securing our real estate portfolio are diversified by type and geographic location. This diversity helps reduce the exposure to adverse economic events that affect any single market or industry.
Commercial real estate loans increased $5.1 million, or 0.8%, to $663.3 million as of December 31, 2020 from $658.2 million as of December 31, 2019. This included a decrease of $38.5 million in land development and construction loans, partially offset by increases of $17.7 million and $16.4 million in non-office commercial tenant loans and multifamily tenant loans, respectively.
Commercial - General and Specialized. Commercial loans are underwritten after evaluating and understanding the borrower’s ability to operate profitably. Underwriting standards have been designed to determine whether the borrower possesses sound business ethics and practices, to evaluate current and projected cash flows to determine the ability of the borrower to repay their obligations, and to ensure appropriate collateral is obtained to secure the loan. Commercial loans are primarily made based on the identified cash flows of the borrower and, secondarily, on the underlying collateral provided by the borrower. Most commercial loans are secured by the assets being financed or other business assets, such as real estate, accounts receivable, or inventory, and typically include personal guarantees. Owner-occupied real estate is included in commercial loans, as the repayment of these loans is generally dependent on the operations of the commercial borrower’s business rather than on income-producing properties or the sale of the properties. Commercial loans are grouped into two distinct sub-categories: specialized and general. Commercial related loans that are considered “specialized” include agricultural production and real estate loans, energy loans, and finance, investment, and insurance loans. Commercial related loans that contain a broader diversity of borrowers, sub-industries, or serviced industries are grouped into the “general category.” These include goods, services, restaurant & retail, construction, and other industries.
Commercial general loans increased $76.9 million, or 17.4%, to $518.3 million as of December 31, 2020 from $441.4 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase in commercial general loans was primarily due to $170.0 million in net PPP loans, partially offset by early payoffs and paydowns and a slowdown of new originations due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic during 2020. In addition, a $16.0 million relationship was paid-off and then new money was loaned for a different purpose in 2020 and it is now reported as a specialized loan.
Commercial specialized loans increased $2.2 million, or 0.7%, to $311.7 million as of December 31, 2020 from $309.5 million as of December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to a net increase of $2.7 million in energy loans, $8.8 million in agricultural real estate loans, and $15.9 million in finance, investment & insurance loans, partially offset with a net decrease of $25.3 million in agricultural production loans. Our agricultural production loans did not experience the typical historical increase in seasonal fundings during the third quarter of 2020, primarily as a result of drought conditions or damaged crops and where the borrower received crop insurance proceeds to pay down the loans.
Consumer. We utilize a computer-based credit scoring analysis to supplement our policies and procedures in underwriting consumer loans. Our loan policy addresses types of consumer loans that may be originated and the collateral, if secured, which must be perfected. The relatively smaller individual dollar amounts of consumer loans that are spread over numerous individual borrowers also minimize our risk. Residential real estate loans are included in consumer loans. We generally require mortgage title insurance and hazard insurance on these residential real estate loans.
Consumer and other loans decreased $18.3 million, or 2.8%, to $633.8 million as of December 31, 2020, from $652.0 million as of December 31, 2019. The decrease in these loans was primarily the result of indirect auto loan originations slowing during March through September 2020 to a level that was less than incoming payments as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 31, 2020, our consumer loan portfolio was comprised of $360.3 million in 1-4 family residential loans, $205.8 million in auto loans, and $67.6 million in other consumer loans.
Construction. Loans for residential construction are for single-family properties to developers, builders, or end-users. These loans are underwritten based on estimates of costs and completed value of the project. Funds are advanced based on estimated percentage of completion for the project. Performance of these loans is affected by economic conditions as well as the ability to control costs of the projects.
Construction loans increased $12.0 million, or 14.5%, to $94.5 million as of December 31, 2020 from $82.5 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase was due to new residential construction loan growth related to the 2020 mortgage boom driven primarily by the decline in mortgage interest rates.
Paycheck Protection Program. In April 2020, we began originating loans to qualified small businesses under the PPP administered by the SBA under the provisions of the CARES Act. Loans covered by the PPP may be eligible for loan forgiveness for certain costs incurred related to payroll, group health care benefit costs and qualifying mortgage, rent and utility payments. The remaining loan balance after forgiveness of any amounts is still fully guaranteed by the SBA. Terms of the PPP loans include the following (i) maximum amount limited to the lesser of $10 million or an amount calculated using a payroll-based formula, (ii) maximum loan term of two years, (iii) interest rate of 1.00%, (iv) no collateral or personal guarantees are required, (v) no payments are required for six months following the loan disbursement date and (vi) loan forgiveness up to the full principal amount of the loan and any accrued interest, subject to certain requirements including that no more than 25% of the loan forgiveness amount may be attributable to non-payroll costs. In return for processing and booking the loan, the SBA will pay the lender a processing fee tiered by the size of the loan (5% for loans of not more than $350 thousand; 3% for loans more than $350 thousand and less than $2 million; and 1% for loans of at least $2 million). At December 31, 2020, PPP loans totaled approximately $170 million which are included in commercial general loans. The Company is participating in the new round of the PPP by offering first and second draw loans.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses provides a reserve against which loan losses are charged as those losses become evident. Management evaluates the appropriate level of the allowance for loan losses on a quarterly basis. The analysis takes into consideration the results of an ongoing loan review process, the purpose of which is to determine the level of credit risk within the portfolio and to ensure proper adherence to underwriting and documentation standards. Additional allowances are provided to those loans which appear to represent a greater than normal exposure to risk. The quality of the loan portfolio and the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses is reviewed by regulatory examinations and the Company’s auditors. The allowance for loan losses consists of two elements: (1) specific valuation allowances established for probable losses on specific loans and (2) historical valuation allowances calculated based on historical loan loss experience for similar loans with similar characteristics and trends, judgmentally adjusted for general economic conditions and other qualitative risk factors internal and external to the Company.
To determine the adequacy of the allowance, the loan portfolio is broken into categories based on loan type. Historical loss experience factors by category, adjusted for changes in trends and conditions, are used to determine an indicated allowance for each portfolio category. These factors are evaluated and updated based on the composition of the specific loan portfolio. Other considerations include volumes and trends of delinquencies, nonaccrual loans, levels of bankruptcies, criticized and classified loan trends, expected losses on real estate secured loans, new credit products and policies, economic conditions, concentrations of credit risk, and the experience and abilities of the Company’s lending personnel. In addition to the portfolio evaluations, impaired loans with a balance of $250,000 or more are individually evaluated based on facts and circumstances of the loan to determine if a specific allowance amount may be necessary. Specific allowances may also be established for loans whose outstanding balances are below the above threshold when it is determined that the risk associated with the loan differs significantly from the risk factor amounts established for its loan category.
The allowance for loan losses was $45.6 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $24.2 million at December 31, 2019, an increase of $21.4 million, or 88.3%. The increase is primarily a result of management’s estimate of economic effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic as well as the decline in oil and gas prices seen in 2020. These effects caused us to downgrade the risk ratings on some of the more at-risk sectors in our portfolio, primarily energy and hospitality, during the first quarter and second quarter of 2020.
The following table provides an analysis of the allowance for loan losses and other data at the dates indicated.
(1)
Average outstanding balances include loans held for sale.
Net charge-offs totaled $4.2 million and were 0.18% of average loans outstanding for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.7 million and 0.09% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net charge-offs was primarily the result of a $342,000 charge-off on another commercial relationship during the third quarter of 2020, a $518,000 charge-off on a retail commercial relationship in the first quarter of 2020, and a $822,000 charge-off of an acquired direct energy relationship in the second quarter of 2020. The allowance for loan losses as a percentage of loans held for investment was 2.05% at December 31, 2020 and 1.13% at December 31, 2019.
While the entire allowance is available to absorb losses from any part of our loan portfolio, the following table sets forth the allocation of the allowance for loan losses for the years presented and the percentage of allowance in each classification to total allowance:
Nonperforming Loans
Loans are considered delinquent when principal or interest payments are past due 30 days or more. Delinquent loans may remain on accrual status between 30 days and 90 days past due. Loans on which the accrual of interest has been discontinued are designated as nonaccrual loans. Typically, the accrual of interest on loans is discontinued when principal or interest payments are past due 90 days or when, in the opinion of management, there is a reasonable doubt as to collectability in the normal course of business. When loans are placed on nonaccrual status, all interest previously accrued but not collected is reversed against current period interest income. Income on nonaccrual loans is subsequently recognized only to the extent that cash is received and the loan’s principal balance is deemed collectible. Loans are restored to accrual status when loans become well-secured and management believes full collectability of principal and interest is probable.
A loan is considered impaired when it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Impaired loans include loans on nonaccrual status and performing restructured loans. Income from loans on nonaccrual status is recognized to the extent cash is received and when the loan’s principal balance is deemed collectible. Depending on a particular loan’s circumstances, we measure impairment of a loan based upon either the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, the loan’s observable market price, or the fair value of the collateral less estimated costs to sell if the loan is collateral dependent. A loan is considered collateral dependent when repayment of the loan is based solely on the liquidation of the collateral. Fair value, where possible, is determined by independent appraisals, typically on an annual basis. Between appraisal periods, the fair value may be adjusted based on specific events, such as if deterioration of quality of the collateral comes to our attention as part of our problem loan monitoring process, or if discussions with the borrower lead us to believe the last appraised value no longer reflects the actual market for the collateral. The impairment amount on a collateral-dependent loan is charged-off to the allowance if deemed not collectible and the impairment amount on a loan that is not collateral-dependent is set up as a specific reserve.
Real estate we acquire as a result of foreclosure or by deed-in-lieu of foreclosure is classified as OREO until sold and is initially recorded at fair value less costs to sell when acquired, establishing a new cost basis.
Nonperforming loans include nonaccrual loans and loans past due 90 days or more. Nonperforming assets consist of nonperforming loans plus OREO.
Nonperforming loans were $15.0 million at December 31, 2020 and $6.0 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to five commercial relationships totaling $9.2 million that moved to nonaccrual status in 2020. These additions to nonaccrual loans, which are primarily secured by real estate, were due to deterioration in the borrowers’ financial condition.
At December 31, 2020, our total nonaccrual loans were $13.7 million as compared to $4.7 million at December 31, 2019. These loans were reviewed for impairment and specific valuation allowances were established as necessary and included in the allowance for loan losses as of December 31, 2020 to cover any probable loss.
The following table presents the contractual aging of the recorded investment in current and past due loans by class of loans as of the dates indicated:
Nonperforming Assets
The following table sets forth the allocation of our nonperforming assets among our different asset categories as of the dates indicated. Nonperforming loans include nonaccrual loans and loans past due 90 days or more.
(1)
Restructured loans, nonaccrual, are included in nonaccrual loans which are a component of nonperforming loans.
Troubled Debt Restructurings
In cases where a borrower experiences financial difficulties and we make certain concessionary modifications to contractual terms, the loan is classified as a troubled debt restructuring, or TDR. Included in certain loan categories of impaired loans are TDRs on which we have granted certain material concessions to the borrower as a result of the borrower experiencing financial difficulties. The concessions granted by us may include, but are not limited to: (1) a modification in which the maturity date, timing of payments or frequency of payments is modified, (2) an interest rate lower than the current market rate for new loans with similar risk, or (3) a combination of the first two factors.
If a borrower on a restructured accruing loan has demonstrated performance under the previous terms, is not experiencing financial difficulty and shows the capacity to continue to perform under the restructured terms, the loan will remain on accrual status. Otherwise, the loan will be placed on nonaccrual status until the borrower demonstrates a sustained period of performance, which generally requires six consecutive months of payments. Loans identified as TDRs are evaluated for impairment using the present value of the expected cash flows or the estimated fair value of the collateral, if the loan is collateral dependent. The fair value is determined, when possible, by an appraisal of the property less estimated costs related to liquidation of the collateral. The appraisal amount may also be adjusted for current market conditions. Adjustments to reflect the present value of the expected cash flows or the estimated fair value of collateral dependent loans are a component in determining an appropriate allowance for loan losses, and as such, may result in increases or decreases to the provision for loan losses in current and future earnings.
We had no loans restructured as TDRs during 2020 or 2019. TDRs are excluded from our nonperforming loans unless they otherwise meet the definition of nonaccrual loans or past due 90 days or more.
COVID-19 Industry Exposures. The Company’s COVID-19 industry exposures at December 31, 2020 were:
•
Restaurant and retail owner-occupied loans totaled $90.5 million (or 4.1% of total loans). The average loan size was $312,000. There was $2.0 million in classified loans, $287,000 in loans past due 30 days or more, and $1.5 million in nonaccrual loans. The related allowance for loan losses to total restaurant and retail owner-occupied loans was 3.56%. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 2% of these loans were active modifications as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Of these modifications, 31% were for six months of interest-only payments with the remaining 69% being 90-day payment deferrals.
•
Hospitality and assisted living center loans totaled $123.5 million (or 5.6% of total loans), excluding properties under construction. The average loan size was $2.8 million. There was $52.6 million in classified loans, $495,000 in loans past due 30 days or more, and $2.3 million in nonaccrual loans. The related allowance for loan losses to total hospitality and assisted living center loans was 7.71%. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 46% of these loans were active modifications as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. All of these modifications were interest-only periods of 12 months or a combination of a 90-day deferral and nine months of interest only.
Oil and Gas Exposures. The Company’s direct energy sector loans totaled $64.0 million (or 2.9% of total loans) at December 31, 2020. There was $7.4 million in classified loans, $21,000 in loans past due 30 days or more, and $93,000 in nonaccrual loans. Management has expanded the monitoring of the loans in this category. The related allowance for loan losses to direct energy loans is 5.30%. As of December 31, 2020, less than 0.5% of these loans were active modifications as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Credit Quality
In addition to the past due and nonaccrual criteria, the Company also evaluates loans according to its internal risk grading system. Loans are segregated between pass, special mention, substandard, doubtful and loss categories. The definitions of those categories are as follows:
Pass: Loans that do not fit any of the other categories listed below and for which likelihood of loss is considered to be remote.
Special mention: Loans with potential for deteriorating into a substandard classification without close supervision and monitoring. Loans remain in this category on a temporary basis and should be reclassified up or down, depending on improvement or continued deterioration.
Substandard: Loans not adequately protected by sound current net worth or adequate repayment capacity of the borrower and/or of the collateral pledged. Substandard loans have well defined weaknesses that jeopardize the liquidation of the classified debt. A potential for loss exists if the deficiencies or weaknesses are not recognized and corrected. Substandard loans can be accruing or placed on nonaccrual based on the individual circumstances of each loan.
Doubtful: Doubtful loans have all the weaknesses inherent in substandard loans with the added characteristics that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions and values highly questionable and improbable. All doubtful loans are on nonaccrual.
Loss: Loans that are considered uncollectible and of such little value that their continuance as an active bank-owned asset is not warranted. These loans are immediately charged off.
Outstanding loan balances categorized by internal risk grades as of the dates indicated are summarized as follows:
The following table shows all loans, including nonaccrual loans, by classification and aging, as of the dates indicated:
Securities Portfolio
The securities portfolio is the second largest component of the Company’s interest-earning assets, and the structure and composition of this portfolio is important to an analysis of the financial condition of the Company. The portfolio serves the following purposes: (i) it provides a source of pledged assets for securing certain deposits and borrowed funds, as may be required by law or by specific agreement with a depositor or lender; (ii) it provides liquidity to even out cash flows from the loan and deposit activities of customers; (iii) it can be used as an interest rate risk management tool, since it provides a large base of assets, the maturity and interest rate characteristics of which can be changed more readily than the loan portfolio to better match changes in the deposit base and other funding sources of the Company; and (iv) it is an alternative interest-earning asset when loan demand is weak or when deposits grow more rapidly than loans.
The securities portfolio consists of securities classified as either held-to-maturity or available-for-sale. Securities consist primarily of state and municipal securities, mortgage-backed securities and U.S. government sponsored agency securities. We determine the appropriate classification at the time of purchase. All held-to-maturity securities are reported at amortized cost, adjusted for premiums and discounts that are recognized in interest income using the interest method over the period to maturity. All available-for-sale securities are reported at fair value.
Total securities at December 31, 2020 were $803.1 million, representing an increase of $95.4 million, or 13.5%, compared to $707.7 million at December 31, 2019. The increase was due to the purchase of $279.8 million in Texas municipal securities and unrealized gain of $25.9 million, partially offset by the sale of $94.5 million in mortgage-backed securities and $114.9 million in maturities. The sale of the mortgage-backed securities occurred in January 2020 and generated a gain of $2.3 million.
The following table summarizes the fair value of the securities portfolio as of the dates presented.
Certain securities have fair values less than amortized cost and, therefore, contain unrealized losses. At December 31, 2020, we evaluated the securities which had an unrealized loss for other-than-temporary impairment and determined all declines in value to be temporary. We anticipate full recovery of amortized cost with respect to these securities by maturity, or sooner in the event of a more favorable market interest rate environment. We do not intend to sell these securities and it is not probable that we will be required to sell them before recovery of the amortized cost basis, which may be at maturity.
The following table sets forth certain information regarding contractual maturities and the weighted average yields of our investment securities as of the date presented. Expected maturities may differ from contractual maturities if borrowers have the right to call or prepay obligation with or without call or prepayment penalties.
Deposits
Deposits represent the Company’s primary and most vital source of funds. We offer a variety of deposit products including demand deposits accounts, interest-bearing products, savings accounts and certificate of deposits. We put continued effort into gathering noninterest-bearing demand deposit accounts through loan production, customer referrals, marketing staffs, mobile and online banking and various involvements with community networks.
Total deposits at December 31, 2020 were $2.97 billion, representing an increase of $277.5 million, or 10.3%, compared to $2.70 billion at December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, 30.9% of total deposits were comprised of noninterest-bearing demand accounts, 57.5% of interest-bearing non-maturity accounts and 11.5% of time deposits. Deposits increased in 2020 primarily due to organic growth, customers having disbursed PPP loan funds in their accounts that have not been spent, and other government related stimulus programs in response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
The following table summarizes our average deposit balances and weighted average rates for the periods indicated:
The following tables set forth the maturity of time deposits of $100,000 or more as of December 31, 2020:
Time deposits issued in amounts of more than $250,000 represent the type of deposit most likely to affect the Company’s future earnings because of interest rate sensitivity. The effective cost of these funds is generally higher than other time deposits because the funds are usually obtained at premium rates of interest.
Borrowed Funds
In addition to deposits, we utilize advances from the FHLB and other borrowings as a supplementary funding source to finance our operations.
FHLB Advances. The FHLB allows us to borrow, both short and long-term, on a blanket floating lien status collateralized by first mortgage loans and commercial real estate loans as well as FHLB stock. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 we had total remaining borrowing capacity from the FHLB of $512.5 million and $394.3 million, respectively.
The following table sets forth our long-term FHLB borrowings as of and for the periods indicated:
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. The Bank has a line of credit with the FRB. The amount of the line is determined on a monthly basis by the Federal Reserve Bank. The line is collateralized by a blanket floating lien on all agriculture, commercial and consumer loans. The amount of the line was $700.8 million and $547.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table sets forth our FRB borrowings as of and for the periods indicated:
Lines of Credit. The Bank has uncollateralized lines of credit with multiple banks as a source of funding for liquidity management. The total amount of the lines was $165.0 million and $135.0 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. The lines were not used at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Subordinated Debt Securities
In December 2018, the Company issued $26.5 million in subordinated debt securities. $12.4 million of the securities have a maturity date of December 2028 and an average fixed rate of 5.74% for the first five years. The remaining $14.1 million of securities have a maturity date of December 2030 and an average fixed rate of 6.41% for the first seven years. After the fixed rate periods, all securities will float at the Wall Street Journal prime rate, with a floor of 4.5% and a ceiling of 7.5%. These securities pay interest quarterly, are unsecured, and may be called by the Company at any time after the remaining maturity is five years or less. Additionally, these securities qualify for tier 2 capital treatment, subject to regulatory limitations.
On September 29, 2020, the Company issued $50.0 million in subordinated debt securities. Proceeds were reduced by approximately $926,000 in debt issuance costs. The securities have a maturity date of September 2030 with a fixed rate of 4.50% for the first five years. After the expiration of the fixed rate period, the securities will reset quarterly at a variable rate equal to the then current three-month Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”), as published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, plus 438 basis points. These securities pay interest semi-annually, are unsecured, and may be called by the Company at any time after the remaining maturity is five years or less. Additionally, these securities qualify for Tier 2 capital treatment, subject to regulatory limitations.
As of December 31, 2020, the total amount of subordinated debt securities outstanding was $76.5 million less approximately $883,000 of remaining debt issuance costs for a total balance of $75.6 million.
Junior Subordinated Deferrable Interest Debentures and Trust Preferred Securities. Between March 2004 and June 2007, the Company formed three wholly-owned statutory business trusts solely for the purpose of issuing trust preferred securities, the proceeds of which were invested in junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures. The trusts are not consolidated and the debentures issued by the Company to the trusts are reflected in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets. The Company records interest expense on the debentures in its consolidated financial statements. The amount of debentures outstanding was $46.4 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019. Company has the right, as has been exercised in the past, to defer payments of interest on the securities for up to twenty consecutive quarters. During such time, corporate dividends may not be paid.
The chart below indicates certain information, as of December 31, 2020, about each of the statutory trusts and the junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures, including the date the junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures were issued, outstanding amounts of trust preferred securities and junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures, the maturity date of the junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures, the interest rates on the junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures and the investment banker.
(1)
May be redeemed at the Company’s option.
(2)
Interest payable quarterly with principal due at maturity.
(3)
Rate as of last reset date, prior to December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Liquidity refers to the measure of our ability to meet the cash flow requirements of depositors and borrowers, while at the same time meeting our operating, capital and strategic cash flow needs, all at a reasonable cost. We continuously monitor our liquidity position to ensure that assets and liabilities are managed in a manner that will meet all short-term and long-term cash requirements. We manage our liquidity position to meet the daily cash flow needs of customers, while maintaining an appropriate balance between assets and liabilities to meet the return on investment objectives of our shareholders.
Interest rate sensitivity involves the relationships between rate-sensitive assets and liabilities and is an indication of the probable effects of interest rate fluctuations on the Company’s net interest income. Interest rate-sensitive assets and liabilities are those with yields or rates that are subject to change within a future time period due to maturity or changes in market rates. The model is used to project future net interest income under a set of possible interest rate movements. The Company’s Investment/Asset Liability Committee reviews this information to determine if the projected future net interest income levels would be acceptable. The Company attempts to stay within acceptable net interest income levels.
Our liquidity position is supported by management of liquid assets and access to alternative sources of funds. Our liquid assets include cash, interest-bearing deposits in correspondent banks, federal funds sold, and fair value of unpledged investment securities. Other available sources of liquidity include wholesale deposits, and additional borrowings from correspondent banks, FHLB advances, and the Federal Reserve discount window.
Our short-term and long-term liquidity requirements are primarily met through cash flow from operations, redeployment of prepaying and maturing balances in our loan and investment portfolios, and increases in customer deposits. Other alternative sources of funds will supplement these primary sources to the extent necessary to meet additional liquidity requirements on either a short-term or long-term basis.
Capital Requirements
Total shareholders’ equity increased to $370.0 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $306.2 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase from December 31, 2019 was primarily the result of $45.4 million in net earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020, and a change in accumulated other comprehensive income of $20.4 million, net of tax, reduced by $2.5 million in dividends paid.
We are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal and state banking regulators. Failure to meet regulatory capital requirements may result in certain mandatory and possible additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on our financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for “prompt corrective action” (described below), we must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of our assets, liabilities and certain off-balance sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting policies. The capital amounts and classifications are subject to qualitative judgments by the federal banking regulators about components, risk weightings and other factors. Qualitative measures established by regulation to ensure capital adequacy required us to maintain minimum amounts and ratio of CET1 capital, tier 1 capital and total capital to risk-weighted assets and of tier 1 capital to average consolidated assets, referred to as the “leverage ratio.”
The risk-based capital ratios measure the adequacy of a bank’s capital against the riskiness of its assets and off-balance sheet activities. Failure to maintain adequate capital is a basis for “prompt corrective action” or other regulatory enforcement action. In assessing a bank’s capital adequacy, regulators also consider other factors such as interest rate risk exposure; liquidity, funding and market risks; quality and level of earnings; concentrations of credit, quality of loans and investments; risks of any nontraditional activities; effectiveness of bank policies; and management’s overall ability to monitor and control risks.
At December 31, 2020, both we and the Bank met all the capital adequacy requirements to which we and the Bank were subject. At December 31, 2020, we and the Bank were “well capitalized” under the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action. Management believes that no conditions or events have occurred since December 31, 2020 that would materially adversely change such capital classifications. From time to time, we may need to raise additional capital to support our and the Bank’s further growth and to maintain our “well capitalized” status.
The table below also summarizes the capital requirements applicable to us and the Bank in order to be considered “well-capitalized” from a regulatory perspective, as well as our and the Bank’s capital ratios as of the dates indicated. We and the Bank exceeded all regulatory capital requirements under Basel III and the Bank was considered to be “well-capitalized” as of the dates reflected in the table below.
Treasury Stock
The Company repurchased stock in accordance with its stock repurchase program during 2020. See Part II, Item 5, “Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters, and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities”, of this Report for further information.
Contractual Obligations
The following tables contain supplemental information regarding our total contractual obligations as of the dates indicated:
We believe that we will be able to meet our contractual obligations as they come due through the maintenance of adequate cash levels. We expect to maintain adequate cash levels through profitability, loan and securities repayment and maturity activity and continued deposit gathering activities. We have in place various borrowing mechanisms for both short-term and long-term liquidity needs.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of our customers. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit. Those instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit and interest rate risk in excess of the amount recognized in the consolidated balance sheets. The Company’s exposure to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by the other party to the financial instrument for commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit to our customers is represented by the contractual or notional amount of those instruments. Commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit are not recorded as an asset or liability by the Company until the instrument is exercised. The contractual or notional amounts of those instruments reflect the extent of involvement we have in particular classes of financial instruments.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since many of the commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. The Company uses the same credit policies in making commitments and conditional obligations as they do for on-balance sheet instruments. The amount and nature of collateral obtained, if deemed necessary by the Company upon extension of credit, is based on management’s credit evaluation of the potential borrower.
Standby letters of credit are conditional commitments issued by the Company to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party. Those guarantees are primarily issued to support public and private short-term borrowing arrangements. The credit risk involved in issuing letters of credit is essentially the same as that involved in extending loan facilities to customers. The Company holds collateral supporting those commitments for which collateral is deemed necessary.
The following table summarizes commitments we have made as of the dates presented.
We use our line of credit with the FHLB to take out letters of credit. These letters of credit pledged as collateral for certain public fund deposits. These letters of credit are off-balance sheet liabilities and would only be funded in the event of a default by the Company. The amount of these letters of credit with the FHLB was $199.0 million and $199.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Interest Rate Sensitivity and Market Risk
As a financial institution, our primary component of market risk is interest rate volatility. Our interest rate risk policy provides management with the guidelines for effective funds management, and we have established a measurement system for monitoring our net interest rate sensitivity position. We have historically managed our sensitivity position within our established guidelines.
Fluctuations in interest rates will ultimately impact both the level of income and expense recorded on most of our assets and liabilities, and the market value of all interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, other than those which have a short term to maturity. Interest rate risk is the potential of economic losses due to future interest rate changes. These economic losses can be reflected as a loss of future net interest income and/or a loss of current fair market values. The objective is to measure the effect on net interest income and to adjust the balance sheet to minimize the inherent risk while at the same time maximizing income.
We manage our exposure to interest rates by structuring our balance sheet in the ordinary course of business. Based upon the nature of our operations, we are not subject to foreign exchange or commodity price risk. We do not own any trading assets.
Our exposure to interest rate risk is managed by the Investment/Asset/Liability Committee, or the ALCO Committee, in accordance with policies approved by the Bank’s Board. The ALCO Committee formulates strategies based on appropriate levels of interest rate risk. In determining the appropriate level of interest rate risk, the ALCO Committee considers the impact on earnings and capital on the current outlook on interest rates, potential changes in interest rates, regional economies, liquidity, business strategies and other factors. The ALCO Committee meets regularly to review, among other things, the sensitivity of assets and liabilities to interest rate changes, the book and market values of assets and liabilities, commitments to originate loans and the maturities of investments and borrowings. Additionally, the ALCO Committee reviews liquidity, cash flow flexibility, maturities of deposits and consumer and commercial deposit activity. Management employs methodologies to manage interest rate risk, which include an analysis of relationships between interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and an interest rate shock simulation model.
We use interest rate risk simulation models and shock analyses to test the interest rate sensitivity of net interest income and fair value of equity, and the impact of changes in interest rates on other financial metrics. Contractual maturities and re-pricing opportunities of loans are incorporated in the model. The average lives of non-maturity deposit accounts are based on decay assumptions and are incorporated into the model. All of the assumptions used in our analyses are inherently uncertain and, as a result, the model cannot precisely measure future net interest income or precisely predict the impact of fluctuations in market interest rates on net interest income. Actual results will differ from the model’s simulated results due to timing, magnitude and frequency of interest rate changes as well as changes in market conditions and the application and timing of various management strategies.
On a quarterly basis, we run a simulation model for a static balance sheet and other scenarios. These models test the impact on net interest income from changes in market interest rates under various scenarios. Under the static model, rates are shocked instantaneously and ramped rates change over a 12-month and 24-month horizon based upon parallel and non-parallel yield curve shifts. Parallel shock scenarios assume instantaneous parallel movements in the yield curve compared to a flat yield curve scenario. Non-parallel simulation involves analysis of interest income and expense under various changes in the shape of the yield curve. Our internal policy regarding internal rate risk simulations currently specifies that for gradual parallel shifts of the yield curve, estimated net interest income at risk for the subsequent one-year period should not decline by more than 7.5% for a 100 basis point shift, 15% for a 200 basis point shift, and 22.5% for a 300 basis point shift.
The following tables summarize the simulated change in net interest income over a 12-month horizon as of the dates indicated:
Impact of Inflation
Our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Report have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. GAAP requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars, without considering changes in the relative value of money over time due to inflation or recession.
Unlike many industrial companies, substantially all of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a more significant impact on our performance than the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rates may not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services. However, other operating expenses do reflect general levels of inflation.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Our accounting and reporting policies conform to GAAP and the prevailing practices in the banking industry. However, we also evaluate our performance based on certain additional financial measures discussed in this Report as being non-GAAP financial measures. We classify a financial measure as being a non-GAAP financial measure if that financial measure excludes or includes amounts, or is subject to adjustments that have the effect of excluding or including amounts, that are included or excluded, as the case may be, in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP as in effect from time to time in the U.S. in our statements of income, balance sheets or statements of cash flows. Non-GAAP financial measures do not include operating and other statistical measures or ratios or statistical measures calculated using exclusively either financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, operating measures or other measures that are not non-GAAP financial measures or both.
The non-GAAP financial measures that we discuss in this Report should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the most directly comparable or other financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. Moreover, the manner in which we calculate the non-GAAP financial measures that we discuss in this Report may differ from that of other companies reporting measures with similar names. It is important to understand how other banking organizations calculate their financial measures with names similar to the non-GAAP financial measures we have discussed in this Report when comparing such non-GAAP financial measures.
Tangible Book Value Per Common Share. Tangible book value per share is a non-GAAP measure generally used by investors, financial analysts and investment bankers to evaluate financial institutions. The most directly comparable GAAP financial measure for tangible book value per common share is book value per common share. We believe that the tangible book value per common share measure is important to many investors in the marketplace who are interested in changes from period to period in book value per common share exclusive of changes in intangible assets. Goodwill and other intangible assets have the effect of increasing total book value while not increasing our tangible book value.
Tangible Common Equity to Tangible Assets. Tangible common equity to tangible assets is a non-GAAP measure generally used by investors, financial analysts and investment bankers to evaluate financial institutions. We calculate tangible common equity, as described above, and tangible assets as total assets less goodwill, core deposit intangibles and other intangible assets, net of accumulated amortization. The most directly comparable GAAP financial measure for tangible common equity to tangible assets is total common shareholders’ equity to total assets. We believe that this measure is important to many investors in the marketplace who are interested in the relative changes from period to period of tangible common equity to tangible assets, each exclusive of changes in intangible assets. Goodwill and other intangible assets have the effect of increasing both total shareholders’ equity and assets while not increasing our tangible common equity or tangible assets.
The following table reconciles, as of the dates set forth below, total stockholders’ equity to tangible common equity and total assets to tangible assets and then presents book value per common share, tangible book value per common share, total stockholders’ equity to total assets, and tangible common equity to tangible assets:
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our accounting and reporting policies conform to GAAP and conform to general practices within the industry in which we operate. To prepare financial statements in conformity with GAAP, management makes estimates, assumptions and judgments based on available information. These estimates, assumptions and judgments affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. These estimates, assumptions and judgments are based on information available as of the date of the financial statements and, as this information changes, actual results could differ from the estimates, assumptions and judgments reflected in the financial statement. In particular, management has identified several accounting policies that, due to the estimates, assumptions and judgments inherent in those policies, are critical in understanding our financial statements.
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (the “JOBS Act”) permits us an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards affecting public companies. We have elected to take advantage of this extended transition period, which means that the financial statements included in this Report, as well as any financial statements that we file in the future, will not be subject to all new or revised accounting standards generally applicable to public companies for the transition period for so long as we remain an emerging growth company or until we affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period under the JOBS Act.
The following is a discussion of the critical accounting policies and significant estimates that we believe require us to make the most complex or subjective decisions or assessments. Additional information about these policies can be found in Note 1 of the Company’s consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2020.
Basis of Presentation and Consolidation. The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned consolidated subsidiaries. All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Cash and Cash Equivalents. The Company includes all cash on hand, balances due from other banks, and Federal funds sold, all of which have original maturities within three months, as cash and cash equivalents.
Securities. Investment securities may be classified into trading, held-to-maturity, or available-for-sale portfolios. Securities that are held principally for resale in the near term are classified as trading. Securities that management has the ability and positive intent to hold to maturity are classified as held-to-maturity and recorded at amortized cost. Securities not classified as trading or held-to-maturity are available-for-sale and are reported at fair value with unrealized gains and losses excluded from earnings, but included in the determination of other comprehensive income. Management uses these assets as part of its asset/liability management strategy; they may be sold in response to changes in liquidity needs, interest rates, resultant prepayment risk changes, and other factors. Management determines the appropriate classification of securities at the time of purchase. Purchase premiums and discounts are recognized in interest income using the interest method over the terms of the securities. Realized gains and losses and declines in value judged to be other-than-temporary are included in gain or loss on sale of securities. The cost of securities sold is based on the specific identification method.
Loans. Loans that management has the intent and ability to hold for the foreseeable future or until maturity or payoff are reported at their outstanding principal balances net of any unearned income, charge-offs, unamortized deferred fees and costs on originated loans, and premiums or discounts on purchased loans. Interest income is accrued on the unpaid principal balance. Loan origination fees, net of certain direct origination costs, are deferred and recognized as an adjustment of the related loan yield using the straight-line method, which is not materially different from the effective interest method required by GAAP.
Loans are placed on non-accrual status when, in management’s opinion, collection of interest is unlikely, which typically occurs when principal or interest payments are more than ninety days past due. When interest accrual is discontinued, all unpaid accrued interest is reversed against interest income. The interest on these loans is accounted for on the cash-basis or cost-recovery method, until qualifying for return to accrual. Loans are returned to accrual status when all the principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are reasonably assured.
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is established as losses are estimated to have occurred through a provision for loan losses charged to earnings. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when management believes the uncollectibility of a loan balance is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. The Company’s allowance for loan losses consists of specific valuation allowances established for probable losses on specific loans and general valuation allowances calculated based on historical loan loss experience for similar loans with similar characteristics and trends, judgmentally adjusted for general economic conditions and other qualitative risk factors internal and external to the Company.
The allowance for loan losses is evaluated on a quarterly basis by management and is based upon management’s review of the collectability of the loans in light of historical experience, the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, adverse situations that may affect the borrower’s ability to repay, estimated value of any underlying collateral, and prevailing economic conditions. This evaluation is inherently subjective, as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available. The determination of the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses is based on estimates that are particularly susceptible to significant changes in the economic environment and market conditions. In connection with the determination of the estimated losses on loans, management obtains independent appraisals for significant collateral. The Bank’s loans are generally secured by specific items of collateral including real property, crops, livestock, consumer assets, and other business assets.
While management uses available information to recognize losses on loans, further reductions in the carrying amounts of loans may be necessary based on various factors. In addition, regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review the estimated losses on loans. Such agencies may require the Bank to recognize additional losses based on their judgments about information available to them at the time of their examination. Because of these factors, it is reasonably possible that the estimated losses on loans may change materially in the near term. However, the amount of the change that is reasonably possible cannot be estimated.
A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Company will be unable to collect the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. All loans rated substandard or worse and greater than $250,000 are specifically reviewed to determine if they are impaired. Factors considered by management in determining whether a loan is impaired include payment status and the sources, amounts, and probabilities of estimated cash flow available to service debt in relation to amounts due according to contractual terms. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls generally are not classified as impaired. Management determines the significance of payment delays and payment shortfalls on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration all of the circumstances surrounding the loan and the borrower, including the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower’s prior payment record, and the amount of the shortfall in relation to the principal and interest owed.
Loans that are determined to be impaired are then evaluated to determine estimated impairment, if any. GAAP allows impairment to be measured on a loan-by-loan basis by either the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, the loan’s obtainable market price, or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent. Loans that are not individually determined to be impaired or are not subject to the specific review of impaired status are subject to the general valuation allowance portion of the allowance for loan loss.
Loans Held for Sale. Loans held for sale are comprised of residential mortgage loans. Loans that are originated for best efforts delivery are carried at the lower of aggregate cost or fair value as determined by aggregate outstanding commitments from investors or current investor yield requirements. All other loans held for sale are carried at fair value. Loans sold are typically subject to certain indemnification provisions with the investor; management does not believe these provisions will have any significant consequences.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets. Goodwill resulting from business combinations is generally determined as the excess of the fair value of the consideration transferred over the fair value of the net assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date. Goodwill is not amortized, but is tested for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events and circumstances exist that indicate that an impairment test should be performed. Intangible assets with definite lives are amortized over their estimated useful lives.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report regarding the impact of new accounting pronouncements which we have adopted.