ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations, seen from our perspective, which should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Executive Overview
The following are factors that regularly affect our operating results and financial condition. In addition, our business is subject to the risks and uncertainties described in Item 1A of this Annual Report. Management currently considers the following events, trends, and uncertainties to be most important to understanding our financial condition and operating performance:
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in commodity and stock market volatility, significant government stimulus and uncertainty about economic conditions that will prevail in the months ahead. In response to temporary government restrictions on businesses during much of calendar year 2020, certain of our commercial and industrial customers were forced to temporarily curtail or suspend operations, or otherwise were impacted by lower economic activity as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, we experienced a period of lower revenues in certain customer sectors, particularly during the period from March 2020 through December 2020. Notwithstanding those challenges, we also experienced an increase in usage in our residential and certain other customer segments that benefited from stay-at-home initiatives and the demand for temporary, portable energy solutions. We took decisive action in the early stages of the pandemic to adapt our business model and modify our operating protocols in order to help protect the health and safety of our employees, while ensuring seamless delivery of our essential services to the customers and communities we serve. As COVID-19 related business restrictions eased throughout fiscal 2021, customer demand in those sectors most impacted originally by the pandemic started to normalize, although there continues to be a risk of permanent demand destruction if economic conditions deteriorate, or if some businesses are unable to recover. While we expect that many of these effects will not be permanent, it is impossible to predict their duration. We have developed, implemented and continue to refine alternative operational plans, inclusive of manpower levels, to address different customer demand scenarios, and we continue to adapt our operational model to shifting demand patterns and the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on future cash flows and access to adequate liquidity as we navigate through fiscal 2022 and beyond.
Product Costs and Supply
The level of profitability in the retail propane, fuel oil, natural gas and electricity businesses is largely dependent on the difference between retail sales price and our costs to acquire and transport products. The unit cost of our products, particularly propane, fuel oil and natural gas, is subject to volatility as a result of supply and demand dynamics or other market conditions,
including, but not limited to, economic and political factors impacting crude oil and natural gas supply or pricing. We enter into product supply contracts that are generally one-year agreements subject to annual renewal, and also purchase product on the open market. We attempt to reduce price risk by pricing product on a short-term basis. Our propane supply contracts typically provide for pricing based upon index formulas using the posted prices established at major supply points such as Mont Belvieu, Texas, or Conway, Kansas (plus transportation costs) at the time of delivery.
To supplement our annual purchase requirements, we may utilize forward fixed price purchase contracts to acquire a portion of the propane that we resell to our customers, which allows us to manage our exposure to unfavorable changes in commodity prices and to assure adequate physical supply. The percentage of contract purchases, and the amount of supply contracted for under forward contracts at fixed prices, will vary from year to year based on market conditions.
Changes in our costs to acquire and transport products can occur rapidly over a short period of time and can impact profitability. There is no assurance that we will be able to pass on product acquisition and transportation cost increases fully or immediately, particularly when such costs increase rapidly. Therefore, average retail sales prices can vary significantly from year to year as our costs fluctuate with the propane, fuel oil, crude oil and natural gas commodity markets and infrastructure conditions. In addition, periods of sustained higher commodity and/or transportation prices can lead to customer conservation, resulting in reduced demand for our product.
During fiscal 2021, the wholesale cost of propane rose steadily throughout the year which was reflective of the contraction in U.S. propane inventory levels resulting from higher domestic consumption, coupled with increased exports. According to the Energy Information Administration, U.S. propane inventory levels at the end of September 2021 were 72.9 million barrels, which was 28.5% lower than September 2020 levels, and 19% lower than the 5-year average for September. Average posted propane prices (basis Mont Belvieu, Texas) were 97.5% higher than the prior year. Consistent with our established practice, we adjusted customer pricing accordingly as market conditions allowed.
Seasonality
The retail propane and fuel oil distribution businesses, as well as the natural gas marketing business, are seasonal because these fuels are primarily used for heating in residential and commercial buildings. Historically, approximately two-thirds of our retail propane volume is sold during the six-month peak heating season from October through March. The fuel oil business tends to experience greater seasonality given its more limited use for space heating and approximately three-fourths of our fuel oil volumes are sold between October and March. Consequently, sales and operating profits are concentrated in our first and second fiscal quarters. Cash flows from operations, therefore, are greatest during the second and third fiscal quarters when customers pay for product purchased during the winter heating season. We expect lower operating profits and either net losses or lower net income during the period from April through September (our third and fourth fiscal quarters). To the extent necessary, we will reserve cash from the second and third quarters for distribution to holders of our Common Units in the fourth quarter and the following fiscal year first quarter.
Weather
Weather conditions have a significant impact on the demand for our products, in particular propane, fuel oil and natural gas, for both heating and agricultural purposes. Many of our customers rely heavily on propane, fuel oil or natural gas as a heating source. Accordingly, the volume sold is directly affected by the severity of the winter weather in our service areas, which can vary substantially from year to year. In any given area, sustained warmer than normal temperatures will tend to result in reduced propane, fuel oil and natural gas consumption, while sustained colder than normal temperatures will tend to result in greater consumption.
Hedging and Risk Management Activities
We engage in hedging and risk management activities to reduce the effect of price volatility on our product costs and to ensure the availability of product during periods of short supply. We enter into propane forward, options and swap agreements with third parties, and use futures and options contracts traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange (“NYMEX”) to purchase and sell propane, fuel oil, crude oil and natural gas at fixed prices in the future. The majority of the futures, forward and options agreements are used to hedge price risk associated with propane and fuel oil physical inventory, as well as, in certain instances, forecasted purchases of propane or fuel oil. In addition, we sell propane and fuel oil to customers at fixed prices, and enter into derivative instruments to hedge a portion of our exposure to fluctuations in commodity prices as a result of selling the fixed price contracts. Forward contracts are generally settled physically at the expiration of the contract whereas futures, options and swap contracts are generally settled at the expiration of the contract through a net settlement mechanism. Although we use derivative instruments to reduce the effect of price volatility associated with priced physical inventory and forecasted transactions, we do not use derivative instruments for speculative trading purposes. Risk management activities are monitored by an internal Commodity Risk Management Committee, made up of six members of management and reporting to our Audit Committee, through enforcement of our Hedging and Risk Management Policy.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies included within the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements section elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Certain amounts included in or affecting our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures must be estimated, requiring management to make certain assumptions with respect to values or conditions that cannot be known with certainty at the time the financial statements are prepared. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We are also subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ from estimated results. Estimates are used when accounting for depreciation and amortization of long-lived assets, employee benefit plans, self-insurance and litigation reserves, environmental reserves, allowances for doubtful accounts, asset valuation assessments and valuation of derivative instruments. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Any effects on our business, financial position or results of operations resulting from revisions to these estimates are recorded in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known to us. Management has reviewed these critical accounting estimates and related disclosures with the Audit Committee of our Board of Supervisors. We believe that the following are our critical accounting estimates:
Allowances for Doubtful Accounts. We maintain allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments. We estimate our allowances for doubtful accounts using a specific reserve for known or anticipated uncollectible accounts, as well as an estimated reserve for potential future uncollectible accounts taking into consideration our historical write-offs. If the financial condition of one or more of our customers were to deteriorate resulting in an impairment in their ability to make payments, additional allowances could be required. As a result of our large customer base, which is comprised of approximately 1.0 million customers, no individual customer account is material. Therefore, while some variation to actual results occurs, historically such variability has not been material. Schedule II, Valuation and Qualifying Accounts, provides a summary of the changes in our allowances for doubtful accounts during the period.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits. We estimate the rate of return on plan assets, the discount rate used to estimate the present value of future benefit obligations and the expected cost of future health care benefits in determining our annual pension and other postretirement benefit costs. We use the Society of Actuaries’ mortality scale (MP-2020) and other actuarial life expectancy information when developing the annual mortality assumptions for our pension and postretirement benefit plans, which are used to measure net periodic benefit costs and the obligation under these plans. While we believe that our assumptions are appropriate, significant differences in our actual experience or significant changes in market conditions may materially affect our pension and other postretirement benefit obligations and our future expense.
Accrued Insurance. Our accrued insurance represents the estimated costs of known and anticipated or unasserted claims for incidents related to general and product, workers’ compensation and automobile liability. For each claim, we record a provision up to the estimated amount of the probable claim utilizing actuarially determined loss development factors applied to actual claims data. Our insurance provisions are susceptible to change to the extent that actual claims development differs from historical claims development. We maintain insurance coverage wherein our net exposure for insured claims is limited to the insurance deductible, claims above which are paid by our insurance carriers. For the portion of our estimated insurance liability that exceeds our deductibles, we record an asset related to the amount of the liability expected to be paid by the insurance companies. Historically, we have not experienced significant variability in our actuarial estimates for claims incurred but not reported. Accrued insurance provisions for reported claims are reviewed at least quarterly, and our assessment of whether a loss is probable and/or reasonably estimable is updated as necessary. Due to the inherently uncertain nature of, in particular, product liability claims, the ultimate loss may differ materially from our estimates. However, because of the nature of our insurance arrangements, those material variations historically have not, nor are they expected in the future to have, a material impact on our results of operations or financial position.
Loss Contingencies. In the normal course of business, we are involved in various claims and legal proceedings. We record a liability for such matters when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amounts can be reasonably estimated. The liability includes probable and estimable legal costs to the point in the legal matter where we believe a conclusion to the matter will be reached. When only a range of possible loss can be established, the most probable amount in the range is accrued. If no amount within this range is a better estimate than any other amount within the range, the minimum amount in the range is accrued.
We contribute to multi-employer pension plans (“MEPPs”) in accordance with various collective bargaining agreements covering union employees. As one of the many participating employers in these MEPPs, we are responsible with the other participating employers for any plan underfunding. Due to the uncertainty regarding future factors that could impact the withdrawal liability, we are unable to determine the timing of the payment of the future withdrawal liability, or additional future withdrawal liability, if any.
Fair Values of Acquired Assets and Liabilities. From time to time, we enter into material business combinations. In accordance with accounting guidance associated with business combinations, the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their estimated fair value as of the acquisition date. Fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed are based upon available information and may involve us engaging an independent third party to perform an appraisal. Estimating fair values can be complex and subject to significant business judgment. Estimates most commonly impact property, plant and equipment and intangible assets, including goodwill. Generally, we have, if necessary, up to one year from the acquisition date to finalize our estimates of acquisition date fair values.
Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Net income for fiscal 2021 was $122.8 million, or $1.96 per Common Unit, compared to $60.8 million, or $0.98 per Common Unit, in fiscal 2020.
Adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (Adjusted EBITDA, as defined and reconciled below) increased $22.0 million, or 8.7%, to $275.7 million for fiscal 2021, compared to $253.7 million in the prior year.
Retail propane gallons sold in fiscal 2021 of 419.8 million gallons increased 4.2% compared to the prior year, primarily due to an increase in weather-related customer demand during the most critical months of the heating season, an increase in commercial and industrial demand resulting from the easing of COVID-related business restrictions and an improving economy, and positive progress in our customer base growth and retention initiatives. Average temperatures (as measured by heating degree days) across all of the Partnership’s service territories for fiscal 2021 were 10% warmer than normal and comparable to the prior year. However, average temperatures during the critical months of December 2020 through February 2021 were 7% cooler than the same period in the prior year and contributed to an overall increase in heat-related demand.
Average propane prices (basis Mont Belvieu, Texas) for fiscal 2021 increased 97.5% compared to the prior year. Total gross margin for fiscal 2021 of $803.3 million increased $78.3 million, or 10.8%, compared to the prior year, primarily due to higher volumes sold and higher unit margins. Gross margin for fiscal 2021 included a $43.1 million unrealized gain attributable to the mark-to-market adjustment for derivative instruments used in risk management activities, compared to a $0.4 million unrealized loss in the prior year. These non-cash adjustments were excluded from Adjusted EBITDA for both periods in the table below.
Combined operating and general and administrative expenses of $485.5 million for fiscal 2021 increased 3.8% compared to the prior year, primarily due to higher volume-related variable operating costs and higher variable compensation, partially offset by a decrease in accruals for self-insured liabilities and bad debt expense. Operating expenses for fiscal 2021 included a $4.3 million charge related to the Partnership’s voluntary full withdrawal from a multi-employer pension plan covering certain employees, which was excluded from Adjusted EBITDA.
During fiscal 2021, we utilized cash flows from operating activities to repay $87.6 million of debt. As a result of the combination of higher earnings and lower debt, our consolidated leverage ratio improved to 3.96x for the fiscal year ended September 25, 2021.
In addition to the improvement in earnings, we succeeded in accomplishing a number of significant goals in fiscal 2021 that will provide further support for our long-term strategic growth initiatives. The following highlights a few noteworthy accomplishments for fiscal 2021:
•
We strengthened our balance sheet by reducing debt by nearly $88 million with cash flows from operating activities;
•
We opportunistically refinanced a significant portion of our senior debt at lower interest rates -- extending weighted average debt maturities by 3.5 years and reducing annual interest expense by $7.0 million;
•
We enhanced returns to Unitholders with an 8.3% increase in the annualized distribution rate at the end of the third quarter of fiscal 2021;
•
We acquired and successfully integrated a well-run propane business in an attractive market on the east coast;
•
We made further advancements in our efforts to advocate for the clean burning attributes of propane, while also making additional strategic investments in new technologies that can contribute to lowering greenhouse gas emissions. More specifically, we made additional investments in our minority-owned subsidiary, Oberon Fuels (“Oberon”) (see Part IV, Note 4 of this Annual Report), which achieved several milestones toward our collective efforts to commercialize clean-burning, renewable dimethyl ether (“rDME”). In June 2021, Oberon began production of the first-ever rDME in the United States, and is believed to be the only current commercial producer of this molecule in the world. Additionally, Oberon, through a public-private partnership with Los Alamos National Laboratory, has secured funding from the U.S. Department of Energy to develop and scale-up steam reforming technology to produce renewable hydrogen from rDME;
•
We expanded our supply agreements to acquire renewable propane, produced entirely from renewal sources, such as waste fats and oils, to help meet customer demand for renewable energy solutions;
•
We extended our reach in certain strategic markets that were not previously served by our existing propane footprint;
•
We made further investments in new handheld technology for our drivers and service technicians to improve efficiency and enhance the customer experience; and
•
We partnered with a number of local organizations to provide donations and support to communities in multiple locations throughout our operating footprint as part of our SuburbanCares corporate pillar.
On October 21, 2021, we announced that our Board of Supervisors declared a quarterly distribution of $0.325 per Common Unit for the three months ended September 25, 2021. This quarterly distribution rate equates to an annualized rate of $1.30 per Common Unit. The distribution was paid on November 9, 2021 to Common Unitholders of record as of November 2, 2021.
As we look ahead to fiscal 2022, our anticipated cash requirements include: (i) maintenance and growth capital expenditures of approximately $35.0 million; (ii) approximately $61.3 million of interest and income tax payments; and (iii) approximately $81.9 million of distributions to Unitholders, based on the current annualized rate of $1.30 per Common Unit. Based on our liquidity position, which includes availability of funds under the revolving credit facility and expected cash flow from operating activities, we expect to have sufficient funds to meet our current and future obligations.
The unprecedented health crisis from the COVID-19 pandemic and the variants thereof continue to represent a complex uncertainty, which has had a profound overall impact on employment and the economy. While our business is considered an essential critical service, our business is not immune to the challenges presented by the dramatic economic slowdown instituted to mitigate the spread of the virus. The areas of our business that have been impacted by the economic slowdown included:
•
The temporary suspension of business operations by certain of our commercial and industrial customers has resulted in lower demand, principally during the second half of fiscal 2020 and the first quarter of fiscal 2021, from these customer markets;
•
In certain states, restrictions were placed on our business that would otherwise allow us to decline or refuse to service certain customers who have not or are unwilling to pay for product delivered or services rendered;
•
There may be potential disruptions in the propane, fuel oil, natural gas and electricity supply chains;
•
The potential for increasing costs to implement additional measures to help protect our employees, customers and local communities as state and federal governments provide and update guidance on workplace safety protocols; and
•
Employee recruiting and retention challenges given rising wages and related competitive pressures.
Although uncertainty remains regarding the long-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and businesses, we believe our efficient and flexible business model, as well as the recent steps taken to strengthen our balance sheet, leave us well positioned to manage our business through the crisis as it continues to unfold. Nonetheless, as we progress through fiscal 2022, there remains significant uncertainty regarding the scope and duration of governmental policies that have been, or may in the future be, instituted to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 and the variants thereof. We will continue to adapt to the changing circumstances and make decisions to help ensure the long-term sustainability of our businesses, and to be able to be opportunistic for strategic growth initiatives.
Fiscal Year 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year 2020
Revenues
As discussed above, average temperatures (as measured in heating degree days) across all of our service territories for fiscal 2021 were 10% warmer than normal and flat to the prior year. The weather during fiscal 2021 was characterized by widespread unseasonably warm temperatures during the first and third fiscal quarters, with sustained and widespread cooler temperatures throughout much of the second quarter. The cooler second quarter temperatures compared to the prior year were experienced throughout most of our operating territories, with cooler temperatures occurring during December 2020 through February 2021, which are the most critical months for heat-related demand. The cooler weather pattern during these critical months of the heating season, combined with improving economic conditions from the easing of restrictions on certain commercial and industrial businesses, contributed to an increase in customer demand and volumes sold.
Revenues from the distribution of propane and related activities of $1,140.5 million for fiscal 2021 increased $185.3 million, or 19.4%, compared to $955.1 million for the prior year, primarily due to higher average retail selling prices associated with a steady rise in wholesale costs and higher volumes sold. Average propane selling prices for fiscal 2021 increased 11.6% compared to the prior year, resulting in a $115.1 million increase in revenues. Retail propane gallons sold increased 16.9 million gallons, or 4.2%, to 419.8 million gallons, resulting in an increase in revenues of $40.1 million. Included within the propane segment are revenues from risk management activities of $30.5 million for fiscal 2021, which increased $30.1 million primarily due to a higher notional amount of hedging contracts used in risk management activities that were settled physically.
Revenues from the distribution of fuel oil and refined fuels of $67.1 million for fiscal 2021 decreased $7.9 million, or 10.6%, from $75.0 million for the prior year, primarily due to lower volumes sold and lower average selling prices. Fuel oil and refined fuels gallons sold decreased 2.0 million gallons, or 7.7%, resulting in a $5.7 million decrease in revenues. Average selling prices for fuel oil and refined fuels decreased 3.1%, resulting in a $2.2 million decrease in revenues.
Revenues in our natural gas and electricity segment decreased $0.8 million, or 2.4%, to $30.4 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $31.2 million in the prior year, mainly due to a reduction to the customer base resulting from regulatory actions taken by the New York State Public Utility Commission that pertain to this segment of our business (see Item 1).
Cost of Products Sold
The cost of products sold reported in the consolidated statements of operations represents the weighted average unit cost of propane, fuel oil and refined fuels, and natural gas and electricity sold, including transportation costs to deliver product from our supply points to storage or to our customer service centers. Cost of products sold also includes the cost of appliances and related parts sold or installed by our customer service centers computed on a basis that approximates the average cost of the products.
Given the retail nature of our operations, we maintain a certain level of priced physical inventory to help ensure that our field operations have adequate supply commensurate with the time of year. Our strategy has been, and will continue to be, to keep our physical inventory priced relatively close to market for our field operations. Consistent with past practices, we principally utilize futures and/or options contracts traded on the NYMEX to mitigate the price risk associated with our priced physical inventory. In addition, we sell propane and fuel oil to customers at fixed prices, and enter into derivative instruments to hedge a portion of our exposure to fluctuations in commodity prices as a result of selling the fixed price contracts. At expiration, the derivative contracts are settled by the delivery of the product to the respective party or are settled by the payment of a net amount equal to the difference between the then market price and the fixed contract price or option exercise price. Under this risk management strategy, realized gains or losses on futures or options contracts, which are reported in cost of products sold, will typically offset losses or gains on the physical inventory once the product is sold (which may or may not occur in the same accounting period). We do not use futures or options contracts, or other derivative instruments, for speculative trading purposes. Unrealized non-cash gains or losses from changes in the fair value of derivative instruments that are not designated as cash flow hedges are recorded within cost of products sold. Cost of products sold excludes depreciation and amortization; these amounts are reported separately within the consolidated statements of operations.
From a commodity perspective, wholesale propane prices trended steadily higher throughout the fiscal year. As of September 2021, propane inventory levels in the United States were 28.5% lower than at September 2020 and 19% below the 5-year average for September, as strong exports and domestic demand outpaced U.S. production. Overall, average posted propane prices (basis Mont Belvieu, Texas) and fuel oil prices during fiscal 2021 were 97.5% and 26.2% higher than the prior year, respectively. The net change in the fair value of derivative instruments during the fiscal year resulted in unrealized non-cash gains of $43.1 million and unrealized non-cash losses of $0.4 million reported in cost of products sold in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, resulting in a year-over-year decrease of $43.5 million in cost of products sold, all of which was reported in the propane segment.
Cost of products sold associated with the distribution of propane and related activities of $411.7 million for fiscal 2021 increased $106.0 million, or 34.7%, compared to the prior year, primarily due to higher wholesale costs and higher volumes sold, which resulted in increases in cost of products sold of $113.4 million and $12.4 million, respectively. Cost of products sold from risk management activities decreased $19.8 million compared to the prior year, primarily due to the $43.5 million difference in mark-to-market adjustments on derivative instruments discussed above, partially offset by a higher notional amount of hedging contracts that were settled physically.
Cost of products sold associated with our fuel oil and refined fuels segment of $41.2 million for fiscal 2021 decreased $5.1 million, or 11.0%, compared to the prior year, due to lower volumes sold and lower wholesale costs, which resulted in decreases in cost of products sold of $3.6 million and $1.5 million compared to the prior year, respectively.
Cost of products sold in our natural gas and electricity segment of $17.5 million for fiscal 2021 increased $0.2 million, or 1.4%, compared to the prior year, primarily due to higher wholesale costs, offset by lower usage.
Operating Expenses
All costs of operating our retail distribution and appliance sales and service operations are reported within operating expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. These operating expenses include the compensation and benefits of field and direct operating support personnel, costs of operating and maintaining our vehicle fleet, overhead and other costs of our purchasing, training and safety departments and other direct and indirect costs of operating our customer service centers.
Operating expenses of $411.4 million for fiscal 2021 increased $9.4 million, or 2.3%, compared to $402.0 million in the prior year, primarily due to higher payroll and benefit-related costs and higher variable volume-related operating costs, offset to an extent by decreases in accruals for self-insured liabilities and other legal matters, and lower bad debt expense.
General and Administrative Expenses
All costs of our back office support functions, including compensation and benefits for executives and other support functions, as well as other costs and expenses to maintain finance and accounting, treasury, legal, human resources, corporate development and the information systems functions are reported within general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations.
General and administrative expenses of $74.1 million for fiscal 2021 increased $8.2 million, or 12.4%, compared to $65.9 million in the prior year, primarily due to higher variable compensation expenses attributable to higher earnings, offset to an extent by lower professional services fees.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense of $104.6 million in fiscal 2021 decreased $12.2 million from $116.8 million in the prior year, primarily as a result of the conclusion of the amortization period for certain intangible assets from prior business acquisitions, coupled with lower levels of capital expenditures.
Interest Expense, net
Net interest expense of $68.1 million for fiscal 2021 decreased $6.6 million from $74.7 million in the prior year, primarily due to the impact of the refinancing of two tranches of senior notes at lower rates, a decrease in benchmark interest rates on outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit facility and a lower average level of outstanding borrowings under that facility. During fiscal
2021, we reduced total outstanding borrowings by $87.6 million with cash flows from operating activities. See Liquidity and Capital Resources below for additional discussion.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
During the third quarter of fiscal 2021, we repurchased, satisfied and discharged all of our previously outstanding $525.0 million in aggregate principal balance of 5.5% senior notes due June 1, 2024 (the “2024 Senior Notes”) and $250.0 million in aggregate principal balance of 5.75% senior notes due March 1, 2025 (the “2025 Senior Notes”) with net proceeds from the issuance of $650.0 million in aggregate principal balance of 5.0% senior notes due June 1, 2031 (the “2031 Senior Notes”) and borrowings under our senior secured revolving credit facility, as described and defined below, pursuant to a tender offer and redemption. In connection with this tender offer and redemption during the third quarter of fiscal 2021, we recognized a loss on the extinguishment of debt of $16.0 million, consisting of $11.5 million for the redemption premium and related fees, as well as the write-off of $4.5 million in unamortized debt origination costs.
In connection with the refinancing of our previous revolving credit facility during the second quarter of fiscal 2020, we recognized a non-cash charge of $0.1 million to write-off a portion of unamortized debt origination costs.
Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA
Net income for fiscal 2021 amounted to $122.8 million, or $1.96 per Common Unit, compared to $60.8 million, or $0.98 per Common Unit, in fiscal 2020. Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) for fiscal 2021 amounted to $296.6 million, compared to $252.1 million for fiscal 2020.
Net income and EBITDA for fiscal 2021 included (i) a $16.0 million loss on debt extinguishment; (ii) a $4.3 million charge resulting from the Partnership’s withdrawal from a multi-employer pension plan; (iii) a $1.0 million pension settlement charge; and (iv) a $0.9 million loss on our equity investment in an unconsolidated affiliate. Net income and EBITDA for fiscal 2020 included (i) a $1.1 million pension settlement charge and (ii) a loss on debt extinguishment of $0.1 million. Excluding the effects of these items, as well as the unrealized non-cash mark-to-market adjustments on derivative instruments in both years, Adjusted EBITDA amounted to $275.7 million for fiscal 2021, compared to Adjusted EBITDA of $253.7 million for fiscal 2020.
EBITDA represents net income before deducting interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA excluding the unrealized net gain or loss on mark-to-market activity for derivative instruments and other items, as applicable, as provided in the table below. Our management uses EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as supplemental measures of operating performance and we are including them because we believe that they provide our investors and industry analysts with additional information to evaluate our operating results. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not recognized terms under US GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to net income or net cash provided by operating activities determined in accordance with US GAAP. Because EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as determined by us excludes some, but not all, items that affect net income, they may not be comparable to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures used by other companies.
The following table sets forth our calculations of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA:
Fiscal Year 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year 2019
We are omitting from this section our discussion of the earliest of the three years of financials included in this Form 10-K. The discussion for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 26, 2020, which was filed with the SEC on November 25, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Analysis of Cash Flows
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2021 amounted to $226.6 million, an increase of $17.2 million compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily attributable to higher earnings (discussed above), offset to an extent by an increase in working capital compared to the prior year, which stemmed from the rise in average wholesale propane costs (discussed above).
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities of $34.1 million for fiscal 2021 consisted of capital expenditures of $29.9 million (including $15.4 million to support the growth of operations and $14.5 million for maintenance expenditures), $8.7 million used in the acquisition of a retail propane business and other investing activities involving Oberon Fuels, Inc. (“Oberon”) (see Part IV, Note 4 of this Annual Report in relation to these transactions), partially offset by $4.5 million in net proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities of $53.2 million for fiscal 2020 consisted of capital expenditures of $32.5 million (including $19.1 million to support the growth of operations and $13.4 million for maintenance expenditures), $25.6 million used in the acquisition of two retail propane businesses and to purchase a minority stake in Oberon, partially offset by $4.9 million in net proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment.
Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities for fiscal 2021 of $189.8 million reflected the quarterly distribution to Common Unitholders at a rate of $0.30 per Common Unit paid in respect of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, the first and second quarters of fiscal 2021 and the quarterly distribution at a rate of $0.325 per Common Unit paid in respect of the third quarter of fiscal 2021. Also reflected in financing activities for fiscal 2021 was proceeds of $650.0 million from the issuance of the 2031 Senior Notes which were used, along with borrowings of $125.0 million under the revolving credit facility, to repurchase, satisfy and discharge all of the previously outstanding 2024 Senior Notes and 2025 Senior Notes, with an aggregate par value of $775.0 million, as well as to pay tender premiums and other related fees of $11.3 million and debt issuance costs of $10.8 million, pursuant to a tender offer and redemption.
Net cash used in financing activities for fiscal 2020 of $155.4 million reflected the quarterly distribution to Common Unitholders at a rate of $0.60 per Common Unit paid in respect of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019 and the first two quarters of fiscal 2020, the quarterly distribution at a rate of $0.30 per Common Unit paid in respect of the third quarter of fiscal 2020, net repayments
of borrowings under the revolving credit facility of $18.9 million, $2.7 million of debt issuance costs associated with the credit agreement and other financing activities of $3.6 million.
Summary of Long-Term Debt Obligations and Revolving Credit Lines
As of September 25, 2021, our long-term debt consisted of $350.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.875% senior notes due March 1, 2027, $650.0 million of the 2031 Senior Notes and $132.0 million outstanding under our $500.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility (“Revolving Credit Facility”) provided by our credit agreement. See Part IV, Note 10 of this Annual Report.
The aggregate amounts of long-term debt maturities subsequent to September 25, 2021 are as follows: fiscal 2022: $-0-; fiscal 2023: $-0-; fiscal 2024: $-0-; fiscal 2025: $132.0 million; fiscal 2026: $-0-; and thereafter: $1,000.0 million.
Partnership Distributions
We are required to make distributions in an amount equal to all of our Available Cash, as defined in our Third Amended and Restated Partnership Agreement, as amended (the “Partnership Agreement”), no more than 45 days after the end of each fiscal quarter to holders of record on the applicable record dates. Available Cash, as defined in the Partnership Agreement, generally means all cash on hand at the end of the respective fiscal quarter, less the amount of cash reserves established by the Board of Supervisors in its reasonable discretion for future cash requirements. These reserves are retained for the proper conduct of our business, the payment of debt principal and interest and for distributions during the next four quarters. The Board of Supervisors reviews the level of Available Cash on a quarterly basis based upon information provided by management.
Pension Plan Assets and Obligations
We have a noncontributory defined benefit pension plan which was originally designed to cover all of our eligible employees who met certain requirements as to age and length of service. Effective January 1, 1998, we amended the defined benefit pension plan to provide benefits under a cash balance formula as compared to a final average pay formula which was in effect prior to January 1, 1998. Our defined benefit pension plan was frozen to new participants effective January 1, 2000 and, in furtherance of our effort to minimize future increases in our benefit obligations, effective January 1, 2003, all future service credits were eliminated. Therefore, eligible participants will receive interest credits only toward their ultimate defined benefit under the defined benefit pension plan. We made contribution payments to the defined benefit pension plan of $6.3 million, $3.8 million and $5.4 million in fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively. As of September 25, 2021 and September 26, 2020, the plan’s projected benefit obligation exceeded the fair value of plan assets by $25.2 million and $35.2 million, respectively. The net liability recognized in the consolidated financial statements for the defined benefit pension plan decreased by $10.0 million during fiscal 2021, which was primarily attributable to the contributions made during the year, as well as the increase in the discount rate used to measure the benefit obligation. During fiscal 2022, we expect to contribute approximately $3.3 million to the defined benefit pension plan.
Our investment policies and strategies, as set forth in the Investment Management Policy and Guidelines, are monitored by a Benefits Committee comprised of five members of management. The Benefits Committee employs a liability driven investment strategy, which seeks to increase the correlation of the plan’s assets and liabilities to reduce the volatility of the plan’s funded status. The execution of this strategy has resulted in an asset allocation that is largely comprised of fixed income securities. A liability driven investment strategy is intended to reduce investment risk and, over the long-term, generate returns on plan assets that largely fund the annual interest on the accumulated benefit obligation. For purposes of measuring the projected benefit obligation as of September 25, 2021 and September 26, 2020, we used a discount rate of 2.50% and 2.125%, respectively, reflecting current market rates for debt obligations of a similar duration to our pension obligations. With other assumptions held constant, an increase or decrease of 100 basis points in the discount rate would have an immaterial impact on net pension and postretirement benefit costs.
During fiscal 2021, lump sum pension settlement payments of $3.9 million exceeded the interest and service cost components of the net periodic pension cost of $2.3 million. As a result, we recorded a non-cash settlement charge of $1.0 million during fiscal 2021 in order to accelerate recognition of a portion of cumulative unamortized losses. Similarly, during fiscal 2020, lump sum pension settlement payments of $3.6 million exceeded the interest and service cost components of the net periodic pension cost of $2.7 million. As a result, we recorded a non-cash settlement charge of $1.1 million during fiscal 2020, also in order to accelerate recognition of a portion of cumulative unamortized losses. During fiscal 2019, the amount of the pension benefit obligation settled through lump sum payments did not exceed the settlement threshold (combined service and interest costs of the net periodic benefit cost); therefore, a settlement charge was not required to be recognized in that fiscal year. These unrecognized losses were previously accumulated as a reduction to partners’ capital and were being amortized to expense as part of our net periodic pension cost.
We also provide postretirement health care and life insurance benefits for certain retired employees. Partnership employees hired prior to July 1993 and who retired prior to March 1998 are eligible for postretirement health care and life insurance benefits if
they reached a specified retirement age while working for the Partnership. Effective March 31, 1998, we froze participation in its postretirement health care benefit plan, with no new retirees eligible to participate in the plan. All active employees who were eligible to receive health care benefits under the postretirement plan subsequent to March 1, 1998, were provided an increase to their accumulated benefits under the cash balance pension plan. Our postretirement health care and life insurance benefit plans are unfunded. Effective January 1, 2006, we changed our postretirement health care plan from a self-insured program to one that is fully insured under which we pay a portion of the insurance premium on behalf of the eligible participants.
Contractual and Other Obligations
The following table summarizes payments due under our known contractual and other obligations as of September 25, 2021:
(a)
Payments exclude costs associated with insurance, taxes and maintenance, which are not material to the operating lease obligations.
(b)
The timing of when payments are due for our self-insurance obligations is based on estimates that may differ from when actual payments are made. In addition, the payments do not reflect amounts to be recovered from our insurance providers, which amount to $3.7 million, $3.1 million, $2.6 million, $1.6 million, $0.7 million and $4.3 million for each of the next five fiscal years and thereafter, respectively, and are included in other assets on the consolidated balance sheet.
(c)
Amounts represent estimated minimum funding requirements for our pension plan.
(d)
These amounts are included in our consolidated balance sheet and primarily include payments for postretirement and incentive benefits as well as other contractual obligations.
Additionally, we have standby letters of credit in the aggregate amount of $56.9 million, in support of retention levels under our casualty insurance programs and certain lease obligations, which expire periodically through April 30, 2022.
Operating Leases
We lease certain property, plant and equipment for various periods under noncancelable operating leases, including 75% of our vehicle fleet, approximately 28% of our customer service centers and portions of our information systems equipment. Rental expense under operating leases was $37.8 million, $31.9 million and $31.3 million for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Future minimum rental commitments under noncancelable operating lease agreements as of September 25, 2021 are presented in the table above.
Guarantees
Certain of our operating leases, primarily those for transportation equipment with remaining lease periods scheduled to expire periodically through fiscal 2028, contain residual value guarantee provisions. Under those provisions, we guarantee that the fair value of the equipment will equal or exceed the guaranteed amount upon completion of the lease period, or we will pay the lessor the difference between fair value and the guaranteed amount. Although the fair value of equipment at the end of its lease term has historically exceeded the guaranteed amounts, the maximum potential amount of aggregate future payments we could be required to make under these leasing arrangements, assuming the equipment is deemed worthless at the end of the lease term, was approximately $29.4 million. The fair value of residual value guarantees for outstanding operating leases was de minimis as of September 25, 2021 and September 26, 2020.
Recently Issued/Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Part IV, Note 2 of this Annual Report.