ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On February 28, 2021, we entered into a Business Combination Agreement (the “Transaction Agreement”) by and among us, Merger Sub, Spire, and certain of Spire’s stockholders (the “Founders”). Merger Sub will be merged with and into Spire (the “Merger” and together with the other transactions contemplated by the Transaction Agreement, the “Transactions”), with Spire surviving the Merger. As a result of the Transactions, as further described below, it is expected that the equityholders of Spire, as of immediately prior to the Merger, will hold approximately 60.8% of the fully diluted outstanding equity interests of the Company.
At the effective time of the Merger (the “Effective Time”), by virtue of the Merger and without any action on the part of our, Merger Sub, Spire or the holders of any of Spire’s securities, each share of outstanding capital stock of Spire (the “Company Capital Stock”) will be canceled and converted into (i) the right to receive at Closing the number of shares of the Company Class A Common Stock (the “Company Class A Common Stock”) based on the pro rata portion applicable to such share of Company Capital Stock, of an aggregate purchase price of approximately $1.1 billion, and (ii) the contingent “earn-out” right to receive a pro rata portion of up to 8,000,000 shares of the Company Class A Common Stock in the aggregate based on the achievement of certain trading price targets following the Closing, which amount of “earn-out” shares will be adjusted based on a formula set forth in the Transaction Agreement to reflect a portion of the value of such “earn-out” shares allocated to holders of Company options assumed by the Company in the Merger.
The Transaction Agreement contains customary representations and warranties of the parties, thereto and the closing is subject to certain conditions as further described in the Transaction Agreement.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, and identifying a target for our Business Combination, activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of Spire. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from May 29, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,033,642, which consists of operating costs of $1,040,966, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $7,324.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On September 14, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 23,000,000 Units, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option of 3,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 6,600,000 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $6,600,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $230,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $13,056,945 in transaction costs, including $4,600,000 of underwriting fees, $8,050,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $406,945 of other costs.
For the period from May 29, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used by operating activities was $421,474. Net loss of $1,033,642 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $7,324 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $619,492 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $230,007,324. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay franchise and income taxes. During the period ended December 31, 2020, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $1,323,425 outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the initial stockholders or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender.
Liquidity and Going Concern
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our Sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. Our officers, directors and Sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through one year and one day from the date of issuance of these financial statements, the date that we will be required to cease all operations, except for the purpose of winding up, if a Business Combination is not consummated. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, administrative and support services to the Company.
We began incurring these fees on September 9, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $8,050,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be waived by the underwriter in the event that the Company does not complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, if any, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding for the period. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for and non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net loss less income attributable to Class A common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of shares of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.