Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A or in other parts of this report.
The following section generally discusses fiscal 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2021 and 2020. Discussions of fiscal 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, and are incorporated herein by reference.
Amounts reported in millions are rounded based on the amounts in thousands. As a result, the sum of the components reported in millions may not equal the total amount reported in millions due to rounding. In addition, percentages presented are calculated from the underlying numbers in thousands and may not add to their respective totals due to rounding.
Overview
Splunk provides innovative cloud and software offerings that deliver and operationalize insights from data generated by digital systems. This data is growing significantly as a direct result of the prevalence and importance of digital systems used by today’s organizations. Decades of investment in digital transformation have integrated the hardware and software that comprise digital systems into every aspect of how modern organizations operate. The data generated by these systems contains a comprehensive, real-time record of operations, interactions, and transactions that our offerings convert into insights that improve technology and business outcomes. Our solutions for Security, Information Technology (“IT”) Operations, and Observability empower users in technology roles, including application development, IT operations, and cyber security, to monitor and secure digital systems more quickly and efficiently. Business users leverage our offerings to gain visibility to their digital processes in order to deliver better experiences, improve decisions and drive better results in areas including supply chain, inbound and outbound logistics, manufacturing, sales, and service.
Our offerings provide visibility to our customers’ diverse technology infrastructure including systems deployed on the edge, on premises, and in private and public cloud environments, running software ranging from embedded through monolithic apps to cloud native ones. We also believe our offerings empower operational transformation, helping customers move from reactive, non-scalable and ineffective approaches to proactive, automated, and AI-assisted processes that drive better outcomes even as the scale and complexity of their infrastructures continue to grow.
The events of 2020 significantly increased the importance of being a digital, data-driven enterprise. The COVID-19 pandemic is exerting an enormous amount of pressure on organizations of all kinds to support new ways of working, to deliver better experiences and outcomes, and to enable entirely new offerings and business models. We believe that Splunk enables organizations to rise to these challenges by leveraging technology to achieve greater efficiency, agility, security, and drive a sustained competitive advantage.
We typically base our cloud services annual subscription fees on either the volume of data indexed per day including a fixed amount of data storage, or purchased infrastructure and data storage our customers require. We recognize the revenues associated with our cloud services ratably over the associated subscription term. For our software offerings, we typically base the license fees on either the estimated daily data indexing capacity or the compute power our customers require and we generally recognize the license fee portion of these arrangements upfront. As a result, the timing of when we enter into large license contracts may lead to fluctuations in our revenues and operating results because our expenses are largely fixed in the short-term.
Our revenue mix has shifted from sales of licenses to sales of cloud services and we expect it will continue to shift in favor of cloud services. Our transition to a predominantly cloud services delivery model has impacted, and it will continue to impact the timing of our recognition of revenue as an increasing percentage of our sales becomes recognized ratably, as well as impact our operating margins as cloud services become a larger percentage of our sales. Our shift to a subscription model has happened faster than we expected, and our ability to predict our revenue and margins in any particular period has been, and may continue to be, limited. We have also shifted from generally invoicing our multi-year contracts upfront to invoicing on an annual basis. Accordingly, we have seen the timing of our cash collections extend over a longer period of time with the transition to a subscription model than it has historically, and we expect this to negatively impact operating cash flows through at least fiscal 2022.
We intend to continue investing for long-term growth. We have invested and intend to continue to invest in product development to deliver additional features and performance enhancements, deployment models and solutions that can address new end markets. We expect to continue to expand our sales and marketing organizations to market and sell our software both in the United States and internationally.
We have utilized and expect to continue to utilize acquisitions to contribute to our long-term growth objectives. During fiscal 2021, we acquired companies that expand our observability capabilities, including companies that offer auto-instrumentation, real user monitoring, application performance monitoring, advanced synthetic monitoring, web optimization and network performance monitoring. Refer to Note 6 of our accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
In December 2019, COVID-19 was reported in China, in January 2020 the World Health Organization (“WHO”) declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern, and in March 2020 the WHO declared it a pandemic. This pandemic has had widespread, rapidly evolving, and unpredictable impacts on global economies, financial markets and business practices, and we anticipate governments and businesses will continue to take additional actions or extend existing actions to respond to the ongoing risks of the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic has impacted, and could further impact, our business and that of our customers as a result of quarantines, various local, state and federal government public health orders, and other restrictions. For example, we temporarily closed the majority of our global offices, required most of our employees to work remotely, implemented travel restrictions, and shifted certain of our customer-focused and corporate events to online-only experiences. Macroeconomic uncertainties resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic have also caused some of our customers to delay spending commitments, particularly for certain high-dollar and long-term contracts. The long-term impact of COVID-19 on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration, spread, severity and potential recurrence of the virus. Our future performance will also depend on the impact of COVID-19 on our customers, partners, employee productivity and sales cycles, including as a result of travel restrictions. These potential developments are uncertain and cannot be predicted and as such, the extent to which COVID-19 will impact our business, operations, financial condition and results of operations over the long term is unknown. If we experience an increase in curtailed customer demand, reduced customer spend or contract duration, delayed collections, lengthened payment terms, lengthened sales cycles or competition due to changes in terms and conditions and pricing of our competitors’ products and services, our business, results of operations and overall financial performance in future periods could be materially adversely affected. Furthermore, due to our shift to a subscription model, the effect of COVID-19 may not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods. For additional discussion of the potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operating results and financial condition, refer to “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Key Business Metrics
We use certain key financial and operating metrics to evaluate our performance and monitor the growth of our recurring revenue as we continue to shift to a subscription model.
Annual Recurring Revenue
We use total annual recurring revenue (“Total ARR”) and cloud annual recurring revenue (“Cloud ARR”) to identify the annual recurring value of customer contracts at the end of a reporting period and to monitor the growth of our recurring business as we continue to shift to a subscription model. Total ARR represents the annualized revenue run-rate of active subscription, term license and maintenance contracts at the end of a reporting period. Cloud ARR represents the annualized revenue run-rate of active subscription contracts at the end of a reporting period. Each contract is annualized by dividing the contract value by the number of days in the contract term and then multiplying by 365. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue, and does not represent our revenue under U.S. GAAP on an annualized basis, as it is an operating metric that can be impacted by contract start and end dates and renewal rates. ARR is not intended to be a replacement or forecasts of revenue.
The following presents our Cloud ARR and Total ARR (in millions):
Number of Customers with Total ARR Greater than $1 Million
We monitor the total number of customers with Total ARR greater than $1 million at the end of a reporting period. An increase in this metric is an indicator of our ability to attract and scale with large enterprise customers who may have a more broad array of use cases that align with the Splunk Platform. The following presents our number of customers with Total ARR greater than $1 million:
Dollar-Based Net Retention Rate
We quantify our net expansion across existing cloud customers through our cloud dollar-based net retention rate (“Cloud DBNRR”). We calculate Cloud DBNRR by dividing the Total ARR from our cloud customer base at the end of a period (“Cloud Current Period ARR”) by the ARR of the same group of customers at the beginning of that 12-month period. Cloud Current Period ARR includes existing customer renewals and expansion, is net of existing customer contraction and churn, and excludes new customers. For the trailing 12-month Cloud DBNRR, we take the dollar-weighted average of the Cloud DBNRR over the trailing 12 months. The following presents our trailing 12-month Cloud DBNRR:
Financial Summary
(Dollars in millions)
_________________________
* Refer to Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Reconciliations below for further information.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Reconciliations
To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (GAAP), we provide investors with the following non-GAAP financial measures: cloud services, cost of revenues, cloud services gross margin, cost of revenues, gross margin, research and development expense, sales and marketing expense, general and administrative expense, operating income (loss), operating margin, income tax provision (benefit), net income (loss), net income (loss) per share and free cash flow (collectively the “non-GAAP financial measures”). These non-GAAP financial measures exclude all or a combination of the following (as reflected in the following reconciliation tables): expenses related to stock-based compensation and related employer payroll tax, amortization of intangible assets, restructuring and facility exit charges, acquisition-related adjustments, capitalized software development costs, a legal settlement charge, non-cash interest expense related to convertible senior notes, a gain on extinguishment of convertible senior notes and a strategic investment impairment. The non-GAAP financial measures are also adjusted for our estimated tax rate on non-GAAP income (loss). To determine the estimated non-GAAP tax rate, we evaluate financial projections based on our non-GAAP results and the tax effect of those projections. The estimated non-GAAP tax rate takes into account many factors including our operating structure and tax positions. The non-GAAP tax rate applied for fiscal 2021 was 20%. The applicable fiscal 2020 tax rates are noted in the reconciliations. In addition, our non-GAAP financial measures include free cash flow, which represents operating cash flow less purchases of property and equipment. We consider free cash flow to be a liquidity measure that provides useful information to management and investors about the amount of cash generated or used by the business.
We exclude stock-based compensation expense because it is non-cash in nature and excluding this expense provides meaningful supplemental information regarding our operational performance and allows investors the ability to make more meaningful comparisons between our operating results and those of other companies. We exclude employer payroll tax expense related to employee stock plans in order for investors to see the full effect that excluding that stock-based compensation expense had on our operating results. These expenses are tied to the exercise or vesting of underlying equity awards and the price of our common stock at the time of vesting or exercise, which may vary from period to period independent of the operating performance of our business. We also exclude amortization of intangible assets, restructuring and facility exit charges, acquisition-related adjustments, capitalized software development costs, a legal settlement charge, non-cash interest expense related to convertible senior notes, a gain on extinguishment of convertible senior notes and a strategic investment impairment from our non-GAAP financial measures because these adjustments are considered by management to be outside of our core operating results.
There are limitations in using non-GAAP financial measures because the non-GAAP financial measures are not prepared in accordance with GAAP, may be different from non-GAAP financial measures used by our competitors and exclude expenses that may have a material impact upon our reported financial results. Further, stock-based compensation expense has been and will continue to be for the foreseeable future a significant recurring expense in our business and an important part of the compensation provided to our employees. The presentation of the non-GAAP financial measures is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. We use these non-GAAP financial measures for financial and operational decision-making purposes and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information about our operating results, enhance the overall understanding of past financial performance and future prospects and allow for greater transparency with respect to key metrics used by management in our financial and operational decision making. In addition, these non-GAAP financial measures facilitate comparisons to competitors’ operating results. The non-GAAP financial measures are meant to supplement and be viewed in conjunction with GAAP financial measures.
The following table reconciles our net cash used in operating activities to free cash flow:
The following table reconciles our GAAP to non-GAAP financial measures for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021:
_________________________
(1) Calculated based on 159,744 weighted-average shares of common stock.
(2) Includes a $0.5 million loss on disposal of property, plant and equipment.
(3) Includes non-cash interest expense of $99.0 million and a $7.0 million non-recurring gain on extinguishment of convertible senior notes.
(4) Represents the income tax adjustment using our estimated non-GAAP tax rate of 20%.
The following table reconciles our GAAP to non-GAAP financial measures for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020:
_________________________
(1) GAAP net loss per share calculated based on 151,949 weighted-average shares of common stock. Non-GAAP net income per share calculated based on 157,815 diluted weighted-average shares of common stock, which includes 5,866 potentially dilutive shares related to employee stock awards. GAAP to non-GAAP net income (loss) per share is not reconciled due to the difference in the number of shares used to calculate basic and diluted weighted-average shares of common stock.
(2) Represents the income tax adjustment using our estimated non-GAAP tax rate of 20%.
Components of Operating Results
Revenues
License revenues. License revenues consist of revenues from term licenses, and to a much lesser extent perpetual licenses, under which we generally recognize the license fee portion of the arrangement upfront, assuming all revenue recognition criteria are satisfied. License revenues reflect the revenues recognized from sales of licenses to new customers and additional licenses to existing customers, including sales from the renewal of term licenses. In addition, seasonal trends that contribute to increased sales activity in the fourth fiscal quarter often result in lower sequential revenues in the first fiscal quarter, and we expect this trend to continue.
Cloud services revenues. Cloud services allow customers to use hosted software over the contract period without taking possession of the software. We recognize the revenues associated with our cloud services ratably, over the associated subscription term.
“Cloud services” revenues have been reclassified from “Maintenance and services” revenues on our consolidated statements of operations. We believe this presentation provides a more meaningful representation of the nature of our revenue. This reclassification had no impact on our previously reported total revenues.
Maintenance and services revenues. Maintenance and services revenues consist of revenues from maintenance agreements and professional services and training.
•Maintenance revenues. When a term license is purchased, maintenance is bundled with the license for the term of the license period. Typically, when purchasing a perpetual license, a customer also purchases one year of maintenance for which we charge a percentage of the license fee. Customers with maintenance agreements are entitled to receive support and unspecified upgrades and enhancements when and if they become available during the maintenance period. We recognize the revenues associated with maintenance agreements ratably, on a straight-line basis, over the associated maintenance period. Maintenance revenues as a percentage of total revenues were 21.4% and 20.9% for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively.
•Professional services and training revenues. We have a professional services organization focused on helping our customers deploy our software in highly complex operational environments and train their personnel. Training and professional services have stated billing rates per service hour or are provided on a subscription basis, accordingly, revenues are recognized as services are delivered or ratably over the subscription period. We have experienced continued growth in our professional services revenues primarily due to the deployment of our software with some customers that have large, highly complex IT environments.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of license revenues. Cost of license revenues includes all direct costs to deliver our products, including salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and related expenses such as employer taxes, allocated overhead for facilities and IT and amortization of acquired intangible assets. We recognize these expenses as they are incurred.
Cost of cloud services revenues. Cost of cloud services revenues includes salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and related expenses such as employer taxes for our cloud services organization, allocated overhead for depreciation of equipment, facilities and IT, amortization of acquired intangible assets and third-party hosting fees. We recognize expenses related to our cloud services organizations as they are incurred.
Cost of maintenance and services revenues. Cost of maintenance and services revenues includes salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and related expenses such as employer taxes for our maintenance and services organizations, third-party consulting services and allocated overhead for depreciation of equipment, facilities and IT. We recognize expenses related to our maintenance and services organizations as they are incurred.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses are classified into three categories: research and development, sales and marketing and general and administrative. For each category, the largest component is personnel costs, which include salaries, employee benefit costs, bonuses, commissions as applicable, stock-based compensation and related expenses such as employer taxes. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead costs for depreciation of equipment, facilities and IT. Allocated costs for facilities include costs for compensation of our facilities personnel, leasehold improvements and rent. Our allocated costs for IT include costs for compensation of our IT personnel, costs associated with our IT infrastructure and software subscriptions. Operating expenses are generally recognized as incurred.
Research and development. Research and development expenses primarily consist of personnel and facility-related costs attributable to our research and development personnel. We have devoted our product development efforts primarily to enhancing the functionality and expanding the capabilities of our software and services. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase, in absolute dollars, as we increase our research and development headcount to further strengthen and enhance our software and services and invest in the development of our solutions and apps.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of personnel and facility-related costs for our sales, marketing and business development personnel, commissions earned by our sales personnel, and the cost of marketing and business development programs, including advertising programs to promote our brand and awareness, demand generating activities and customer events. We expect that sales and marketing expenses will continue to increase, in absolute dollars, as we continue to hire additional personnel and invest in marketing programs.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel and facility-related costs for our executive, finance, legal, human resources and administrative personnel; our legal, accounting and other professional services fees; and other corporate expenses. We anticipate continuing to incur additional expenses due to growing our operations, including higher legal, corporate insurance and accounting-related expenses.
Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest and other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest expense related to our convertible senior notes, gain on extinguishment of convertible senior notes, a strategic investment impairment loss, foreign exchange gains and losses, interest income on our investments and cash and cash equivalents balances and changes in the fair value of forward exchange contracts.
Income Tax Provision (Benefit)
The income tax provision (benefit) consists of federal, state and foreign income taxes. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which we expect the differences to reverse. To the extent that we believe any amounts are not more-likely-than-not to be realized, we record a valuation allowance to reduce the deferred income tax assets. Because of our history of U.S. net operating losses, we have established a full valuation allowance against potential future benefits for U.S. deferred tax assets. We regularly assess the need for the valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets, and to the extent that we determine that an adjustment is needed, such adjustment will be recorded in the period that the determination is made.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with revenue recognition, deferred sales commissions and business combinations have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates. Accordingly, we believe these are the most critical to fully understand and evaluate our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
Our contracts with customers often contain multiple performance obligations. For these contracts, we account for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. We apply significant judgment in identifying and accounting for each performance obligation, as a result of evaluating the terms and conditions in contracts. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price (“SSP”) basis. We determine the SSP based on an observable standalone selling price when it is available, as well as other factors, including the price charged to customers, our discounting practices, and our overall pricing objectives, while maximizing observable inputs. In situations where pricing is highly variable, we estimate the SSP using the residual approach.
Deferred Sales Commissions
Sales commissions paid to our sales force and the related payroll taxes are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. We generally amortize these costs over the remaining contractual term of our customer contracts, consistent with the pattern of revenue recognition of each performance obligation, for contracts in which the commissions paid on the initial and renewal contracts are commensurate. For certain contracts in which the commissions paid on the initial and renewal contracts are not commensurate, we amortize the commissions paid on the initial contract over an expected period of benefit, which we have determined to be approximately five years. We have determined the period of benefit by taking into consideration our customer contracts, the duration of our relationships with our customers and our technology. In capitalizing and amortizing deferred commissions, we have elected to apply a portfolio approach.
Business Combinations
We use our best estimates and assumptions to allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. We apply significant judgment in determining the fair value of the intangible assets acquired, which involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions with respect to revenue growth rates, royalty rate and technology migration curve. While we use our best estimates and judgments, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances are initially established in connection with a business combination as of the acquisition date. We continue to collect information and reevaluate these estimates and assumptions quarterly and record any adjustments to our preliminary estimates to goodwill provided that we are within the measurement period. Upon the conclusion of the final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed during the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are included in our consolidated statements of operations.
For further information on all of our significant accounting policies, refer to Note 1 of our accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of our total revenues for those periods. The period-to-period comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of financial results to be achieved in future periods.
Consolidated Statements of Operations Data
_________________________
(1)Calculated as a percentage of the associated revenues.
Comparison of the Fiscal Years Ended January 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
(Dollars in millions)
Fiscal 2021 - 2020
Total revenues decreased $129.5 million, or (5.5)%, primarily due to the following:
- decrease of $402.0 million, or (29.3)%, in license revenues
+ increase of $241.7 million, or 77.4%, in cloud services revenues
+ increase of $30.7 million, or 4.6%, in maintenance and services revenues
Our transition to a subscription model has impacted, and it will continue to impact the timing of our recognition of revenue as an increasing percentage of our sales becomes recognized ratably. As a result, total revenues decreased primarily due to a decrease in license revenues from our ongoing subscription model transition. License revenues also decreased as a result of lower average term license contract duration. The decrease in license revenues was partially offset by an increase in cloud services revenues. Our customers are increasingly purchasing our Splunk Cloud service as it delivers the benefits of Splunk Enterprise, while eliminating the need to purchase, deploy and manage infrastructure. The increase in maintenance and services revenues was primarily due to an increase in professional services and training revenues, partially offset by a decrease in maintenance revenues.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
(Dollars in millions)
Fiscal 2021 - 2020
Total cost of revenues increased $117.5 million or 27.3% primarily due to the increase in cloud services cost of revenues, as a result of our ongoing transition from a license to cloud subscription model.
Cloud services cost of revenues increased $90.8 million or 56.2%, primarily due to the following:
+ increase of $48.1 million in third-party hosting fees to support our cloud services
+ increase of $17.5 million in salaries and benefits, including stock-based compensation expense as we increased headcount
+ increase of $13.8 million in intangible asset amortization related to our acquisitions
+ increase of $4.9 million in overhead expenses, primarily due to facility-related costs
Maintenance and services cost of revenues increased $30.0 million, or 12.3%, primarily due to the following:
+ increase of $27.2 million in salaries and benefits, including stock-based compensation expense as we increased headcount
+ increase of $7.8 million in overhead expenses, primarily due to facility-related costs
- decrease of $9.3 million in travel-related expenses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions
Total gross margin decreased primarily due to a shift in the overall revenue mix in favor of cloud services, which have lower gross margins than our on-premises license business.
Operating Expenses
(Dollars in millions)
Research and Development Expense
Fiscal 2021 - 2020
Research and development expense increased $171.2 million, or 27.6%, primarily due to the following:
+ increase of $149.1 million in salaries and benefits, which includes a $85.9 million increase in stock-based compensation expense primarily due to our acquisitions of SignalFx and Omnition
+ increase of $12.6 million in overhead expenses, primarily due to facility-related costs
+ increase of $14.2 million in third-party hosting fees to support our product development efforts
- decrease of $7.3 million in travel-related expenses and employee meals as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
Sales and Marketing Expense
Fiscal 2021 - 2020
Sales and marketing expense increased $72.2 million, or 5.7%, primarily due to the following:
+ increase of $87.3 million in salaries and benefits, which is net of a decrease in stock-based compensation expense due to an executive departure and the modification of our fiscal 2021 PSU awards
+ increase of $25.5 million in overhead expenses, primarily due to facility-related costs
+ increase of $6.5 million in third-party hosting fees to support our sales and marketing efforts
- decrease of $49.7 million in travel-related expenses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions
General and Administrative Expense
Fiscal 2021 - 2020
General and administrative expense increased $2.5 million, or 0.8%, primarily due to the following:
+ increase of $21.9 million in overhead expenses, primarily due to higher facility-related costs
+ increase of $1.6 million in salaries and benefits, which includes a decrease of $6.7 million in stock-based compensation expense, primarily from the modification of our fiscal 2021 PSU awards
- decrease of $7.9 million in third-party consulting services, primarily due to increased spending in fiscal 2020 on larger acquisitions as compared to fiscal 2021
- decrease of $4.9 million in travel-related expenses and employee meals as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
- decrease of $4.4 million in employment-related expenses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
Interest and Other Income (Expense), net
Fiscal 2021 - 2020
Interest and other income (expense), net reflects a net increase in expense of $76.3 million, primarily due to the following:
+ a decrease in interest income from our investments, a large portion of which matured during fiscal 2021
+ an increase in interest expense related to the issuance of convertible senior notes in June 2020
+ an increase in foreign exchange transaction losses
+ the impairment of a strategic investment during fiscal 2021
- a gain on extinguishment of convertible senior notes
Income Tax Provision
Fiscal 2021 - 2020
Income tax provision increased $1.9 million, primarily due to a decrease in tax benefit upon the release of valuation allowance as a result of our acquisitions.
Seasonality, Cyclicality and Quarterly Trends
Our quarterly results reflect seasonality in the sale of our offerings. Historically, a pattern of increased license sales in the fourth fiscal quarter as a result of industry buying patterns has positively impacted sales activity in that period, which can result in lower sequential revenue in the first fiscal quarter. We expect some of this seasonality to continue in fiscal 2022 and beyond as license sales activity continues, however we expect the impact of this seasonality to decrease over time as a higher percentage of our revenues come from cloud services. As we continue to expect seasonally higher bookings and billings in the fiscal fourth quarter, with more of our revenue being recognized ratably there will also be a seasonal impact on our remaining performance obligations and deferred revenue. Our gross margins and operating losses have been affected by these historical trends because the majority of our expenses are relatively fixed in the short term. The timing of revenues in relation to our expenses, much of which does not vary directly with revenues, has an impact on the cost of revenues, research and development expense, sales and marketing expense and general and administrative expense as a percentage of revenues in each fiscal quarter during the year. The majority of our expenses are personnel-related and include salaries, stock-based compensation, benefits and incentive-based compensation plan expenses. As a result, we have not experienced significant seasonal fluctuations in the timing of expenses from period to period. Although these seasonal factors are common in the technology industry, historical patterns should not be considered a reliable indicator of our future sales activity or performance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
(In millions)
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents, investments and net accounts receivable. As of January 31, 2021, we had $1.87 billion of cash, cash equivalents and investments of which $227.4 million was held by foreign subsidiaries. We believe that these funds will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next 12 months.
We intend to continue to focus our capital expenditures in fiscal 2022 to support the growth in our operations, including acquisition-related activities. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced software and services offerings, the investments in our office facilities and our systems infrastructure, the continuing market acceptance of our offerings and our planned investments, particularly in our product development efforts or acquisitions of complementary businesses, applications or technologies.
Beginning in fiscal 2020, we shifted from generally invoicing our multi-year contracts upfront to invoicing on an annual basis. Accordingly, we have seen the timing of our cash collections extend over a longer period of time than it has been historically, and expect this to negatively impact operating cash flows through at least fiscal 2022.
In June 2020, we issued $1.27 billion aggregate principal amount of 1.125% Convertible Senior Notes due 2027 (the “2027 Notes”), including the exercise in full by the initial purchasers of the 2027 Notes of their option to purchase an additional
$165.0 million principal amount of 2027 Notes. The 2027 Notes are general senior, unsecured obligations of Splunk. The total proceeds from the issuance of the 2027 Notes was $1.25 billion, net of initial purchaser discounts and other issuance costs. In connection with the issuance of the 2027 Notes, we entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions with certain counterparties (the “2027 Capped Calls”). We used approximately $137.4 million of the net proceeds from the offering of the 2027 Notes to pay the cost of the 2027 Capped Calls and $691.6 million to repurchase for cash approximately $488.3 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 2023 Notes. In September 2018, we issued $1.27 billion aggregate principal amount of 0.50% Convertible Senior Notes due 2023 (the “2023 Notes”) and $862.5 million aggregate principal amount of 1.125% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025 (the “2025 Notes”). In connection with the issuance of the 2023 Notes and the 2025 Notes, we entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions with certain counterparties (the “2023 and 2025 Capped Calls”). The premiums paid for the purchase of the 2023 and 2025 Capped Calls were $274.3 million. Refer to Note 7 “Convertible Senior Notes” of our accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on 10-K.
In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us, if at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected.
Operating Activities
Operating activities consist of our net loss adjusted for certain non-cash items and changes in operating assets and liabilities during the year.
Fiscal 2021 - 2020
Net cash used in operating activities was $190.9 million for the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to $287.6 million for the prior year. The decrease in net cash used in operating activities was primarily due to an increase in cash collections from customers, partially offset by higher cash expenditures during fiscal 2021 and the repurchase of convertible senior notes attributable to the accreted interest related to debt discount. The decrease in travel-related expenses during fiscal 2021 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions also contributed to the decrease in net cash used in operating activities.
Investing Activities
Fiscal 2021 - 2020
Net cash provided by investing activities was $797.2 million for the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to net cash used in investing activities of $708.0 million for the prior year. The change in net activity was primarily due to the following:
+ $908.7 million maturities of investments, net of purchases, in marketable debt securities in fiscal 2021 compared to $5.5 million in net purchases of investments in marketable debt securities in fiscal 2020
+ decrease of $538.5 million in cash purchase price paid, net of cash acquired, from our fiscal 2020 acquisitions of SignalFx and Omnition
+ decrease of $64.0 million in purchases of property and equipment due to higher leasehold improvement spend in fiscal 2020 related to new office space
Financing Activities
Fiscal 2021 - 2020
Net cash provided by financing activities was $382.9 million for the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to net cash used in financing activities of $100.2 million for the prior year. The change in net activity was primarily due to the following:
+ issuance of $1.25 billion related to the issuance of the 2027 Notes, net of initial purchase discounts and issuance costs
+ decrease of $23.4 million in taxes paid related to net share settlement of equity awards
The increase in net cash provided by financing activities was partially offset by the payment of approximately $668.9 million to repurchase for cash approximately $488.3 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 2023 Notes, as well as by the use of approximately $137.4 million of the net proceeds from the offering of the 2027 Notes to pay the cost of the 2027 Capped Calls.
Contractual Obligations
Operating Lease Commitments and Contractual Obligations
We lease our office spaces under non-cancelable leases. Refer to Note 4 “Leases” of our accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details related to our accounting for leases and related costs.
Purchase obligations are contractual obligations for purchase of goods or services and are defined as agreements that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum, or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction.
The following summarizes our convertible senior notes, operating lease commitments and significant purchase obligations as of January 31, 2021:
_________________________
(1) Total future payments related to our Convertible Senior Notes due 2023 includes $776.7 million principal amount and future interest payments of $11.6 million. Total future payments related to our Convertible Senior Notes due 2025 includes $862.5 million principal amount and future interest payments of $48.5 million. Total future payments related to our Convertible Senior Notes due 2027 includes $1.27 billion principal amount and future interest payments of $92.5 million. For more information on our convertible senior notes, refer to Note 7 “Convertible Senior Notes” of our accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) We have entered into sublease agreements for portions of our office space and the future rental income of $3.4 million from these agreements has been included as an offset to our future minimum rental payments.
(3) Purchase obligations relate primarily to IT and product infrastructure costs, enterprise subscription agreements, and sales and marketing costs.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated organizations or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities that have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Indemnification Arrangements
During the ordinary course of business, we may indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse for losses suffered or incurred, our customers, vendors and each of their affiliates for certain intellectual property infringement and other claims by third parties with respect to our offerings, in connection with our commercial license arrangements or related to general business dealings with those parties.
As permitted under Delaware law, we have entered into indemnification agreements with our officers, directors, and certain employees, indemnifying them for certain events or occurrences while they serve as our officers or directors or those of our direct and indirect subsidiaries.
Claims and reimbursements under indemnification arrangements have not been material to our consolidated financial statements; therefore, there is no accrual of such amounts at January 31, 2021. We are unable to estimate the maximum potential impact of these indemnifications on our future results of operations.