Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto that are available elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following is a discussion and analysis of SPLP's consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31,
2020 and 2019. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors. All monetary amounts used in this discussion are in thousands, except common and preferred units, per common and preferred unit, and per share data..
Restatement for Correction of Immaterial Errors in Previously Issued Consolidated Financial Statements
In connection with the preparation of the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company identified errors in its previously filed annual consolidated financial statements and unaudited quarterly consolidated financial statements. The errors were not material to any individual prior quarterly or annual period. The prior period errors are related primarily to a division of the Company's Electrical Products business within the Diversified Industrial segment.
The Company assessed the materiality of the errors in its historical annual consolidated financial statements in accordance with SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin ("SAB") Topic 1.M, Materiality, codified in Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 250, Accounting Changes and Error Corrections, and concluded that the errors were not material to the previously filed annual consolidated financial statements or corresponding unaudited interim periods but would be material in the aggregate if corrected solely in its consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020. In accordance with ASC 250 (SAB Topic 1.N, Considering the Effects of Prior Year Misstatements when Quantifying Misstatements in Current Year Financial Statements), the Company has corrected for these errors by revising previously filed 2019 annual consolidated financial statements in connection with the filing of this 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K. The revised annual consolidated financial statements also include adjustments to correct certain other immaterial errors, including errors that had previously been adjusted for as out of period corrections in the period identified. Refer to Note 25 - "Restatement of Previously Issued Consolidated Financial Statements" for reconciliations between as reported and as restated annual amounts. Accordingly, this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations reflects the impact of those restatements.
Business Segments
SPLP operates through the following segments: Diversified Industrial, Energy and Financial Services, which are managed separately and offer different products and services. Corporate and Other consists of several consolidated subsidiaries, including Steel Services, equity method and other investments, and cash and cash equivalents. Its income or loss includes certain unallocated general corporate expenses. For a more complete description of the Company's segments, see Part I, Item 1, "Business - Products and Product Mix" found elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Significant Developments
Following is a summary of significant developments that have impacted the Company in 2020 and early 2021. For additional discussion of these matters, please see the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Report.
COVID-19 Impact
In March 2020, the World Health Organization categorized COVID-19 as a pandemic, and the President of the U.S. declared the COVID-19 outbreak a national emergency. The spread of the outbreak has caused significant disruptions in the U.S. and global economies, and economists expect the impact will be significant during the remainder of 2021 and potentially beyond. The Company is subject to risks and uncertainties as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company continues to evaluate the global risks and the slowdown in business activity related to COVID-19, including the potential impacts on its employees, customers, suppliers and financial results. As the situation surrounding COVID-19 continues to remain fluid, it is expected to continue having a negative impact to the Company; however, it is difficult to predict the duration of the pandemic and its continued impact on the Company's business, operations, financial condition and cash flows. There is no certainty that federal, state or local regulations regarding safety measures to address the spread of COVID-19 will not adversely impact the Company's operations. As of the filing of this Form 10-K, all of the Company's facilities were open and able to operate at normal capacities. Additionally, as the COVID-19 pandemic progressed, the Company initiated cost reduction actions, including the reduction and waiver of management and board fees, hiring freezes, employee furloughs, staffing and force reductions, salary reductions, bonus payment deferrals and 401(k) match suspension to help mitigate the financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company also froze all discretionary spend, implemented strict approvals for capital expenditures and aggressively managed working capital. Many of those prior actions, such as reduction and waiver of management and board fees, employee furloughs, salary reductions and 401(k) match suspensions have ceased and certain of the salary reductions and
management and board payment deferrals have been repaid. The Company continues to evaluate the overall impact of COVID-19 and may take further or continued actions as circumstances warrant.
The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected our consolidated financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company anticipates COVID-19 may continue to have an adverse impact on our business through 2021 and potentially beyond. While the Company developed and implemented, and continues to develop and implement, health and safety protocols, business continuity plans and crisis management protocols in an effort to try to mitigate the negative impact of COVID-19 to its employees and business, the severity of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company's business in 2021 and beyond will depend on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the duration and severity of the pandemic, governmental actions that have been taken, or may be taken in the future, in response to the pandemic, and the extent and severity of the impact on the Company's customers and suppliers, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. The Company's future results of operations and liquidity could be adversely impacted by delays in payments of outstanding receivable amounts beyond normal payment terms, supply chain disruptions and uncertain demand, and the impact of any initiatives or programs that the Company may undertake to address financial and operations challenges faced by its customers. As of the date of filing of this Form 10-K, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may materially impact the Company's financial condition, liquidity or results of operations is uncertain.
Investments
Following is a summary of the recent transactions involving the Company's investments:
•Steel Connect - On November 19, 2020, the Board of Directors of the Company sent a letter to Steel Connect setting forth a non-binding expression of interest to acquire all of the outstanding shares of Steel Connect common stock, par value $0.01 per share, not already owned by the Company and its subsidiaries. The letter is only a proposal, which does not constitute an offer or proposal capable of acceptance and may be withdrawn at any time and in any manner. There can be no assurance that any definitive offer will be made, that any agreement will be executed or that the transaction proposed in the letter or any other transaction will be approved or completed. The Company is not obligated to disclose any further developments or updates on the progress of the proposed transaction until either the Company enters into a definitive agreement or determines no such transaction will be approved.
•Aerojet - As of December 31, 2020, the Company owned 5.1% of Aerojet Rocketdyne Holdings, Inc. ("Aerojet") common stock with a fair value of $208,758. On December 20, 2020, Aerojet entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger with Lockheed Martin Corporation ("Lockheed"), in which Aerojet would be acquired by Lockheed. Pursuant to terms of the merger, each share of common stock outstanding as of immediately prior to the effective time of the merger will be automatically converted into the right to receive cash in an amount equal to $56.00 per share, without interest, less, to the extent paid or payable as outlined below, the amount per share of the Pre-Closing Dividend (defined below). On December 19, 2020, Aerojet's Board of Directors declared a one-time cash dividend of $5.00 per share (the "Pre-Closing Dividend") which was paid on March 24, 2021 to the holders of Aerojet's shares as of the close of business on March 10, 2021. The $56.00 per share price under the merger agreement is expected to be reduced to $51.00 after the pre-closing payment of the Pre-Closing Dividend to the company's stockholders.
•Aviat - In January and February of 2021, the Company sold its remaining ownership interest in Aviat Network, Inc. ("Aviat") for total proceeds of approximately $24,100.
Acquisitions, Divestitures and Discontinued Operations
•Edge Divestiture - On January 31, 2021, the Company completed the sale of its Edge business for a sales price of $16,000, subject to a working capital adjustment. Edge provided roofing edge metal products and was part of the Company's OMG, Inc. ("OMG") business in the Diversified Industrial segment.
•API Discontinued Operations - On January 31, 2020, the Company announced that API and certain of its affiliates commenced administration proceedings in the U.K. The purpose of the administration proceedings is to facilitate an orderly sale or wind-down of its U.K. operations. In the U.S., API Americas Inc. voluntarily filed for Chapter 11 proceedings in Bankruptcy Court on February 2, 2020 in order to facilitate the sale or liquidation of its assets. The API Americas Inc. Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings were closed by the Bankruptcy Court on December 21, 2020. The Company deconsolidated the API entities on the previously noted filing dates as it no longer holds a controlling financial interest as of those dates.
Common Unit Repurchase Program
•In December 2020, the Board of Directors of the Company approved the repurchase of up to an additional 2,500,000 of the Company's common units under the Repurchase Program. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company purchased 2,268,771 units for an aggregate price of $20,464 under the Repurchase Program. Since inception of the Repurchase Program, the Company has purchased 4,357,948 common units for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $54,345 and there remain 1,142,052 units that may yet be purchased under the Repurchase Program.
Preferred Units
•On February 6, 2020 ("Redemption Date"), the Company redeemed 1,600,000 units of its preferred units at a price equal to $25 per unit, plus an amount of $0.22 per unit, equal to any accumulated and unpaid distributions up to, but excluding, the Redemption Date, for a total payment of approximately $40,400.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We utilize certain non-GAAP financial measurements as defined by the SEC, which include "Adjusted EBITDA." The Company defines Adjusted EBITDA as net income or loss from continuing operations before the effects of income or loss from investments in associated companies and other investments held at fair value, interest expense, taxes, depreciation and amortization, non-cash pension expense or income, and realized and unrealized gains or losses on investments, and excludes certain non-recurring and non-cash items. The Company is presenting this non-GAAP financial measurement because it believes that this measure provides useful information to investors about the Company's business and its financial condition. The Company believes this measure is useful to investors because it is a measure used by the Company's Board of Directors and management to evaluate its ongoing business, including in internal management reporting, budgeting and forecasting processes, in comparing operating results across the business, as an internal profitability measure, as a component in evaluating the ability and the desirability of making capital expenditures and significant acquisitions, and as an element in determining executive compensation.
However, this measure is not a measure of financial performance under U.S. GAAP, and the items excluded from this measure are significant components in understanding and assessing financial performance. Therefore, this non-GAAP financial measurement should not be considered a substitute for net income or loss. Because Adjusted EBITDA is calculated before recurring cash charges, including realized losses on investments, interest expense, and taxes, and is not adjusted for capital expenditures or other recurring cash requirements of the business, it should not be considered as a measure of discretionary cash available to invest in the growth of the business. There are a number of material limitations to the use of Adjusted EBITDA as an analytical tool, including the following:
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the Company's tax provision or the cash requirements to pay its taxes;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect income or loss from the Company's investments in associated companies and other investments held at fair value;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the Company's interest expense;
•Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash expenses in the period recorded, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the cash requirements for such replacement;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the Company's net realized and unrealized gains and losses on its investments;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not include non-cash charges for pension expense and equity-based compensation;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not include amounts related to noncontrolling interests in consolidated entities;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not include certain other non-recurring and non-cash items; and
•Adjusted EBITDA does not include the Company's discontinued operations.
The following table reconciles net income from continuing operations to Adjusted EBITDA:
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Revenue in 2020 decreased $144,412, or 9.9%, as compared to 2019. Excluding the effect of an increase in average silver prices in the Diversified Industrial segment of 1.2%, revenue decreased by 11.1%. The net revenue decrease of 11.1% was due to lower sales volume across all the reportable segments, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold in 2020 decreased $92,208, or 9.7%, as compared to 2019, due to decreases in the Diversified Industrial and Energy segments. The decrease in cost of goods sold was primarily due to: (1) lower sales volume in both the Diversified Industrial and Energy segments, (2) the Company's cost reduction efforts to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 and (3) a $5,049 reduction in expense due to a favorable settlement of litigation involving the OMG business in the Diversified Industrial segment (refer to Note 20).
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses ("SG&A") in 2020 decreased $43,782, or 13.1%, as compared to 2019, primarily due to lower sales volume and cost reduction initiatives in the Diversified Industrial and Energy segments. These decreases were partially offset by: (1) a $14,000 environmental reserve charge recorded in 2020 in the Diversified Industrial segment related to a legacy, non-operating site and (2) higher SG&A in the Financial Services segment driven by increased credit performance fees associated with the larger loan balances. There was also a $12,500 expense associated with a legal settlement in Corporate and Other in 2019.
Goodwill Impairment Charges
As a result of declines in customer demand and the performance of the performance materials business during 2020, the Company recorded a $1,100 charge in the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company fully impaired the Packaging reporting unit's goodwill during 2019 and recorded aggregate pre-tax Goodwill impairment charges of $41,853 ($15,924 classified in continuing operations for Dunmore and $25,929 classified in discontinued operations for API) in the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Asset Impairment Charges
As a result of COVID-19 related declines in our youth sports business within the Energy segment, intangible assets of $606, primarily customer relationships, were fully impaired in 2020. The impairment charges in 2019 of $849 were primarily related to unused software in the Diversified Industrial segment's Kasco business.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $29,514 and $38,835, respectively. The lower interest expense in 2020 was primarily due to lower interest rates.
Realized and Unrealized Gains on Securities, Net
Realized and unrealized gains on securities, net for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $25,643 and $47,315, respectively. The changes in realized and unrealized gains on securities, net over the respective periods are primarily due to mark-to-market adjustments on the Company's portfolio of securities, which are required to be recorded in earnings under U.S. GAAP.
All Other Expenses, Net
All other expenses, net were lower by $29,028 in 2020, as compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower provision for loan losses and lower finance interest expense, as compared to 2019.
Income Taxes
As a limited partnership, we are generally not responsible for federal and state income taxes, and our profits and losses are passed directly to our limited partners for inclusion in their respective income tax returns. The Company's tax provision represents the income tax expense or benefit of its consolidated corporate subsidiaries. For the year ended December 31, 2020, a tax provision of $38,136 was recorded, as compared to $14,563 in 2019. Significant losses incurred by a corporate subsidiary together with losses incurred by the limited partnership, a flow-through entity, for both of which no tax benefits have been recorded, resulted in an effective tax rate of 30.4% based on the consolidated income before income taxes and equity method investments of $125,399 in 2020. The lower 2019 effective tax rate reflects benefits for the removal of the valuation allowance on a capital loss carryforward and deductions related to the write-off of investments in certain subsidiaries.
Loss of Associated Companies, Net of Taxes
The Company incurred losses from associated companies, net of taxes, of $3,786 in 2020, as compared to losses, net of taxes of $8,043 in 2019. For the details of each of these investments and the related mark-to-market adjustments in both periods, see Note 11 - "Investments" to the SPLP consolidated financial statements found elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Loss from Discontinued Operations
The Company recorded net loss from discontinued operations, net of taxes, of $10,199 and $81,165 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to the Company's API entities which were part of the Diversified Industrial segment. The Company deconsolidated API on January 31, 2020 as it no longer held a controlling financial interest as of that date (see to Note 6 - "Discontinued Operations").
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA was $213,739 in 2020, as compared to $195,349 in 2019. Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of sales was 16.3% in 2020, as compared to 13.4% in 2019. Higher Adjusted EBITDA in 2020 was primarily driven by cost reduction efforts to mitigate the impact of COVID-19, partially offset by the unfavorable impact from lower revenue, as compared to 2019.
Segment Analysis
Diversified Industrial
Net sales in 2020 decreased by $60,897, or 5.4%, as compared to 2019. The change in net sales reflects an increase of $17,142 as a result of higher average silver prices. Excluding the favorable impact from higher average silver prices, net sales decreased by approximately $78,039, primarily due to lower sales volume from the performance materials and electrical products businesses, partially offset by higher sales volume from the building materials business.
Segment operating income in 2020 increased by $29,105, or 69.7%, as compared to 2019. The increase in operating income was primarily due to: (1) the absence of a $15,924 non-cash goodwill impairment charge associated with the packaging business in 2019 and (2) lower SG&A driven by cost reduction actions. These increases were partially offset by lower gross profit as a result of declines in sales volume.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA in 2020 increased by $23,195, or 19.8%, as compared to 2019. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to lower SG&A driven by cost reduction actions, partially offset by lower gross profit as a result of declines in sales volume.
Energy
In 2020, net revenue decreased $56,141, or 34.2%, as compared to 2019. The decrease in net revenue was primarily due lower oil prices and lower rig hours, as compared to 2019, as a result of the overall downturn experienced in the oil services industry in 2020.
Segment operating loss in 2020 decreased $1,959, or 50.9%, as compared to 2019, primarily due to lower SG&A driven by cost reduction actions initiated during 2020 as a result of the lower sales volume, partially offset by the impact of the lower sales volume.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA in 2020 increased by $401, or 3.0%, as compared to 2019. The increase was primarily due to lower SG&A driven by cost reduction actions initiated during 2020 as a result of the lower sales volume, partially offset by the impact of lower sales volume.
Financial Services
Revenue in 2020 decreased $27,374, or 16.0%, as compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to decreases in interest income and fees due to lower origination volume, as compared to 2019.
Segment operating income in 2020 decreased $9,586, or 13.8%, as compared to 2019. The lower operating income was primarily due to lower revenue and higher SG&A driven by increased credit performance fees associated with the larger loan balances, partially offset by lower personnel expenses driven by cost reduction actions due to the economic impact of COVID-19, lower finance interest expense of $4,546 and lower provision for loan losses of $21,427 in 2020. The lower finance interest expense was due to a decrease in interest rates and lower deposit balances. WebBank's allowance for loan losses has decreased in 2020, primarily driven by lower loan balances, partially offset by the impact of COVID-19.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA in 2020 decreased by $5,676, or 8.6%, as compared to 2019. The lower Adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to lower revenue and higher SG&A driven by increased credit performance fees associated with the larger loan balances, partially offset by lower personnel expenses driven by cost reduction actions due to the economic impact of COVID-19, lower finance interest expense and lower provision for loan losses in 2020.
Net Interest Income, Margin and Interest Rate Spreads
Net interest income is the difference between interest earned on interest-earning assets and interest incurred on interest-bearing liabilities. By its nature, net interest income is especially vulnerable to changes in the mix and amounts of interest- earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. In addition, changes in the interest rates and yields associated with these assets and liabilities can significantly impact net interest income. The following table summarizes the average balances, the amount of interest earned or incurred and the applicable yields for interest-earning assets and the costs of interest-bearing liabilities that generate net interest income. For purposes of calculating the yields in these schedules, the average loan balances also include the principal amounts of nonaccrual and restructured loans. However, interest received on nonaccrual loans is included in income only to the extent that cash payments have been received and not applied to principal reductions. In addition, interest on restructured loans is generally accrued at reduced rates.
WebBank has several lending arrangements with companies where it originates credit card and other loans for consumers and small businesses. These loans are classified as held for sale and are typically sold after origination.
The following table presents the effects of changing rates and volumes on WebBank's net interest income for the periods indicated. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume column shows the effects attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate). The total column represents the sum of the prior columns. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately, based on the changes due to rate and the changes due to volume.
Balance Sheet Analysis
Loan Portfolio
As of December 31, 2020, net loans accounted for 93% of WebBank's total assets, as compared to 77% at the end of 2019. The following table presents WebBank's loans outstanding by type of loan as of December 31, 2020 and the five most recent year-ends.
The following table includes a maturity profile for the loans that were outstanding as of December 31, 2020:
Nonperforming Lending Related Assets
Total nonaccrual loans were $0 at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Summary of Loan Loss Experience
The methodologies used to estimate the allowance for loan losses ("ALLL") depend upon the impairment status and portfolio segment of the loan. Loan groupings are created for each loan class and are then graded against historical and industry loss rates. After applying historic loss experience, as described above, we review the quantitatively derived level of ALLL for each segment using qualitative criteria. We track various risk factors that influence our judgment regarding the level of the ALLL across the portfolio segments. The following table summarizes activity in WebBank's allowance for loan and lease losses for the periods indicated:
The distribution of WebBank's allowance for losses on loans at the dates indicated is summarized as follows:
Corporate and Other
Operating income was $22,366 in 2020, as compared to $25,586 in 2019. The fluctuations were primarily due to changes in investment gains and losses from both marketable securities and associated companies, and lower SG&A driven by cost reduction actions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic impact in the 2020 period. There was also a $12,500 expense associated with a legal settlement in 2019.
For additional information on the Company's investments, see Note 2 - "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" and Note 11 - "Investments" to the SPLP consolidated financial statements found elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
DISCUSSION OF CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOWS
The following table provides a summary of the Company's consolidated cash flows from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations was $311,235 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net income from continuing operations of $83,477 was favorably impacted by certain non-cash items and a net improvement of $137,151 relating to changes in operating assets and liabilities. The net cash provided by changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $138,361 decrease in loans held for sale due to a reduction in loan originations at the end of the year of 2020, decreases in inventories of $12,220 and trade and other receivables of $8,725, partially offset by a decrease in accounts payable, accrued and other liabilities of $16,005 and an increase from prepaid and other assets of $6,150. Net cash provided by discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $12,855.
Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations was $118,455 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net income from continuing operations of $79,471 was favorably impacted by certain non-cash items and a net reduction of $57,865 relating to changes in operating assets and liabilities. The net cash used in changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $38,389 increase in loans held for sale due to an increase in loan originations at the end of 2019, a decrease in accounts payable, accrued and other liabilities of $14,700, and increases in inventories of $12,480 and prepaid and other assets of $3,217, partially offset by a decrease in trade and other receivables of $10,921. Net cash used in discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $8,231.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,899,041, which included loan originations, net of collections of $1,904,843, capital expenditures of $23,226 and net cash paid for the
Metallon, Inc. acquisition of $3,500, partially offset by proceeds from maturities and sales of investments (net of purchases) of $29,528 and from sale of assets of $3,000.
Net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $271,757. Significant items included, an increase in loan originations, net of collections of $205,874, net cash paid for the National Partners acquisition of $45,559, capital expenditures of $39,816 and net short position settlements of $14,611, partially offset by proceeds from maturities and sales of investments (net of purchases) of $32,810. Net cash used in investing activities from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $3,208.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,574,128. Significant items included other borrowings driven by the PPP loans of $2,090,223 during 2020, partially offset by a net decrease in deposits of $399,058, net revolver repayments of $40,891, purchase of the Company's common units of $20,464, redemption of the Company's preferred units of $40,000 and term loan repayments of $14,208.
Net cash used in financing activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $33,924, including net revolver repayments of $62,048, term loan repayments of $7,746 and purchases of the Company's common units of $6,721, partially offset by a net increase in WebBank's deposits of $43,406. Net cash used in financing activities from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $2,222.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
SPLP (excluding its operating subsidiaries, "Holding Company") is a diversified global holding company with assets that principally consist of the stock of its direct subsidiaries, equity method and other investments, and cash and cash equivalents. The Company works with its businesses to enhance their liquidity and operations and to increase long-term value for the Company's unitholders and stakeholders through balance sheet improvements, capital allocation policies, and operational and growth initiatives, which are further described in Part I, Item 1 - "Business - Business Strategy."
Management utilizes the following strategies to continue to enhance liquidity: (1) continue to implement improvements using the Steel Business System throughout all the Company's operations to increase sales and operating efficiencies, (2) support profitable sales growth both organically and potentially through acquisitions and (3) evaluate from time to time and as appropriate, strategic alternatives with respect to the Company's businesses and/or assets. The Company continues to examine all of its options and strategies, including acquisitions, divestitures and other corporate transactions, to increase cash flows and stakeholder value.
The Company's senior credit facility ("Credit Agreement") consists of a revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $500,000 and a $182,500 term loan with quarterly amortization equating to $2,500 per quarter. The Credit Agreement covers substantially all of the Company's subsidiaries, with the exception of WebBank. Availability under the Credit Agreement is based upon earnings and certain covenants, including a maximum ratio limit on Total Leverage and a minimum ratio limit on Interest Coverage, each as defined in the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement is subject to certain mandatory prepayment provisions and restrictive and financial covenants, primarily the leverage ratios described above. The Company was in compliance with all financial covenants as of December 31, 2020. If the Company does not meet its financial covenants, and if it is unable to secure necessary waivers or other amendments from its lenders on terms acceptable to management, its ability to access available lines of credit could be limited, its debt obligations could be accelerated and liquidity could be adversely affected. The Credit Agreement will expire on November 14, 2022, and all outstanding amounts will be due and payable.
The Holding Company and its operating businesses believe that they have access to adequate resources to meet their needs for normal operating costs, capital expenditures, pension payments, debt obligations and working capital for their existing business, as well as to fund its taxes, legal and environmental matters, for at least the next twelve months. These resources include cash and cash equivalents, investments, cash provided by operating activities and unused lines of credit. The Holding Company and its operating businesses' ability to satisfy their debt service obligations, to fund planned capital expenditures and required pension payments, and to make acquisitions or repurchase units under its common unit Repurchase Program will depend upon their future operating performance, which will be affected by prevailing economic conditions in the markets in which they operate, as well as financial, business and other factors, some of which are beyond their control. As indicated above, there can be no assurances that the Holding Company and its operating businesses will continue to have access to their lines of
credit if their financial performance does not satisfy the financial covenants set forth in their respective financing agreements, which could also result in the acceleration of their debt obligations by their respective lenders, adversely affecting liquidity.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company's working capital was $286,302, as compared to working capital of $154,069 as of December 31, 2019. The increase in working capital during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in retail depository accounts (current liabilities), which was partially offset by an overall decrease in loans receivable related primarily to consumer loans. As of December 31, 2020, the availability under the Credit Agreement was approximately $336,289. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, capital expenditures were $23,226 and $39,816, respectively. The Company currently expects full year capital expenditures in the range of $37,000 to $48,000 in 2021. The Company and its subsidiaries have ongoing commitments, including funding of the minimum requirements of its subsidiaries' pension plans. For the year ending December 31, 2021, the Company currently estimates it will contribute between $41,700 and $46,700 to its pension plans, including 2020 contributions of $27,400 that were deferred until January 4, 2021 under the CARES Act. The final amount of pension contributions to be made by the Company in 2021 is dependent on the Company's election of various implementation options provided to it by the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, which was signed into law by President Biden in March 2021. Required future pension contributions are estimated based upon assumptions such discount rates on future obligations, assumed rates of return on plan assets and legislative changes. Actual future pension costs and required funding obligations will be affected by changes in the factors and assumptions described in the previous sentence, including the impact of declines in pension plan assets and interest rates, as well as other changes such as any plan termination or other acceleration events.
WebBank manages its liquidity to provide adequate funds to meet anticipated financial obligations, such as certificate of deposit maturities and to fund customer credit needs. WebBank had $117,553 and $125,047 in cash and cash equivalents, time deposits placed at other institutions and federal funds sold at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. WebBank had $40,000 in lines of credit from its correspondent banks at both December 31, 2020 and 2019. WebBank had $30,590 and $21,287 available from the Federal Reserve discount window at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Therefore, WebBank had a total of $188,143 and $186,334 in cash, lines of credit and access to the Federal Reserve Bank discount window at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which represents approximately 29.4% and 19.4%, respectively, of WebBank's total assets (excluding PPP loans funded through the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility).
Contractual Commitments and Contingencies
Consistent with the rules applicable to "Smaller Reporting Companies," we have omitted information required by this item.
Environmental Liabilities
Certain of the Company's facilities are subject to environmental remediation obligations. The Company has estimated its liability to remediate these sites and has recorded liabilities of $25,782 as of December 31, 2020. For further discussion regarding these commitments, among others, see Note 20 - "Commitments and Contingencies" to the Company's consolidated financial statements found elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Deposits
Deposits at WebBank at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
The decrease in deposits as December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, is due to decrease in WebBank's asset. The average original maturity for time deposits at December 31, 2020 was 12 months, as compared to 21 months at December 31, 2019.
The following table details the maturity of time deposits as of December 31, 2020:
Off-Balance Sheet Risk
It is not the Company's usual business practice to enter into off-balance sheet arrangements such as guarantees on loans and financial commitments, indemnification arrangements and retained interests in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity for securitization purposes. SPLP uses the same credit policy in making commitments and conditional obligations as it does for on-balance sheet instruments.
WebBank is a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk. In the normal course of business, these financial instruments include commitments to extend credit in the form of loans as part of WebBank's lending arrangements with Marketing Partners. Those instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit and interest rate risk in excess of the amount recognized on the Company's consolidated balance sheets. The contractual amounts of those instruments reflect the extent of involvement WebBank has in particular classes of financial instruments.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, WebBank's undisbursed commitments under these instruments totaled $170,611 and $125,861, respectively. Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a borrower who meets the lending criteria established by WebBank through one of WebBank's lending agreements with its Marketing Partners, provided there is no violation of any condition established in the contract with the counterparty to the lending arrangement. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee, and in some cases are subject to ongoing adjustment by WebBank. Since certain of the commitments are expected to expire without the credit being extended, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. WebBank evaluates each prospective borrower's credit worthiness on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained, if deemed necessary by WebBank upon extension of credit, is based on management's credit evaluation of the borrower and WebBank's Marketing Partner.
WebBank's exposure to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by the other party to the financial instrument for commitments to extend credit is represented by the contractual amount of those instruments. WebBank uses the same credit policy in making commitments and conditional obligations as it does for on-balance sheet instruments.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP. Preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Estimates are based on historical experience, expected future cash flows and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Note 2 - "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to the Company's consolidated financial statements, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, includes a summary of the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. The following is a discussion of the critical accounting policies and methods used by the Company.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, Net
Goodwill, which is not amortized, represents the difference between the purchase price and the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired in a business combination. We review goodwill for impairment annually in the fourth quarter, and test for impairment during the year if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate the carrying amount may be impaired. Examples of such events would include pertinent macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, overall financial performance and other factors. An entity can choose between using the Step 0 approach or the Step 1 approach.
For the Step 0 approach, an entity may assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. An entity has an unconditional option to bypass the Step 0 assessment for any reporting unit in any period and proceed directly to performing the first step of the goodwill impairment test. An entity may resume performing the Step 0 assessment in any subsequent period. For the Step 1 approach, which is a quantitative approach, the Company will calculate the fair value of a reporting unit and compare it to its carrying amount. There are several methods that may be used to estimate a reporting unit's fair value, including the income approach, the market approach and/or the cost approach. The amount of impairment, if any, is determined by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount and recognizing an impairment charge based on the amount that the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit's fair value. The loss recognized should not exceed the total goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
2020 Goodwill Impairment Tests
For 2020, the Company utilized a quantitative approach for all of its reporting units in the Diversified Industrial and Energy segments using a discounted cash flow method with consideration of market comparisons. The annual quantitative impairment test for the Financial Services reporting unit utilized a discounted cash flow method and market approach using the guideline company method. The annual impairment test did not result in an impairment to goodwill for any of its reporting units, except for a partial impairment of the Performance Materials reporting unit. In addition, the fair value of all of our reporting units, other than Performance Materials, exceeded the carrying value of the net assets of those reporting units by more than 20% as of the date of the annual fourth quarter 2020 test.
In our 2020 third quarter Form 10-Q, we previously disclosed that there was a risk of future goodwill impairment of the Performance Materials reporting unit if the fair value of this reporting unit, and its associated assets, decreased in value due to further declines in market conditions or customer demand. In connection with the Company's annual fourth quarter goodwill impairment testing and as a result of declines in customer demand in the Performance Materials reporting unit, which is included in the Diversified Industrial segment, the Company determined its fair value was less than its carrying value. The Company partially impaired the Performance Materials reporting units' goodwill and recorded a $1,100 charge in Goodwill impairment charges in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. The fair value of the Performance Materials reporting unit was determined using a discounted cash flow model (a form of the income approach) with consideration of market comparisons. The discounted cash flow model used the Company's projections, which are subject to various risks and uncertainties associated with its forecasted revenue, expenses and cash flows, as well as the expected impact on its business from the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company's significant assumptions in the analysis include, but are not limited to, future cash flow projections, the weighted-average cost of capital, the terminal growth rate and the tax rate. The Company's estimates of future cash flows are based on the current economic environment, recent operating results and planned business strategies. These estimates could be negatively affected by changes in regulations, further economic downturns, decreased customer demand for Performance Material's products or an inability to execute its business strategies. Future cash flow estimates are, by their nature, subjective, and actual results may differ materially from the Company's estimates. As of December 31, 2020, the Performance Materials' reporting unit had $6,808 of goodwill. While the Performance Materials reporting unit was determined not to be fully impaired in the fourth quarter, it may be at risk of further impairment in the future if the business does not perform as projected, including if it does not recover as planned from the COVID-19 pandemic, or if market factors utilized in the impairment test deteriorate, including an unfavorable change in the terminal growth rate or the weighted-average cost of capital.
2019 Goodwill Impairment Tests
The annual impairment test in 2019 did not result in an impairment to goodwill for any reporting unit. The Company performed an interim impairment test during the third quarter of 2019 for the Metallized Films and Packaging reporting unit (formerly the Packaging reporting unit), which included the operations of API and Dunmore. Due to a decline in their estimated fair values, the Company fully impaired the Packaging reporting unit's goodwill during 2019 and recorded aggregate goodwill impairment charges of $41,853 ($15,924 classified in continuing operations for Dunmore and $25,929 classified in discontinued operations for API) in the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019. Refer to Note 9 - "Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, Net" for additional information on the goodwill impairment charges.
For finite-lived intangible assets, the Company evaluates the carrying amount of such assets when circumstances indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Conditions that could have an adverse impact on the cash flows and fair value of the long-lived assets are deteriorating business climate, condition of the asset or plans to dispose of the asset before the end of its useful life. If the assets' carrying amounts exceed the sum of the undiscounted cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized in the amount by which the carrying amounts exceed their fair values. The Company performs such assessments at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities, which
is generally at the plant level, operating company level or the reporting unit level, depending on the level of interdependencies in the Company's operations. As a result of COVID-19 related declines in the Company's youth sports business within the Energy segment, intangible assets of $606, primarily customer relationships, were fully impaired during the first quarter of 2020. The impairment is included in Asset impairment charges in the accompanying statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets, which are only within the Diversified Industrial segment, are tested for impairment at least annually, or when events or changes in circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired. Companies can use the same two testing approaches for indefinite-lived intangibles as for goodwill. For 2020 and 2019, the Company utilized both the quantitative and qualitative approaches to assess its indefinite-lived intangible assets and the results indicated no impairment. As of December 31, 2020, the estimated fair value of all indefinite-lived intangible assets were significantly in excess of their net carry value. For 2019, the Company utilized both the quantitative and qualitative approaches to assess its indefinite-lived intangible assets and the results indicated no impairment.
Long-Lived Asset Testing
The Company's accounting policy for long-lived assets is to estimate the depreciable lives of property, plant and equipment, and to depreciate such assets over such lives. The Company tests long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. If the carrying amounts of the long-lived assets exceed the sum of the undiscounted cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized in the amount by which the carrying amounts exceeds their fair values. The Company performs such assessments at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities, which is generally at the plant level, operating company level or the reporting unit level, depending on the level of interdependencies in the Company's operations. The Company considers various factors in determining whether an impairment test is necessary, including among other things: a significant or prolonged deterioration in operating results and projected cash flows; significant changes in the extent or manner in which assets are used; technological advances with respect to assets which would potentially render them obsolete; the Company's strategy and capital planning; and the economic climate in the markets it serves. When estimating future cash flows and if necessary, fair value, the Company makes judgments as to the expected utilization of assets and estimated future cash flows related to those assets. The Company considers historical and anticipated future results, general economic and market conditions, the impact of planned business and operational strategies and other information available at the time the estimates are made. The Company believes these estimates are reasonable; however, changes in circumstances or conditions could have a significant impact on its estimates, which might result in material impairment charges in the future.
Pension and Other Post-Retirement Benefit Costs
The Company maintains qualified and non-qualified pension and other post-retirement benefit plans for certain subsidiaries. The Company recorded pension expense of $3,512 for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to its significant pension plans, and, as of December 31, 2020, the Company had recorded pension liabilities totaling $183,462. Pension benefits are generally based on years of service and the amount of compensation earned during the participants' employment. However, the qualified pension benefits have been frozen for all participants.
The pension and other post-retirement benefit costs are developed from actuarial valuations. Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions, including discount and mortality rates and expected long-term rates of return on plan assets. Material changes in pension and other post-retirement benefit costs may occur in the future due to changes in these assumptions, changes in the number of plan participants, changes in the level of benefits provided, changes to the level of contributions to these plans and other factors.
Actuarial assumptions for its pension and other post-retirement benefit plans are determined each year to calculate liability information as of year end, and pension and other post-retirement benefit expense or income for the following year. The discount rate assumption is derived from the rate of return on high-quality bonds.
The various pension plan assets are diversified as to type of assets, investment strategies employed and number of investment managers used. Investments may include equities, fixed income, cash equivalents, convertible securities and private investment funds. Derivatives may be used as part of the investment strategy. The transfer of assets may be directed between investment managers in order to rebalance the portfolio in accordance with asset allocation guidelines established by the Company. The private investment funds, or the investment funds they are invested in, own marketable and non-marketable securities and other investment instruments. Such investments are valued by the private investment funds, underlying investment managers or the underlying investment funds at fair value, as described in their respective financial statements and offering
memorandums. These values are utilized in quantifying the value of the assets of its pension plans, which are then used in the determination of the unfunded pension liabilities on the Company's consolidated balance sheets. Because of the inherent uncertainty of valuation of some of the pension plans' investments in private investment funds and the nature of some of the underlying investments held by the investment funds, the recorded value may differ from the value that would have been used had a ready market existed for some of these investments for which market quotations are not readily available. Management uses judgment to make assumptions on which its employee benefit liabilities and expenses are based. The effect of a 1% change in discount rate or expected return on asset assumptions for the pension plans sponsored by the Company's subsidiaries would not have a significant impact on pension cost.
Loan Impairment and Allowance for Loan Losses
A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that WebBank will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement, including scheduled interest payments. When a loan has been identified as being impaired, the amount of impairment is measured based on the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan's effective interest rate or, when appropriate, the loan's observable fair value or the fair value of the collateral (less any selling costs) if the loan is collateral-dependent. If the measurement of the impaired loan is less than the recorded investment in the loan (including accrued interest, net of deferred loan fees or costs and unamortized premium or discount), an impairment is recognized by creating or adjusting an existing allocation of the ALLL, or by charging down the loan to its value determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
The ALLL is established as losses are estimated to have occurred through a provision for loan losses charged to earnings. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when the uncollectability of a loan or receivable balance is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. The ALLL is evaluated on a regular basis and is based upon a periodic review of the collectability of the amounts due in light of historical experience, the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, adverse situations that may affect the borrower's ability to repay, estimated value of any underlying collateral and prevailing economic conditions. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available. The allowance consists of specific and general components. The specific component relates to loans that are classified as doubtful, substandard or loss. For such loans that are classified as impaired, an allowance is established when the discounted cash flows (or collateral value or observable market price) of the impaired loan is lower than the carrying value of that loan. The general component covers non-classified loans and is based on historical loss experience and is adjusted for qualitative factors to cover uncertainties that could affect the estimate of probable losses. The ALLL is increased by charges to income and decreased by charge-offs (net of recoveries). The periodic evaluation of the adequacy of the allowance is based on WebBank's past loss experience, known and inherent risks in the portfolio, adverse situations that may affect the debtor's ability to repay, the estimated value of any underlying collateral and current economic conditions. Since our loss rates are applied to large pools of loans, even minor changes in the level of estimated losses can significantly affect management's determination of the appropriate ALLL because those changes must be applied across a large portfolio.
Income Taxes
As a limited partnership, we are generally not responsible for federal and state income taxes, and our profits and losses are passed directly to our limited partners for inclusion in their respective income tax returns. Our subsidiaries that are corporate subsidiaries are subject to federal and state income taxes. The table in Note 17 - "Income Taxes" to the SPLP consolidated financial statements, found elsewhere in this Form 10-K, reconciles a hypothetical calculation of federal income taxes based on the federal statutory rate applied to the income or loss before income taxes and equity method investments. The tax effect of income passed through to common unitholders is subtracted from the hypothetical calculation.
Our subsidiaries that are subject to income taxes use the liability method of accounting for such taxes. Under the liability method, deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Our subsidiaries evaluate the recoverability of deferred tax assets and establish a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
When tax returns are filed, it is highly certain that most positions taken would be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities, while others are subject to uncertainty about the merits of the position taken or the amount of the position that
would be ultimately sustained. The benefit of a tax position is recognized in the consolidated financial statements in the period during which, based on all available evidence, management believes it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including the resolution of appeals or litigation processes, if any. Tax positions taken are not offset or aggregated with other positions. Tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold are measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement with the applicable taxing authority. The portion of the benefits associated with tax positions taken that exceeds the amount measured as described above is provided for and reflected as a liability for unrecognized tax benefits on the consolidated balance sheets, along with any associated interest and penalties that would be payable to the taxing authorities upon examination.
Contingencies, Including Legal and Environmental Liabilities
The Company is subject to litigation, proceedings, claims or assessments and various contingent liabilities incidental to its business or assumed in connection with certain business acquisitions. The Company accrues a charge for a loss contingency when it believe it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. If the loss is within a range of specified amounts, the most likely amount is accrued, and the Company accrues the minimum amount in the range if no amount within the range represents a better estimate. Generally, the Company records the loss contingency at the amount we expect to pay to resolve the contingency and the amount is generally not discounted to the present value. Amounts recoverable under insurance contracts are recorded as assets when recovery is deemed probable. Contingencies that might result in a gain are not recognized until realizable. Changes to the amount of the estimated loss or resolution of one or more contingencies could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows.
The Company accrues for losses associated with environmental remediation obligations when such losses are probable and reasonably estimable. Accruals for estimated losses from environmental remediation obligations generally are recognized no later than completion of the remedial feasibility study. Such accruals are adjusted as further information develops or circumstances change. Costs of future expenditures for environmental remediation obligations are not discounted to their present value. Recoveries of environmental remediation costs from other parties are recorded as assets when their receipt is deemed probable. See Note 20 - "Commitments and Contingencies" to the SPLP consolidated financial statements found elsewhere in this Form 10-K for further information.
New or Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of the Company's new or recently adopted accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 - "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to the SPLP consolidated financial statements found elsewhere in this Form 10-K.