ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and the discussion under "Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” (refer to Note 1 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements), which describes key estimates and assumptions we make in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements; the cautionary language that appears under the title "Forward Looking Statements" immediately following the Table of Contents; "Item 1. Business," which describes our operations; and "Item 1A. Risk Factors," which describes key risks associated with our operations and markets in which we operate. A reference to a "Note" in this section refers to the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Overview and Highlights
We are a comprehensive provider of clinical communication and collaboration solutions for enterprises. We offer a suite of unified clinical communication and collaboration solutions that include call center operations, clinical alerting and notifications, one-way and advanced two-way wireless messaging services, mobile communications and public safety response. Our customers rely on Spok for workflow improvement, secure texting, paging services, contact center optimization and public safety response. Our product offerings are capable of addressing a customer’s clinical communications needs. We develop, sell and support enterprise-wide systems for healthcare and other organizations needing to automate, centralize and standardize their approach to clinical communications. While our primary market has been the healthcare industry with a focus on prominent hospitals, our solutions can also be found in large government agencies; leading public safety institutions; colleges and universities; large hotels, resorts and casinos; and well-known manufacturers.
Revenue generated by wireless messaging services (including voice mail, personalized greetings, message storage and retrieval) and equipment loss and/or maintenance protection to both one-way and two-way messaging subscribers is presented as wireless revenue in our statements of operations. Revenue generated by the sale of our software solutions, which includes software license, professional services (installation, consulting and training), equipment procured by us from third parties (to be used in conjunction with our software) and post-contract support (on-going maintenance), is presented as software revenue in our statements of operations. Our software is licensed to end users under an industry standard software license agreement.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic, and the virus has significantly impacted the global economy. Although federal and state restrictions were not widely adopted until late in the first quarter of 2020, we began to experience a direct impact on our sales cycle in late February 2020 as hospitals began to delay purchasing decisions and deal with staff reductions. These delays have continued to affect our software bookings, which directly impact license and equipment revenues. We have also experienced delays in our ability to deliver on-site implementation services, which continued to impact our services revenue throughout 2020. While much of our implementation process can be performed remotely, the on-premise nature of certain of our solutions require some level of on-site availability to complete and finalize customer software solutions, and we believe we will continue to see weaker professional services revenue in comparison to normal operating levels that will continue into 2021.
Our ability to return to normal operating levels is largely driven by our customers and their ability to bring operations back to levels beyond just critical needs and emergency services. Many hospitals initially reduced the providing of elective surgeries as a result of government restrictions, as well as patients delaying or canceling elective procedures during the pandemic. While these organizations began to see improved operating levels during the second half of 2020 as they better managed their admissions process and capacity constraints, the timing of vaccine distributions as well as any significant spikes in U.S. virus cases could further delay progress towards returning to normal operational levels. As previously discussed, we believe that we are likely to see some lingering and continued effects from COVID-19 throughout 2021, although we are cautiously optimistic that normal operating levels could be achieved during the second half of 2021.
Additionally, many hospitals have restrictive social distancing guidelines in place in order to ensure the safety of their personnel and patients. These restrictions can make it difficult for external personnel who are not critical to the immediate operating needs of a hospital, such as our implementation staff, to gain access. These factors can vary considerably depending on the size of an organization, geographical location and local regulations. Given that we anticipate continued disruptions to our business, we believe there will be a continued impact on our software revenues throughout 2021. With regard to implementation services, these impacts have primarily resulted in delays in timing of revenue recognition, as associated revenue corresponds to our backlog of performance obligations ready to deliver at some point in the future.
Over the last several months of 2020, we began to see modest improvements in each of the aforementioned areas that have been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and we are cautiously optimistic that we will continue seeing sequential improvement in these areas over the next several quarters. We are also optimistic that any lingering effects from COVID-19 will have a lesser impact on our financial results in 2021 than they did in 2020. As facts and circumstances continue to evolve over the coming months, we will continue to assess and communicate the anticipated impact on our business, and we continue to diligently pursue countermeasures to prudently manage operating expenses during this time, with a goal of neutralizing the impact of the pandemic on our cash flows into 2021. More specifically, we enacted a Company-wide plan that reduced work schedules with a related temporary reduction in compensation rates during the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020. For the year, these reduced work schedules resulted in realized savings of approximately $5.6 million in compensation expense.
We will continue to manage operating expenses and conserve cash for the duration of the pandemic. We expect to continue operating with reduced work schedules and a temporary reduction in compensation rates throughout 2021. We have also initiated a measure that will provide equity in lieu of cash for a portion of salary compensation for employees who meet the requisite criteria for consideration. Finally, non-employee Directors will continue to have the option of receiving Deferred Stock Units ("DSU") in lieu of cash compensation, that we began offering in the third quarter of 2020 (Refer to Note 8, "Stockholder Equity" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further detail related to the alternative DSU plan). Each of these measures are described in further detail below and are subject to actual operating conditions experienced during the year.
•Reduced work schedules: Each of our employees, including our executive officers, will be subject to one week of reduced work schedules per quarter in 2021. We expect to realize savings of between $4.5 million and $6.5 million in compensation expense for the year.
•Equity in Lieu of Cash Compensation: Qualified employees will receive shares of the Company's common stock in lieu of partial cash compensation. These awards will be made in advance on a quarterly basis and vest immediately. This will affect approximately 450 of our employees, and we expect to achieve between $2.0 million and $3.0 million in cash savings for the year.
•Non-Employee Director Alternative DSU Plan: Non-Employee Directors have the option of receiving DSUs in lieu of cash compensation. Since inception of this alternative payment plan, which began in the third quarter of 2020, all non-employee Directors have voluntarily elected to receive DSUs in lieu of cash compensation. We anticipate all non-employee Directors will continue with this election through 2021 and we expect to achieve between $0.3 million and $0.5 million in cash savings for the year.
As we continue to see improvements in our operating levels, we are confident that the need to mitigate cash flow impacts through direct expense management will also continue to decline. While the Company has the ability to continue its countermeasures for the foreseeable future, we anticipate re-evaluating our position on a quarterly basis based on the progression of COVID-19, impacts on our business, and other facts and circumstances as deemed relevant by management. Additionally, we believe the Company will continue to see some benefits from the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security ("CARES") Act discussed in further detail below.
The CARES Act was signed into law on March 27, 2020, to provide stimulus and relief in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting economic collapse. While the CARES Act provides a number of potential benefits to companies, the Company has made use of the following provisions:
•Payroll Tax Deferral: Allows for the deferral of payment on the Company's share of the 6.2% Social Security tax on wages paid beginning on March 27, 2020, and ending on December 31, 2020. Deferred amounts are payable in two installments, with 50% of such taxes due on December 31, 2021, and the remainder due on December 31, 2022. This resulted in a total deferral of $2.1 million in payroll taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020.
•Employee Retention Credits: Allows for a refundable tax credit for the Company's share of the 6.2% Social Security tax on wages. This tax credit applies to the first $10,000 in qualified wages paid to each employee commencing on March 13, 2020. To be eligible, the Company must (i) have had operations fully or partially suspended because of a shutdown order from a governmental authority related to COVID-19, or (ii) have had gross receipts decline by more than 50% in a calendar quarter when compared to the same quarter in 2019. Qualified wages are limited to wages paid to employees who were not providing services due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This resulted in a tax credit of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
•Alternative Minimum Tax ("AMT") Credit: Allows for an immediate refund of all refundable AMT credits resulting from passage of the CARES Act of 2020. This resulted in accelerated collection of approximately $1.3 million of other current assets that was received during the third quarter of 2020.
As previously mentioned, we believe our cost mitigation efforts, in addition to natural cost savings that have materialized as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic (e.g., reduced travel and events), will allow us to continue to offset any negative cash flow impact resulting from the pandemic during 2021.
2020 Highlights
Spok Go was released to the general market in early 2020. This was a significant milestone given the amount of effort and investment that has gone into the development of Spok Go over the last several years. Spok Go is an integrated cloud-native platform built on the foundation of a single, best-in-class architecture which we believe is uniquely positioned to meet healthcare industry needs around clinical communications. While this is a critical milestone in our transition from an on-premise oriented company to a SaaS provider, it is important to understand that this transition will likely take several years to complete.
Total revenue declined by 7.6% or $12.1 million during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily as a result of the continued and expected decline in wireless revenue as well as the significant impacts from COVID-19. The rate of decline in wireless revenues continues to trend favorably over the last several years as we saw the lowest level of erosion in the last five years, declining at a rate of only 5.2%.
In the fourth quarters of 2020 and 2019, we recognized non-cash pre-tax goodwill impairment charges of $25.0 million and $8.8 million, respectively. Excluding these goodwill impairment charges, our operating expenses decreased by 12.8% or $21.4 million during 2020 compared to 2019, driven primarily by savings from management's cost mitigation plan related to COVID-19 as well as the capitalization of software development costs.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we recorded a non-cash valuation allowance of $22.1 million which resulted in a corresponding increase to income tax expense.
We returned approximately $9.8 million of capital to stockholders in the form of cash dividends.
Results of Operations
The following table is a summary of our Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 and the discussion that follows compares the year ended December 31, 2020, to the year ended December 31, 2019. For a discussion and analysis of the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, please refer to Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 27, 2020:
Revenue
The table below details total revenue for the periods stated:
Wireless Revenue
Wireless revenue consists of two primary components: paging revenue and product and other revenue. Paging revenue consists primarily of recurring fees associated with the provision of messaging services and fees for paging devices and is net of a provision for service credits. Product and other revenue reflects system sales, the sale of devices and charges for paging devices that are not returned and are net of anticipated credits.
Our core offering includes subscriptions to one-way or two-way messaging services for a periodic (monthly, quarterly, semiannual, or annual) service fee. This is generally based upon the type of service provided, the geographic area covered, the number of devices provided to the customer and the period of commitment. A subscriber to one-way messaging services may select coverage on a local, regional or nationwide basis to best meet their messaging needs. Two-way messaging is generally offered on a nationwide basis. In addition, subscribers either contract for a messaging device from us for an additional fixed monthly fee or they own a device, having purchased it either from us or from another vendor.
We also sell devices to resellers who lease or resell devices to their subscribers and then sell messaging services utilizing our networks. We offer ancillary services, such as voicemail and equipment loss or maintenance protection, which help increase the monthly recurring revenue we receive along with these traditional messaging services. We offer exclusive one-way (T5) and two-way (T52) alphanumeric pagers, which are configurable to support unencrypted or encrypted operation. When configured for encryption, they utilize AES-128 bit encryption, screen locking and remote wipe capabilities. With encryption enabled, these new secure paging devices enhance our service offerings to the healthcare community by adding HIPAA security capabilities to the low cost, highly reliable and availability benefits of paging (see Item 1. "Business" for more details).
The decrease in wireless revenue during 2020 compared to 2019 reflects the decrease in demand for our wireless services. Wireless revenue is generally based upon the number of units in service and the monthly Average Revenue Per User ("ARPU"). On a consolidated basis ARPU is affected by several factors, including the mix of units in service and the pricing of the various components of our services. The number of units in service changes based on subscribers added, referred to as gross placements, less subscriber cancellations, or disconnects. For the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, ARPU was $7.30 and $7.34, respectively. Total units in service were 0.9 million as of December 31, 2020, and 2019.
While demand for wireless services continues to decline, it has done so at a slower rate for each of the periods presented. While we are optimistic that this trend will continue in future periods, we believe that demand will continue to decline for the foreseeable future in line with recent and historical trends. As our wireless products and services are replaced with other competing technologies, such as the shift from narrowband wireless service offerings to broadband technology services, our wireless revenue will continue to decrease.
The following reflects the impact of subscribers and ARPU on the change in wireless revenue:
As demand for one-way and two-way messaging has declined, we have developed or added service offerings such as encrypted paging and Spok Mobile with a pager number in order to increase our revenue potential and mitigate the decline in our wireless revenue. We will continue to explore ways to innovate and provide customers the highest value possible.
Software Revenue
Software revenue consists of two primary components: operations revenue and maintenance revenue. Operations revenue consists primarily of license and subscription revenues for our healthcare communications solutions, revenue from the sale of equipment that facilitate the use of our software solutions, and professional services revenue related to the implementation of our solutions. Maintenance revenue is for ongoing support of our software solutions or related equipment (typically for one year).
Operations Revenue
Software operations revenue decreased during 2020 when compared to 2019. The decrease in license revenue is the result of a decrease in bookings as well as the benefit received in 2019 due to amounts included from software licenses delivered to customers that were contracted for in a prior period. During 2019, the Company began delivering software licenses to customers in the same month they were contracted for, thus a similar benefit was not seen in 2020. Additionally, the delay in our sales cycle due to COVID-19 resulted in delivery of fewer software licenses and equipment products. Service revenue was lower, primarily resulting from the impact of COVID-19 as social distancing and other restrictions, as well as our customers' focus on COVID-19 mitigation efforts, led to delays in implementation projects, contributing to lower services revenue beginning in March 2020.
Maintenance Revenue
Software maintenance revenue decreased during 2020 when compared to 2019. The decrease in maintenance revenue primarily relates to lower license bookings, as discussed above, from which new maintenance revenue is derived, and the timing of certain revenue items reflected in the results for 2019 that did not occur at the same rate in 2020. Revenue items impacted by timing generally relate to specific renewal contracts that do not have auto-renewal terms and for which we must negotiate at the end of each term. We are generally precluded from recognizing revenue on these contracts until new terms have been agreed to even though we generally will continue to provide maintenance service for these customers while negotiations are ongoing. While certain commercial customers require this type of contract renewal, these contracts are generally limited to government organizations, including federal, state and local entities. When a renewal of this nature has been contracted, it is often accompanied by several months of "catch-up" revenue from services performed in past periods resulting in a one-time value that is greater than the normal monthly revenue expected over the life of the remaining term.
As we continue to focus the majority of our development efforts on Spok Go, we anticipate a continued decline in our ability to sell new licenses for the Care Connect Suite of products. While we have not seen a meaningful increase in our normal customer churn, our ability to replace this churn with new revenues will not likely replicate what we have accomplished historically nor do we expect to fully offset this with annual increases of our existing base. Our intent is to replace this churn with the sale of Spok Go as well as transition existing on-premise customers to our cloud based solution over the next several years. Given these dynamics, we believe annual maintenance revenue is likely to be relatively flat or slightly down as we move forward, especially as we begin the process of transitioning existing customers to a subscription model.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses are presented in functional categories. Certain of our functional categories are especially important to overall expense control and management. These operating expenses are categorized as follows:
•Cost of Revenue. These are expenses primarily for hardware, third-party software, outside service expenses and payroll and related expenses for our professional services, logistics, customer support and maintenance staff.
•Research and Development. These expenses relate primarily to the development of new software products and the ongoing maintenance and enhancement of existing products. This classification consists primarily of employee payroll and related expenses, outside services related to the design, development, testing and enhancement of our solutions and to a lesser extent hardware equipment. The research and development costs exclude any development costs that qualify for capitalization.
•Technology Operations. These are expenses associated with the operation of our paging networks. Expenses consist largely of site rent expenses for transmitter locations, telecommunication expenses to deliver messages over our paging networks, and payroll and related expenses for our engineering and pager repair functions. We actively pursue opportunities to consolidate transmitters and other service, rental and maintenance expenses in order to maintain an efficient network while simultaneously ensuring adequate service for our customers. We believe continued reductions in these expenses will occur for the foreseeable future as our networks continue to be consolidated, although the benefits of such network rationalization efforts and resulting costs savings will continue to decline.
•Selling and Marketing. The sales and marketing staff are involved in selling our communication solutions primarily in the United States. These expenses support our efforts to maintain gross placements of units in service, which mitigated the impact of disconnects on our wireless revenue base, and to identify business opportunities for additional or future software sales. We have a centralized marketing function, that is focused on supporting our products and vertical sales efforts by strengthening our brand, generating sales leads and facilitating the sales process. These marketing functions are accomplished through targeted email campaigns, webinars, regional and national user conferences, monthly newsletters and participation at industry trade shows. Expenses consist largely of payroll and related expenses, commissions and other costs such as travel and advertising costs.
•General and Administrative. These are expenses associated with information technology and administrative functions, including finance and accounting, human resources and executive management. This classification consists primarily of payroll and related expenses, outside service expenses, taxes, licenses and permit expenses, and facility rent expenses.
•Depreciation, Amortization and Accretion. These are expenses that may be associated with one or more of the aforementioned functional categories. This classification generally consists of depreciation from capital expenditures or other assets that are core to our ongoing operations, amortization of intangible assets, amortization of capitalized software development costs, and accretion of asset retirement obligations.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consisted primarily of the following items:
Cost of revenue expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019, primarily due to the decrease in cost of sales, partially offset by an increase in payroll and related expenses. The decrease in cost of sales is primarily related to lower sales in 2020 as well as significant project delays as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in payroll and related expenses is primarily a reflection of full-year costs for a large number of personnel hired during the fourth quarter of 2019 as well as higher average cost per Full-Time Equivalent ("FTE") employee. This was partially offset by temporary cost reductions implemented by management beginning in the second quarter of 2020, in an effort to negate the impacts of COVID-19. These temporary cost reductions are outlined in more detail within our earlier discussion on COVID-19.
Research and Development
Research and development consisted primarily of the following items:
Research and development expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to the capitalization of certain development costs related to Spok Go. Refer to Note 1, "Organization and Significant Accounting Policies" and Note 5, "Consolidated Financial Statement Components" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further detail. The payroll and related costs decreased primarily as a result of lower headcount as well as the temporary cost reductions implemented by management beginning in the second quarter of 2020, in an effort to mitigate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. These temporary cost reductions are outlined in more detail within our discussion on the COVID-19 pandemic.
We continue to focus on the development efforts of our software solutions and intend to maintain these efforts based on their importance to our continued success. However, increases in development costs have grown at a slower pace when compared to prior years. Excluding the effects of capitalization, these costs will continue to substantially impact margins and our cash flow from operations. The benefits from our development efforts are contingent upon successful adoption of Spok Go in the marketplace, which we expect to gradually take place over the next several years.
Technology Operations
Technology operations consisted primarily of the following items:
Technology operations expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to the decrease in payroll and related and other minor expenses. The payroll and related costs decreased primarily as a result of lower headcount as well as temporary cost reductions implemented by management beginning in the second quarter of 2020, in an effort to mitigate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. These temporary cost reductions are outlined in more detail within our discussion on the COVID-19 pandemic above.
The number of active transmitters declined 5.1% from December 31, 2019, to December 31, 2020. The number of active transmitters directly relates to the amount of site rent expenses we generally incur on a recurring basis. As we reach certain minimum frequency commitments, as outlined by the FCC, we may be unable to continue our efforts to rationalize and consolidate our networks.
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing consisted primarily of the following items:
Selling and marketing expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to the decrease in payroll and related, commissions and advertising and events. The payroll and related expenses decreased primarily as a result of lower headcount as well as temporary cost reductions implemented by management beginning in the second quarter of 2020, in an effort to mitigate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. These temporary cost reductions are outlined in more detail within our discussion on the COVID-19 pandemic above. The decrease in commissions expense primarily relates to a corresponding decrease in revenue. The decrease in advertising and events expenses was largely the result of restrictions on travel and trade events due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative
General and administrative consisted primarily of the following items:
General and administrative expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to a decrease in payroll and related expenses, outside services and various other expenses, which were largely offset by increases in stock-based compensation and bad debt expense. Payroll and related expenses decreased primarily as a result of lower headcount as well as temporary cost reductions implemented by management beginning in the second quarter of 2020, in an effort to mitigate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. These temporary cost reductions are outlined in more detail within our earlier discussion on the COVID-19 pandemic above. Outside service expenses declined primarily as a result of lower recruiting and hiring costs. The increase in bad debt expense was partly due to our adoption of Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 2016-13, as we now carry an allowance for current unbilled receivables which was not included in 2019. The increase in stock-based compensation for the year was largely due to forfeitures related to the resignation of a named executive officer ("NEO") in 2019, as well as an expense related to the alternative deferred stock units ("DSU") plan available to our Board of Directors. Refer to Note 8, "Stockholder Equity" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further detail related to the alternative DSU plan.
Depreciation, Amortization and Accretion
For the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, depreciation, amortization and accretion expenses decreased by $0.2 million. Depreciation expenses decreased by $1.3 million for the year, however this was largely offset by $1.1 million in amortization of capitalized software development costs.
Goodwill Impairment
For the years ended December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, we recognized non-cash, pre-tax goodwill impairment charges of $25.0 million and $8.8 million, respectively, resulting from the Company's annual goodwill impairment testing performed in the fourth quarter of each year. Despite these impairment charges, our outlook for the business continues to remain strong. We believe the launch of Spok Go is set to meet a significant need in the healthcare marketplace and will create significant value for shareholders in the coming years. Refer to Note 1, "Organization and Significant Accounting Policies," and Note 6, "Goodwill and Intangible Assets, Net" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Interest Income, Other Income (Expense), and Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
Interest Income
Interest income decreased by $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to a decrease in interest earned on the Company's cash balances and short-term investments. This was driven by lower interest rates during the year, as the COVID-19 pandemic weighed on the U.S. economy.
Other Income (Expense)
For the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, other income (expense) decreased by $0.5 million, largely as a result of a decrease in gains on foreign currency.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
The effects of foreign taxes are immaterial for all periods presented. The following provides the effective tax rate reconciliation for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively (See Note 9, "Income Taxes" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion on our income taxes):
Provision for income taxes increased by $25.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019 due primarily to an increase in the deferred tax asset valuation allowance of $22.1 million and the goodwill impairment. Our investment in research and development qualifies for the research and development income tax credit under Section 41 of the Internal Revenue Code. Unused research and development tax credits have a 20-year carryover and will provide future tax benefits once Spok’s net operating losses are fully utilized.
We assess the recoverability of our deferred income tax assets, which represent the tax benefits of future tax deductions, based on available positive and negative evidence, and by considering the adequacy of future taxable income from all sources, including prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. This assessment is required to determine whether, based on all available evidence, it is more likely than not" (meaning a probability of greater than 50%) that all or some portion of our deferred income tax assets will be realized in future periods.
The cumulative loss incurred by the Company over the three-year period ended December 31, 2020 constitutes a piece of objective negative evidence which limits our ability to consider other subjective evidence. In addition, the uncertainty created by COVID-19 has significantly limited our ability to consider our projections for future profitability and growth in our assessment of the recoverability of our deferred income tax assets. Based on this evaluation, completed utilizing our annual long-range planning and forecasting updates that are traditionally completed in the fourth quarter of each year, we recorded a valuation allowance of $22.1 million, as of December 31, 2020, to reduce net deferred income tax assets as their realization did not meet the more-likely-than-not criterion. COVID-19 has significantly limited our ability to consider projections for future profitability as objectively verifiable positive evidence to support the realizability of deferred tax assets, as the projections rely on subjective estimates and assumptions regarding the market launch of our SaaS product, Spok Go. As a result, a valuation allowance was established against deferred tax assets associated with net operating losses and credits with set expiration dates.
Those deferred income tax assets which are not currently covered by a valuation allowance are those that are indefinite-lived, or whose temporary differences would reverse in the future and may result in the creation of an indefinite-lived deferred income tax asset, which we consider to be realized through future taxable income despite near term uncertainties. The amount of deferred income tax assets considered realizable, however, could be adjusted in the future if objective negative evidence in the form of cumulative losses is no longer present, additional weight is given to subjective evidence such as our projections for future profitability and growth, or other relevant factors arise. We did not record a valuation allowance during 2019.
Despite the need for a valuation allowance based on accounting guidance, our outlook for the business continues to remain strong. While we are limited in using only our projected future profitability and growth in assessing the recoverability of our deferred income tax assets based on Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 740, "Income Taxes," we are committed to generating taxable income and utilizing our deferred income tax assets prior to expiration. Refer to Note 1, "Organization and Significant Accounting Policies," and Note 9, "Income Taxes," for further discussion.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and Cash Equivalents
At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $48.7 million. The available cash and cash equivalents consist of invested cash and cash in our operating accounts. The invested cash is invested in interest-bearing funds managed by third-party financial institutions. These funds invest in direct obligations of the government of the United States. To date, we have experienced no loss or lack of access to our invested cash or cash equivalents; however, we can provide no assurance that access to our invested cash and cash equivalents will not be impacted by adverse market conditions.
We maintain a level of liquidity sufficient to allow us to meet our cash needs in both the short-term and long-term. At any point in time, we maintain approximately $7.0 to $15.0 million in our operating accounts that are with third-party financial institutions. While we monitor daily the cash balances in our operating accounts and adjust the cash balances as appropriate, these cash balances could be impacted if the underlying financial institutions fail or are subject to other adverse conditions in the financial markets. To date, we have experienced no loss or lack of access to cash in our operating accounts.
We intend to use our cash on hand to provide working capital, to support operations, to invest in our business and to return value to stockholders through cash dividends and possible repurchases of our common stock. We may also consider using cash to fund or complete opportunistic investments and acquisitions that we believe will provide a measure of growth or revenue stability while supporting our existing operations. Because we intend to continue investing heavily in the development of Spok Go over the next several years, commensurate with declining revenues from our wireless business, we anticipate that our cash on hand will decrease significantly during that period and possibly longer until revenue from Spok Go begins to be realized.
Cash Flows Overview
In the event that net cash provided by operating activities and cash on hand are not sufficient to meet future cash requirements, we may be required to reduce planned capital expenses, reduce or eliminate our cash dividends to stockholders, not resume our common stock repurchase program, sell assets or seek additional financing. We can provide no assurance that reductions in planned capital expenses or proceeds from asset sales would be sufficient to cover shortfalls in available cash or that additional financing would be available on acceptable terms.
Based on current and anticipated levels of operations, we anticipate net cash provided by operating activities, together with the available cash on hand at December 31, 2020, should be adequate to meet anticipated cash requirements for the foreseeable future.
The following table sets forth information on our net cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities for the periods stated:
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
As discussed above, we are dependent on cash flows from operating activities to meet our cash requirements. Cash from operations varies depending on changes in various working capital items, including deferred revenues, accounts payable, accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and various accrued expenses.
Cash provided by operating activities in 2020 was $26.2 million, due primarily to non-cash items such as goodwill impairment of $25 million, valuation allowance of $22.1 million, depreciation, amortization and accretion of $9.1 million, stock-based compensation of $5.5 million, and other non-cash items of $1.7 million, partially offset by the 2020 net loss of $44.2 million. Cash provided by operating activities also increased resulting from changes in accounts payable, accrued liabilities and other of $4.0 million, deferred revenue of $3.2 million and prepaid and other assets of $1.4 million, partially offset by a change in accounts receivable of $1.6 million.
Cash provided by operating activities in 2019 was $11.7 million, due primarily to non-cash items such as goodwill impairment of $8.8 million, depreciation, amortization and accretion of $9.2 million, stock-based compensation of $3.6 million, and other non-cash items of $0.7 million, partially offset by the 2019 net loss of $10.8 million and deferred income benefit of $3.2 million. Cash provided by operating activities also increased resulting from changes in prepaid expenses and other assets of $2.9 million and accounts receivable of $1.0 million and deferred revenue of $0.1 million, partially offset by a change in accounts payable, accrued liabilities and other of $0.6 million.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities in 2020 and 2019, was $14.6 million and $30.2 million, respectively, due primarily to the purchase and maturity of U.S. treasury securities, and capital expenditures. Additionally, in 2020 we began capitalizing certain software development costs.
Cash Used in Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities was $10.4 million and $17.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively, primarily due to cash distributions to stockholders of $9.8 million in 2020 and in 2019 and the repurchase of common stock of $6.6 million in 2019.
On February 17, 2021, the Board of Directors declared a regular quarterly cash dividend of $0.125 per share of common stock, with a record date of March 16, 2021, and a payment date of March 30, 2021. This cash dividend of approximately $2.4 million is expected to be paid from available cash on hand.
Commitments and Contingencies
The following table provides the Company's significant commitments and contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Our contractual payment obligations for operating leases apply to leases for office space and transmitter locations. Purchase obligations are defined as agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable, legally binding, non-cancelable, have a remaining term in excess of one year and that specify all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable pricing provisions; and the approximate timing of transactions. The amounts of such obligations are based on our contractual commitments, however, it is possible that we may be able to negotiate lower payments if we choose to exit these contracts before their expiration date.
Refer to Note 10, "Commitments and Contingencies," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial statements for further discussion of commitments and contingencies.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As such, we are not exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in such relationships.
Related Parties
Refer to Note 12, "Related Parties" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion on our related party transactions.
Inflation
Inflation has not had a material effect on our operations to date. System equipment and operating costs have not significantly increased in price, and the price of wireless messaging devices has tended to decline in recent years. Our general operating expenses, such as salaries, site rent for transmitter locations, employee benefits and occupancy costs, are subject to normal inflationary pressures.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company’s accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. As disclosed in Note 1, the preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates. We believe that the following discussion addresses the Company’s most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations and require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition
The majority of our revenues are derived from short-term contracts related to the sale of wireless paging services and software solutions. Our arrangements exist primarily with customers in the healthcare market and to a lesser extent state and federal governments, as well as large enterprise businesses.
Under the typical payment terms of our software contracts, customers will normally pay a material amount of the contract price immediately upon execution of the contract. The remaining payments are required when the product is delivered, when services begin and, to a lesser extent, when services are completed. For SaaS contracts, the subscription and premium support services are generally billed annually in advance while professional services are billed at various milestones which reflect work completed. Wireless services are generally billed as incurred on a monthly basis. Our contracts will generally result in billings in excess of revenue recognized, which we present as deferred revenues on the Consolidated Balance Sheets, primarily due to the receipt of payment in advance of the product or services we provide. Amounts billed and due from our customers are classified as accounts receivable on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. At times, we may have contracts which require us to perform work or provide products prior to billing which will generally result in revenue recognized in excess of billings. This excess is presented as unbilled receivables in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We generally do not have transactions that include a significant financing component (whether payments are made in advance or in arrears) as our contracts typically take less than 12 months to complete once started. We would not adjust the total consideration for the effects of a significant financing component if we anticipate, at contract inception, that the period between when we transfer a promised good or service to a customer and when the customer pays for that good or service will be one year or less.
We account for a contract when: (1) both parties have approved the contract through mutually signed agreements or through other methods such as purchase orders or master agreements; (2) the rights of the parties have been identified; (3) payment terms have been identified; (4) the contract has commercial substance; and (5) collectability of consideration is probable. We also evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as a single contract. In our evaluation, we consider criteria such as, but not limited to, whether: (1) the contracts are negotiated as a package with a single commercial objective; (2) the amount of consideration to be paid in one contract is dependent on the price or performance of another contract; and (3) some or all of the goods or services promised in the contracts are a single performance obligation. Should we consider contracts related, we would account for those contracts as if they were a single contract. Evaluating whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as a single contract requires significant judgment. In the aggregate, a decision to combine a group of contracts could significantly impact the amount of revenue and profit recorded in a given period.
We review each contract to determine whether to account for the various promises as one or more performance obligations. The assessment and determination of performance obligations for a given contract requires significant judgment. Wireless service contracts are generally considered to be a single promise and therefore accounted for as a single performance obligation. Contracts which include goods or services related to our software solutions and subscriptions are generally sold with multiple promises and therefore will often include multiple performance obligations. Material performance obligations related to the sale of our software solutions include software licenses, professional services, hardware and maintenance. Material performance obligations related to the sale of our SaaS platform include a SaaS subscription, professional services, and signature support services.
More often than not, total consideration will equate to the stated value on the contract taking into consideration any period or term over which services are to be provided, if applicable. However, we could have contracts in which variable consideration is present. It is common for our contracts that include wireless services to contain customer penalties if rental pagers are not returned and fees for usage of services in excess of the contractually allotted amount for a given period. It is also common for our contracts that include professional services to include travel-related costs. These are costs which we incur in the normal course of delivering professional services and are generally billable to the customer based on our incurred expenses. These elements of variable consideration are fully
constrained when an agreement is initially executed and are generally not considered estimable until the penalties, fees or costs have been incurred or are otherwise known. We include estimated amounts in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. Estimating variable consideration requires significant judgment and our assessment includes all relevant information that is reasonably available to us including historical, current and forecasted information. We have elected to exclude from revenue all amounts collected on behalf of third parties, and therefore, items such as sales and use tax are excluded from our calculation of the total transaction price.
If a contract is separated into more than one performance obligation we allocate the total transaction price to each performance obligation proportionately based on the estimated relative standalone selling price ("SSP") of the promised goods or services underlying each performance obligation. We rarely sell goods or services as readily observable standalone sales, however, if we do, the observable standalone sales are used to determine the SSP. In most cases, we must estimate the relative SSP which requires significant judgment and estimates. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, we determine the SSP using information that may include contractually stated prices, market conditions, costs, renewal contracts, list prices and other observable inputs. A discount is present if the total transaction price is less than the sum of the estimated SSPs of the goods or services promised in the contract. Discounts are generally allocated proportionately based on the relative SSP of the identified performance obligations for a given contract.
Our wireless, professional, maintenance, and subscription services are generally recognized over time due to a customer's simultaneous receipt and consumption of the benefit as we perform the work. As we transfer control over time, we recognize revenue based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation. The selection of the method to measure progress towards completion requires significant judgment and is based on the nature of the products or services to be provided. Generally, we use the time-elapsed measure of progress for performance obligations that include wireless, maintenance, or subscription services. We believe this method best depicts the simultaneous transfer and consumption of the benefit based on our performance as these services are generally considered standby services. For professional services, we leverage an input methodology based on the number of hours worked on a project versus the total expected hours necessary to complete the project. Revenues are recognized proportionally as hours are incurred. This is a significant area of judgment as it requires an estimate at completion ("EAC") for each contract. Our initial EAC is primarily based on prior experience also taking into consideration any specific facts and circumstances for a given contract. As projects progress, the EAC is periodically updated and reviewed to ensure the timing of revenue recognition is appropriate. The creation, maintenance and review of a project's EAC requires significant judgment to determine an appropriate number of hours over which the remaining project is expected to be completed.
Our software licenses and hardware are generally recognized at a point in time when we have transferred control to the customer. For software licenses, revenue is not recognized until the related license(s) has been made available to the customer and the customer can begin to benefit from its right to use the license(s). Our software licenses represent a right to use Spok’s Intellectual Property ("IP") as it exists at a point in time at which the license is granted. Many of our software licenses have significant standalone functionality due to their ability to process a transaction or perform a function or task, and we do not need to maintain those products, once provided to the customer, for value to exist. While the functionality of IP that we license may substantively change during the license period, customers are not contractually or practically required to update their license as a result of those changes. In most contracts transfer of control for software licenses occurs in a short period of time after a contract has been executed and licenses are made electronically available.
Contracts may be modified to account for changes in a project's scope or other customer requirements. Most of our contract modifications are for goods or services that are distinct from the existing contract. In these instances, the contract modification would either be recognized as an entirely new and separate contract or the modification would be treated as if it were a termination of the existing contract and the creation of a new contract including all undelivered goods and services under the previous contract. Revenue would be recognized on a prospective basis and a cumulative catch-up would not be recognized.
Income Taxes
We file a consolidated U.S. federal income tax return and income tax returns in state, local and foreign jurisdictions as required. The provision for current income taxes is calculated and accrued on income and expenses expected to be included in current year U.S. and foreign income tax returns. The provision for current income taxes may also include interest, penalties and an estimated amount reflecting uncertain tax positions.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are calculated based on temporary differences between the financial statement values and the tax bases of assets and liabilities including net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards at the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income when taxes are actually paid or recovered. Changes in deferred income tax assets and liabilities are included as a component of deferred income tax expense. Deferred income tax assets represent amounts available to reduce future income taxes payable. We assess the recoverability of our deferred income tax assets, which represent the tax benefits of future tax deductions,
based on available positive and negative evidence and by considering the adequacy of future taxable income from all sources, including prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. This assessment is required to determine whether, based on all available evidence, it is "more likely than not" (meaning a probability of greater than 50%) that all or some portion of our deferred income tax assets will be realized in future periods. We provide a valuation allowance when we consider it "more likely than not" that a deferred income tax asset will not be fully recovered. The assessment of our deferred income tax assets requires significant judgment.
Assets and liabilities are established for uncertain tax positions taken or positions expected to be taken in income tax returns when such positions fail to meet the "more likely than not" threshold based on the technical merits of the positions. We assess whether previously unrecognized tax benefits may be recognized when the tax position is (1) more likely than not of being sustained based on its technical merits, (2) effectively settled through examination, negotiation or litigation, or (3) settled through actual expiration of the relevant tax statutes. The assessment of an uncertain tax position requires significant judgment. We had no uncertain tax positions for the periods ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 (see Note 9, "Income Taxes," for additional details).
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets, Intangible Assets Subject to Amortization and Goodwill
We are required to evaluate the carrying value of our long-lived assets, amortizable intangible assets and goodwill. Amortizable intangible assets include customer-related intangibles that resulted from previous acquisitions. Such intangibles are amortized over periods up to ten years. Quarterly, we assess whether circumstances exist which suggest that the carrying value of long-lived and amortizable intangible assets may not be recoverable. When applicable, we assess the recoverability of the carrying value of our long-lived assets and certain amortizable intangible assets based on estimated undiscounted cash flows generated from such assets. In assessing the recoverability of these assets, we forecast estimated enterprise-level cash flows based on various operating assumptions such as revenue forecasted by product line and in-process research and development cost. If the forecast of undiscounted cash flows does not exceed the carrying value of the long-lived and amortizable intangible assets, we record an impairment charge to the extent the carrying value exceeded the fair value of such assets.
Goodwill is not amortized but is evaluated for impairment at least annually, or when events or circumstances suggest a potential impairment has occurred. We generally perform this annual impairment test in the fourth quarter of the fiscal year. We evaluate goodwill for impairment between annual tests if indicators of impairment exist. The impairment test involves comparing the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying value. An impairment charge is recognized for the amount that the carrying value exceeds the reporting unit's fair value. For purposes of the goodwill impairment evaluation, the Company as a whole is considered the reporting unit. The fair value of the reporting unit is estimated under a market-based approach using the fair value of the Company's common stock. The estimated fair value requires significant judgments, including timing and appropriateness of the price of common stock used (e.g. point-in-time application, simple moving average, exponential moving average), as well as application of an estimated control premium. The estimated control premium is based on a review of current and past market information published by a third-party resource, assessment of the Company's future projected discounted cash flows and other relevant information if available.
Based on our assessment during the fourth quarter of 2020, the estimated fair value exceeded the carrying value of the reporting unit and, therefore, an impairment existed. For additional details refer to Note 6, "Goodwill and Intangible Assets, Net."
We did not record any impairment of long-lived assets or definite-lived intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, "Recent and Pending Accounting Standards" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a summary of recent and pending accounting standards.