Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a multi-asset, clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on identifying, developing and commercializing treatments in high unmet need areas involving MDR bacterial infections and rare diseases. Our most advanced product candidate, tebipenem HBr, is designed to be the first broad-spectrum oral carbapenem-class antibiotic for use in adults to treat MDR Gram-negative infections. Treatment with effective orally administrable antibiotics may prevent hospitalizations for serious infections and enable earlier, more convenient and cost-effective treatment of patients after hospitalization. We are also developing SPR720, a novel oral antibiotic designed for the treatment of a rare, orphan disease caused by non-tuberculous mycobacterial pulmonary infections, or NTM disease. In addition, we have a Potentiator technology, which includes an IV-administered product candidate, SPR206, being developed to treat MDR Gram-negative infections in the hospital. We believe that our novel product candidates, if successfully developed and approved, would have a meaningful patient impact and significant commercial applications for the treatment of MDR infections in both the community and hospital settings. Since our inception in 2013, we have focused substantially all of our efforts and financial resources on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, acquiring and developing product and technology rights, building our intellectual property portfolio and conducting research and development activities for our product candidates. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales.
We have experienced net losses and significant cash outflows from cash used in operating activities since our inception. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $277.7 million, and cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $126.9 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. Based on our current plans, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, together with the committed funding from our existing BARDA contract and other non-dilutive funding commitments, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the second quarter of 2022, including through the submission of the NDA for tebipenem HBr. This timeline is subject to uncertainty as to the timing of future expenditures. We have developed plans to mitigate this risk, which primarily consist of raising additional capital through some combination of equity or debt financings, potential new collaborations, additional grant funding and/or reducing cash expenditures. If we are not able to secure adequate additional funding, we plan to make reductions in spending. In that event, we may have to delay, scale back, or eliminate some or all of our planned clinical trials and research stage programs. The actions necessary to reduce spending under this plan at a level that mitigates the factors described above is not considered probable, as defined in the accounting standards and therefore, the full extent to which management may extend our funds through these actions may not be considered in management’s assessment of our ability to continue as a going concern. As a result, management has concluded that substantial doubt exists about our ability to continue as a going concern.
We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates and do not enter into a commercialization partnership, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our internal commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing and distribution. Further, we expect to incur additional costs associated with our continued operation as a public company.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, government funding arrangements, collaborations, strategic alliances and marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more of our product candidates.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with pharmaceutical product development, we are unable to accurately predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
Recent Developments
Business Update regarding COVID-19
The spread of SARS-CoV-2, and the resulting disease COVID-19 in 2020, has caused an economic downturn on a global scale, as well as widespread business disruptions and significant volatility in the financial markets. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic. In response to the pandemic, we implemented and have maintained a remote working policy for all employees to aid the global containment effort.
Update on Phase 2a Clinical Trial
On February 5, 2021, we announced that the FDA informed us that a clinical hold had been placed on our Phase 2a clinical trial of SPR720, following our notification to the FDA of our decision to pause dosing in our ongoing Phase 2a clinical trial of SPR720 as a precautionary measure related to events in our ongoing animal toxicology study of SPR720. The decision to implement the pause was made based on a recommendation from the Company’s Safety Review Board, or SRB, following review of data from an ongoing toxicology study of SPR720 in adult non-human primates in which mortalities with inconclusive causality to treatment were observed.
The animal study is being conducted to assess the potential toxicity of SPR720. A concurrent study of SPR720 in rats is proceeding uneventfully. These studies are meant to support longer-term treatment with SPR720 beyond the 28 days currently supported by IND-enabling toxicology studies. No serious adverse events have been observed in any human study participants.
Subsequent to receiving verbal notification from the FDA of the clinical hold, we received a formal clinical hold letter in which the FDA has requested additional information from the non-human primate trial, including a study report. We have decided to discontinue the Phase 2a clinical trial at this time to best facilitate future potential adjustments to the protocol based on FDA feedback and to avoid incurring costs associated with the trial while on clinical hold. We are continuing to work with the FDA to evaluate the findings and determine the further development pathway for the SPR720 clinical program.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Grant Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the foreseeable future. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales. We cannot predict if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
To date, the majority of our revenue has been derived from government awards. We expect that our revenue for the next few years will be derived primarily from payments under our government awards that we have currently entered into and that we may enter into in the future.
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue relates to our agreement with Everest.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, which include:
•
employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits, travel and share-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•
expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates, including under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs;
•
costs incurred in connection with our government awards;
•
the cost of consultants and contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, that manufacture drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•
facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and supplies; and
•
payments made under third-party licensing agreements.
We have recorded research and development expenses conducted by our Australian subsidiary net of a 43.5% research and development tax incentive we expect to receive for qualified expenses from the Australian government.
In June 2019, we entered into a collaboration with Gates MRI, a nonprofit research institution wholly owned by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to develop SPR720 for the treatment of lung infections caused by Mtb. In furtherance of the Gates MRI’s charitable purposes, we also granted the Gates MRI a no cost, exclusive license to develop, manufacture and commercialize SPR720 for the treatment of TB in low- and middle- income countries. Gates MRI will conduct and fund preclinical and clinical studies for the development of SPR720 against TB and fund certain agreed upon collaborative research activities performed by us. Due to our assessment that we do not have a vendor/customer relationship with the Gates MRI, we recognize the funding received under the agreement as a reduction to the research and development expenses as the related expenses are incurred.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Nonrefundable advance payments we make for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. The prepaid amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
Our direct research and development expenses are tracked on a program-by-program basis and consist primarily of external costs, such as fees paid to consultants, contractors, CMOs and CROs in connection with our preclinical and clinical development activities. License fees and other costs incurred after a product candidate has been designated and that are directly related to the product candidate are included in direct research and development expenses for that program. License fees and other costs incurred prior to designating a product candidate are included in early stage research programs. We do not allocate employee costs, costs associated with our preclinical programs or facility expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple product development programs and, as such, are not separately classified.
Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials.
At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development of any of our product candidates. The successful development and commercialization of our product candidates is highly uncertain. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties, including the following:
•
successful completion of clinical trials with safety, tolerability and efficacy profiles that are satisfactory to the FDA or any comparable foreign regulatory authority, including on account of the disruptive impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•
receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•
establishment of arrangements with third-party manufacturers to obtain manufacturing supply;
•
obtainment and maintenance of patent, trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity, both in the United States and internationally, including our ability to maintain our license agreement with Meiji with respect to tebipenem HBr;
•
protection of our rights in our intellectual property portfolio;
•
launch of commercial sales of tebipenem HBr and our other product candidates, if approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
•
acceptance of tebipenem HBr and our other product candidates, if approved, by patients, the medical community and third-party payors;
•
competition with other therapies; and
•
a continued acceptable safety profile of tebipenem HBr and our other product candidates, if approved.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including share-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include direct and allocated facility-related costs as well as professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, investor and public relations, accounting and audit services. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the foreseeable future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research, development, and commercialization of our product candidates. We also anticipate that we will incur increased accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, compliance, infrastructure, and director and officer insurance costs as well as investor and public relations expenses associated with our continued operation as a public company.
Other Income (Expense)
Anti-Dilution Rights. In connection with the issuance of non-controlling interests in certain of our subsidiaries, specifically Spero Gyrase, Inc., we granted the minority investors the right to maintain ownership interests at no additional cost, subject to a maximum ownership percentage, which rights we refer to collectively as anti-dilution rights. We classified the anti-dilution rights as derivative liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet that we remeasured to fair value at each reporting date, and we recognized changes in the fair value of the derivative liabilities associated with the anti-dilution rights as a component of other income (expense) in our consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. In November 2019, we repurchased 100% of the minority investor’s outstanding shares in Spero Gyrase, Inc. at a price of $0.001 per share. As a result, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there are no anti-dilution rights outstanding. Additionally, effective as of January 1, 2020, we merged Spero Gyrase, Inc. with and into Spero, Therapeutics, Inc.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash equivalents, which are primarily invested in money market accounts, as well as interest earned on our investments in marketable securities that we held during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net, consists of insignificant amounts of miscellaneous income, as well as realized and unrealized gains and losses from foreign currency-denominated cash balances, vendor payables and receivables from the Australian research and development tax incentive.
Income Taxes
Since our inception, we have not recorded any income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred in each year or for our earned research and development tax credits, as we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all of our net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits will not be realized. As of December 31, 2020, we had federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of $228.1 million and $226.2 million, respectively, which may be available to offset future income tax liabilities. The federal NOLs of $73.0 million will expire at various dates from 2033 to 2037 and approximately $155.1 million can be carried forward indefinitely. The state NOLs begin to expire in 2033 and will expire at various dates through 2039. In addition, as of December 31, 2020, we had foreign net operating loss carryforwards of $10.7 million, which may be available to offset future income tax liabilities and do not expire. As of December 31, 2020, we also had federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $6.7 million and $1.4 million, respectively, which begin to expire in 2033 and 2028, respectively. We have recorded a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets at each balance sheet date.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Funding Received from Government Contracts and Collaborations
Since our inception, we have been able to obtain partial funding for our research and development activities from government contracts, government tax incentives and a collaboration arrangement. The classification within our statement of operations and comprehensive loss of the funding received under these arrangements is subject to management judgment based on the nature of the arrangements we enter into, the source of the funding and whether the funding is considered central to our business operations.
Government Contracts
We generate revenue from government contracts that reimburse us for certain allowable costs for funded projects. For contracts with government agencies, when we have concluded that we are the principal in conducting the research and development expenses and where the funding arrangement is considered central to our ongoing operations, we classify the recognized funding received as revenue. Revenue from government grants is recognized as the qualifying expenses related to the contracts are incurred, provided that there is reasonable assurance of recoverability. Revenue recognized upon incurring qualifying expenses in advance of receipt of funding is recorded as unbilled receivables, a component of prepaid expenses and other current assets, in the consolidated balance sheet.
We recognize funding received from BARDA, the DoD and the NIAID of the NIH, as revenue, rather than as a reduction of research and development expenses, because we are the principal in conducting the research and development activities and these contracts are central to our ongoing operations. We recognize revenue only after the qualifying expenses related to the contracts have been incurred, we are reasonably assured that the expenses will be reimbursed and the revenue is collectible. We record revenue recognized upon incurring qualifying expenses in advance of billing as unbilled revenue, which is included in other receivables in our consolidated balance sheet. The related costs incurred by us are included in research and development expense in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Collaboration Agreements
For collaboration agreements with a third party, to determine the appropriate statement of operations classification of the recognized funding, we first assess whether the collaboration arrangement is within the scope of the accounting guidance for collaboration arrangements. If it is, we evaluate the collaborative arrangement for proper classification in the statement of operations based on the nature of the underlying activity and we assess the payments to and from the collaborative partner. If the payments to and from the collaborative partner are not within the scope of other authoritative accounting guidance, we base the statement of operations classification for the payments received on a reasonable, rational analogy to authoritative accounting guidance, applied in a consistent manner. Conversely, if the collaboration arrangement is not within the scope of accounting guidance for collaboration arrangements, we assess whether the collaboration arrangement represents a vendor/customer relationship. If the collaborative arrangement does not represent a vendor/customer relationship, we then classify the funding payments received in the statement of operations and comprehensive loss as a reduction of the related expense that is incurred.
In June 2019, we entered into a collaboration agreement with the Gates MRI and concluded that the agreement is within the scope of the accounting guidance for collaboration arrangements. Due to the cost-funded nature of the payments and our assessment that we do not have a vendor/customer relationship with the Gates MRI, we will recognize the funding received under the agreement as a reduction to research and development expense as we incur the related expenses.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of the estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•
vendors in connection with the preclinical development activities;
•
CMOs in connection with the production of preclinical and clinical trial materials;
•
CROs in connection with preclinical and clinical studies; and
•
investigative sites in connection with clinical trials.
We base our expenses related to preclinical studies and clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Share-Based Compensation
We measure all share-based awards granted to employees and directors based on the fair value on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, and we recognize compensation expense of those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. Generally, we issue awards with only service-based vesting conditions and record the expense for these awards using the straight-line method. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model uses as inputs the fair value of our common stock and assumptions we make for the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our common stock options and performance-based awards, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our common stock options and performance-based awards, and our expected dividend yield.
Results of Operations
Our financial statements have been presented on the basis that we are a going concern, which contemplates the realization of revenues and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. We have incurred losses from the inception of our operations. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Grant Revenue
Grant revenue recognized during 2020 and 2019 consisted of the reimbursement of qualifying expenses incurred in connection with our various government awards. The decrease in revenue during 2020 was primarily due to decreased funding received under our BARDA contract for tebipenem HBr.
Collaboration Revenue
During the years December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $0.3 million and $4.7 million of revenue, respectively, related to our agreement with Everest, consisting of the performance of research and development services.
Research and Development Expenses
Direct costs related to our tebipenem HBr program decreased by $1.5 million during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to the completion of significant activities and related costs of the Phase 3 clinical trial in 2020. We initiated enrollment for the phase 3 clinical trial in the first quarter of 2019, completed enrollment in the second quarter of 2020 and announced results of topline data in September 2020. This decrease was partially offset by increases in expenses related to formulation development, manufacturing process and manufacturing of clinical trial material in 2020 compared to 2019. We expect to continue to incur direct costs related to tebipenem HBr as we finalize activities in the Phase 3 clinical trial and incur expenses related to a potential NDA filing for tebipenem HBr.
Direct costs related to our SPR720 program increased by $0.1 million during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to increased expenses related to the initiation of our Phase 2a clinical trial, offset by decreased costs related to the formulation development, manufacturing process and manufacturing of clinical trial material. Direct costs related to our SPR720 program during the year ended December 31, 2020 reflect a $2.1 million reduction to expense related to activities funded by Gates MRI, compared to $1.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. On February 5, 2021, we announced that the FDA informed us that a clinical hold had been placed on our Phase 2a clinical trial of SPR720, which is further described elsewhere in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” section of our Annual Report on Form 10-K under the heading “Recent Developments - Update on Phase 2a Clinical Trial.”
Direct costs related to our Potentiator product candidates include costs related to our SPR206 and SPR741 programs. Direct costs related to our SPR206 program decreased by $2.0 million during 2020, primarily due to higher costs incurred in the prior year related to the Phase 1 trial. Direct costs related to our SPR741 program were immaterial for both the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. In January 2020, we decided to proceed with SPR206 as the lead Potentiator product candidate and discontinue development of SPR741.
During 2020 and 2019, research and development expenses conducted by our Australian subsidiary were recorded net of a 43.5% research and development tax incentive for qualified expenses from the Australian government, resulting in a receivable of $1.2 million.
The increase in personnel-related costs included in unallocated expenses of $4.0 million was primarily due to an increase in research and development headcount and a $0.6 million increase in share-based compensation.
The increase in facility-related and other costs was primarily due to the increased costs of supporting a larger research and development staff.
General and Administrative Expenses
The increase in personnel-related costs of $2.6 million was primarily a result of an increase in headcount in our general and administrative function. Personnel-related costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included share-based compensation expense of $2.7 million and $2.2 million, respectively.
The increase in professional and consultant fees of $2.4 million primarily related to increased commercial operations expenses, as well as increased IT, HR and Finance contractor and consulting expenses related to supporting the growth in our business.
The increase in facility-related and other costs was primarily due to the increased costs of supporting a larger number of general and administrative personnel.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income, net was $0.8 million during 2020, compared to $2.3 million during 2019. Other income, net in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily comprised of unrealized foreign currency gains, offsetting decreased interest income due to falling interest rates. In comparison, other income, net, for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of other income of $2.1 million, which was primarily related to interest income on our invested cash balances and marketable securities, as well as $0.2 million in connection with the repurchase of Vaxart Inc.’s outstanding shares in Spero Gyrase, Inc. at a price of $0.001 per share.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. We have recognized limited revenue to date from funding arrangements with the DoD, NIAID, CARB-X and BARDA and our license agreement with Everest. We have not yet commercialized any of our product candidates and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any product candidates for several years, if at all. To date, we have funded our operations with proceeds from the sales of preferred units and bridge units, payments received under license and collaboration agreements and funding from government contracts, and from multiple equity financings of our common and preferred stock. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $126.9 million.
On September 15, 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of an aggregate of 4,785,000 shares of our common stock and 3,215,000 shares of our Series D Preferred Stock. The price to the public in the offering was $10.00 per share with respect to the common stock and the Series D Preferred Stock. In addition, under the terms of the Underwriting Agreement, we granted the underwriters an option, exercisable for 30 days, to purchase up to 1,200,000 additional shares of common stock.
The shares of Series D Preferred Stock are convertible on a one-to-one basis into shares of common stock at any time at the option of the holder, provided that the holder will be prohibited from converting the Series D Preferred Stock into shares of common stock if, as a result of such conversion, the holder, together with its affiliates, would own more than 9.99% of the total number of shares of common stock then issued and outstanding, subject to certain exceptions. In the event of the Company’s liquidation, dissolution, or winding up, holders of Series D Preferred Stock will receive a payment equal to $0.001 per share of Series D Preferred Stock before any proceeds are distributed to the holders of common stock and equal to any distributions to the holders of Series A Preferred Stock, Series B Preferred Stock and Series C Preferred Stock. Shares of Series D Preferred Stock will generally have no voting rights, except as required by law and except that the consent of holders of a majority of the then outstanding Series D Preferred Stock will be required to amend the terms of the Series D Preferred Stock. As such, we have classified the Series D Convertible Preferred Stock within permanent equity in its consolidated balance sheet.
The offering closed on September 15, 2020 with an aggregate public offering price of $80.0 million. Aggregate net proceeds from the offering were $74.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by us.
In addition, pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, on October 1, 2020, we issued and sold 1,200,000 shares of common stock at the price of $10.00 per share pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise of their option to purchase additional shares of common stock, resulting in additional net proceeds of approximately $11.2 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions.
On February 11, 2020, the Company announced a rights offering pursuant to which it distributed to holders of its common stock and Series A Preferred Stock and Series B Preferred Stock, at no charge, non-transferable subscription rights to purchase shares of our common stock and Series C Preferred Stock, with an aggregate offering value of $30.0 million. For each share of common stock (including shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of our outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock and Series B Preferred Stock) owned by holders of record as of 5:00 p.m., New York time, on February 10, 2020, such holders received 0.152 rights to purchase shares of our common stock (subject to the aggregate offering threshold and certain ownership limitations). Each whole right allowed holders to subscribe for one share of common stock at the subscription price equal to $9.00 per whole share (or an equivalent number of shares of Series C Preferred Stock). The total number of subscription rights issued to each stockholder was rounded down to the nearest whole number.
Any participant in the rights offering that, following exercise of such participant’s subscription right, would be or become a holder of greater than 9.99% of the outstanding number of shares of the Company’s common stock following the offering could elect to instead purchase Series C Preferred Stock at a purchase price of $9,000 per share (ratably adjusted for fractional shares), and any such holder so electing had a right to purchase one one-thousandth of a share of Series C Preferred Stock for each share of common stock it had a right to purchase under the subscription rights. Each share of Series C Preferred Stock is convertible into 1,000 shares of our common stock at the election of the holder, subject to beneficial ownership conversion limits applicable to the Series C Preferred Stock. The Series C Preferred Stock generally have no voting rights, except as required by law, and participate pari passu (on an as-converted basis) with any distribution of proceeds to holders of common stock and Series A Preferred Stock and Series B Preferred Stock, in the event of the Company’s liquidation, dissolution or winding up or the payment of a dividend on the common stock.
At the closing of the rights offering on March 5, 2020, a total of 1,046,249 shares of our common stock and 2,287 shares of Series C Preferred Stock were issued for aggregate gross proceeds of $30.0 million. Issuance costs related to the offering were $0.5 million.
On December 3, 2018, we filed a universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-228661) with the SEC, which was declared effective on December 11, 2018, and pursuant to which we registered for sale up to $200.0 million of any combination of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, rights and/or units from time to time and at prices and on terms that we may determine, including up to $50.0 million of our common stock available for issuance pursuant to an “at-the-market” offering program sales agreement that we entered into with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co, or Cantor. Under the sales agreement, Cantor may sell shares of our common stock by any method permitted by law deemed to be an “at the market,” or ATM, offering as defined in Rule 415 of the Securities Act, subject to the terms of the sales agreement.
The prospectus underlying the “at-the-market” offering program was terminated on September 9, 2020 in connection with our underwritten public offering that was completed in September 2020. At such time, we had raised approximately $15.4 million in sales of our common stock under the “at-the-market” offering program, prior to deducting sales commissions, and had remaining available capacity of approximately $34.6 million. On November 13, 2020, we reinstated the “at-the-market” offering program with a capacity of up to $34 million by filing an updated prospectus.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 993,870 shares of our common stock under the “at-the-market” agreement at an average price of approximately $13.66 per share for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $13.6 million prior to deducting sales commissions.
Concurrently with the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we entered into a new sales agreement with Cantor and will file a new universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3, including an “at-the-market” prospectus with the SEC, which is further described elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K under “Item 9B. Other Events.” Our existing sales agreement with Cantor will terminate automatically at such time as the SEC declares effective our new universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3.
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in ongoing volatility in financial markets. If our access to capital is restricted or associated borrowing costs increase as a result of developments in financial markets relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, our operations and financial condition could be adversely impacted.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $85.9 million, primarily resulting from our net loss of $78.3 million, adjusted for net non-cash items of $5.9 million (primarily stock-based compensation and depreciation and amortization expense). Net cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities was $(13.5) million and consisted primarily of a decrease of $12.1 million in accrued expenses and accounts payable, a $1.9 million increase in other assets and a $1.2 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, partially offset by a $2.2 million net decrease in receivables related to our government awards.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $50.0 million, primarily resulting from our net loss of $60.9 million, adjusted for net non-cash items of $4.1 million (primarily stock-based compensation and depreciation and amortization expense). Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities was $6.8 million and consisted primarily of an increase of $13.8 million in accrued expenses and accounts payable and a $2.7 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets, offset by a $7.1 million increase in receivables related to our government awards and a $2.9 million increase in other assets.
Changes in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities, and prepaid expenses and other current assets in all periods were generally due to the advancement of our development programs and the timing of vendor invoicing and payments.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $10.5 million, primarily related to the maturities of marketable securities of $56.4 million, offset by purchases of marketable securities of $45.7 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $29.5 million and consisted primarily of the net maturities of marketable securities, as well as $0.3 million in property and equipment purchases.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $130.9 million, consisting primarily of proceeds of $116.5 million from the sale of common stock, Series C Preferred Stock and Series D Preferred Stock in our rights offering and underwritten public offering, net proceeds of $13.2 million from the sale of common stock under our “at-the-market” offering program sales agreement and proceeds of $2.2 million from the exercise of employee stock options, offset by the payment of offering expenses of approximately $1.0 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $16.1 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds of $5.8 million from the sale of common stock under our “at-the-market” offering program sales agreement, proceeds of $10.0 million from the sale of common stock to Novo, both of which were offset by offering expenses of $0.2 million, as well as $0.5 million of proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance our clinical programs and prepare for possible commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs associated with our continued operation as a public company. The timing and amount of our operating expenditures will depend largely on:
•
the timing and costs of our ongoing and planned clinical trials;
•
the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of preclinical studies and clinical trials of our other product candidates and potential new product candidates;
•
the amount of funding that we receive under government contracts that we have applied for;
•
the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue;
•
the outcome, timing and costs of seeking regulatory approvals;
•
the costs of commercialization activities for tebipenem HBr and other product candidates if we receive marketing approval, including the costs and timing of establishing product sales, marketing, distribution and manufacturing capabilities;
•
the receipt of marketing approval and revenue received from any potential commercial sales of tebipenem HBr;
•
the terms and timing of any future collaborations, licensing or other arrangements that we may establish;
•
the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights, including milestone and royalty payments and patent prosecution fees that we are obligated to pay pursuant to our license agreements;
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending against any intellectual property related claims;
•
the costs of operating as a public company; and
•
the extent to which we in-license or acquire other products and technologies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $126.9 million. In accordance with Accounting Standards Update, or ASU, 2014-15, Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern (Subtopic 205-40), we are required to evaluate whether there are conditions and events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern from the issuance date of our financial statements. Based on our current plans, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, together with the committed funding from our existing BARDA contract and other non-dilutive funding commitments, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the second quarter of 2022, including through the submission of the NDA for tebipenem HBr.
This timeline is subject to uncertainty as to the timing of future expenditures. We have developed plans to mitigate this risk, which primarily consist of raising additional capital through some combination of equity or debt financings, potential new collaborations, additional grant funding and/or reducing cash expenditures. If we are not able to secure adequate additional funding, we plan to make reductions in spending. In that event, we may have to delay, scale back, or eliminate some or all of our planned clinical trials, research stage programs and commercial activities. The actions necessary to reduce spending under this plan at a level that mitigates the factors described above is not considered probable, as defined in the accounting standards and therefore, the full extent to which management may extend our funds through these actions may not be considered in management’s assessment of our ability to continue as a going concern. As a result, management has concluded that substantial doubt exists about our ability to continue as a going concern.
We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our working capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on and could increase significantly as a result of many factors, including those listed above.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, government funding, collaborations, strategic alliances and marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our stockholders’ ownership interests will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions or capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in ongoing volatility in financial markets. If our access to capital is restricted or associated borrowing costs increase as a result of developments in financial markets, including relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, our operations and financial condition could be adversely impacted. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our research, product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the effects that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods:
(1)
Reflects payments due for our lease of office space under an operating lease agreement that expires in 2027.
As further described below, under various licensing and related agreements with third parties, we have agreed to make milestone payments and pay royalties to third parties. We have not included any contingent payment obligations, such as milestones or royalties, in the table above as the amount, timing and likelihood of such payments are not known.
Under our license agreement with Meiji, we are obligated (i) to make future milestone payments of up to $2.0 million upon the achievement of specified clinical and regulatory milestones for tebipenem HBr, (ii) to pay royalties, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, of a low single-digit percentage based on net sales of products licensed under the agreement and (iii) to pay to Meiji a low double-digit percentage of any sublicense fees received by us up to $7.5 million. During the fourth quarter of 2018 we paid Meiji approximately $1.6 million related to fixed assets which will be used in manufacturing related activities at Meiji. The equipment has been capitalized as property and equipment in the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Under an agreement we entered into with PBB, we are obligated to make milestone payments of up to $5.8 million upon the achievement of specified clinical milestones and a payment of £5.0 million ($6.8 million as of December 31, 2020) upon the achievement of a specified commercial milestone for SPR206. In addition, we have agreed to pay to PBB royalties, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, of a low single-digit percentage based on net sales of products licensed under the agreement.
Under our agreement with Vertex, we are obligated to make future milestone payments of up to $80.2 million upon the achievement of specified clinical, regulatory and commercial milestones and to pay to Vertex tiered royalties, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, of a mid single-digit to low double-digit percentage based on net sales of products licensed under the agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid Vertex $0.9 million related to the achievement of regulatory milestones for SPR720.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs, CMOs and other third parties for clinical trials, preclinical research studies and testing, manufacturing and other services. These contracts are cancelable by us upon prior notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including non-cancellable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation. These payments are not included in the table of contractual obligations and commitments above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our business.