Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the section titled “Selected Financial Data” and our audited financial statements and related notes which are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements included in this discussion as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited to, those discussed in “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
SPS Commerce is a leading provider of cloud-based solutions that make it easier for retailers, suppliers, grocers, distributors, and logistics firms to orchestrate the management of item data, order fulfillment, inventory control and sales analytics across all channels. The solutions offered by SPS Commerce eliminate the need for on-premise software and support staff by taking on that capability on the customer’s behalf. We derive the majority of our revenues from numerous monthly recurring subscriptions from businesses that utilize our solutions.
We plan to continue to grow our business by further penetrating the supply chain management market, increasing revenues from our customers as their businesses grow, expanding our distribution channels, expanding our international presence and, from time to time, developing new solutions and applications. We also intend to selectively pursue acquisitions that will add customers, allow us to expand into new regions or allow us to offer new functionalities. On December 16, 2020, we acquired D Masons Software, LLC (Data Masons), a leading provider of EDI System Automation solutions for the Microsoft Dynamics market. Due to the date of acquisition being near year-end, the acquisition did not have a material impact on operating results.
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we generated revenues of $312.6 million, $279.1 million and $248.2 million, respectively. Our quarter ended December 31, 2020 represented our 80th consecutive quarter of increased revenues. Recurring revenues from recurring revenue customers accounted for 94%, 94%, and 93% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Our revenues are not concentrated with any customer, as our largest customer represented less than 1% of total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Impact of COVID-19
Although the global emergence of COVID-19 did not have a material adverse effect on our business, operating results, and overall financial performance for the year ended December 31, 2020, the future impact remains uncertain and depends on several factors, including, but not limited to, the pandemic’s duration and continued spread, impact on our customers, impact on our partners or employees, and impact on the economic environment and financial markets, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. We have seen shifts in consumer and retailer behavior during the pandemic. We believe these shifts have not had a material positive or negative impact on our business as they appear to have increased the demand for EDI services in certain customer segments and decreased it in others. We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations, as may be required by federal, state, or local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners, and shareholders.
Key Financial Terms and Metrics
Sources of Revenues
Fulfillment. Our Fulfillment solution provides fulfillment automation and replaces or augments an organization’s existing trading partner electronic communication infrastructure, enabling suppliers to have visibility into the journey of an order and comply with retailers’ rule books and enabling the electronic exchange of information among numerous trading partners through various protocols.
Analytics. Our Analytics solution consists of data analytics applications that enable our customers to improve their visibility across, and analysis of, their supply chains. When focused on point-of-sale data, for example, retailers and suppliers can ensure inventory is located where demand is highest. Retailers improve their visibility into supplier performance and their understanding of product sell-through.
SPS COMMERCE, INC.
Form 10-K for the Annual Period ended December 31, 2020
Other. We provide several peripheral solutions such as our assortment solution (which enables accurate order management and rapid fulfillment) and our community solution (which accelerates vendor onboarding and ensures trading partner adoption of new supply chain requirements). In addition to our solution offerings, we also provide one-time services such as professional services and testing and certification.
Cost of Revenues and Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenues. Cost of revenues consist primarily of personnel costs for our customer success and implementation teams, customer support personnel and application support personnel. Cost of revenues also includes our cost of network services, which is primarily data center costs for the locations where we keep the equipment that serves our customers, cloud provider services, and connectivity costs that facilitate electronic data transmission between our customers and their trading partners.
Sales and Marketing Expenses. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for our sales, marketing and product management teams, commissions earned by our sales personnel and marketing costs.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for development of new and maintenance of existing solutions, net of amounts capitalized as developed software. Our research and development group is also responsible for enhancing existing solutions and applications, internal tools, and developing new information maps that integrate our customers to their trading partners in compliance with those trading partners’ requirements.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for finance, human resources, and internal information technology support, as well as legal, accounting, and other fees, such as bad debt expense and credit card processing fees.
Overhead Allocation. We allocate overhead expenses such as rent, certain employee benefit costs, office supplies and depreciation of general office assets to cost of revenues and operating expenses categories based on headcount.
Other Metrics
Recurring Revenue Customers. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately 33,000 customers with contracts to pay us recurring fees, which we refer to as recurring revenue customers. We report recurring revenue customers as of the end of a period. A small portion of our recurring revenue customers consist of separate units within a larger organization. We treat each of these units, which may include divisions, departments, affiliates and franchises, as distinct customers.
Average Recurring Revenues Per Recurring Revenue Customer. We calculate average recurring revenues per recurring revenue customer, which we also refer to as wallet share, by dividing the recurring revenues from recurring revenue customers for the period by the average of the beginning and ending number of recurring revenue customers for the period. For interim periods, we annualize this number by multiplying the quotient calculated above by the quotient of 12 divided by the number of months in the period. We anticipate that average recurring revenues per recurring revenue customer will continue to increase as we increase the number of solutions we offer and increase the penetration of those solutions across our customer base.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures. To supplement our financial statements, we also provide investors with Adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP income per share, both of which are non-GAAP financial measures. We believe that these non-GAAP measures provide useful information to management and investors regarding certain financial and business trends relating to our financial condition and results of operations. Our management uses these non-GAAP measures to compare the company’s performance to that of prior periods for trend analyses and planning purposes. Adjusted EBITDA is also used for purposes of determining executive and senior management incentive compensation. These measures are also presented to our board of directors.
These non-GAAP measures should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures exclude significant expenses and income that are required by GAAP to be recorded in the Company’s financial statements and are subject to inherent limitations. Investors should review the reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures to the comparable GAAP financial measures that are included in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
SPS COMMERCE, INC.
Form 10-K for the Annual Period ended December 31, 2020
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. We base our estimates of the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that our significant accounting policies, which are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity and are material to our financial statement presentation. A critical accounting policy is one that is both material to the presentation of our financial statements and requires us to make difficult, subjective, or complex judgments for uncertain matters that could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are recognized when our services are made available to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we are contractually and legally entitled to in exchange for those services. Our set-up fees from customers are one-time revenues that are specific for each connection a customer has with a trading partner and many of our customers have connections with numerous trading partners. Set-up fees related to our cloud-based supply chain management solutions are nonrefundable upfront fees that are necessary for our customers to utilize our cloud-based services. These set-up fees do not provide any standalone value to our customers.
Certain contracts contain set-up fees that constitute a material renewal option right. This material right provides customers a significant future incentive that would not be otherwise available to that customer unless they entered into the contract as the set-up fees will not be incurred again upon contract renewal.
For our Fulfillment solution, we have determined that the set-up fees and related costs represent a material renewal option right to our customers as they will not be incurred again upon renewal. These set-up fees and related costs are deferred and recognized ratably over two years, which is the estimated period for which a material right is present for our customers.
For our Analytics solution, we have determined that the set-up fees do not represent a material customer renewal right and, as such, are deferred and recognized ratably over the estimated initial contract term, which is one year.
Internal-Use Software
Internal-use software consists of capitalized costs incurred during the application development stage, which include costs related to the design of the chosen path, coding, installation of the hardware necessary to run the software, and any testing done before the operational stage. Costs incurred during the preliminary project stage and post-implementation stage are expensed as incurred. Internal-use software is depreciated over the estimated useful life, three years, commencing on the date when the asset is ready for its intended use. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method. Maintenance and enhancements of internal-use software are expensed as incurred.
Business Combinations
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets.
Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired customers and acquired technology from a market participant perspective, useful lives, and discount rates. Significant estimates in valuing liabilities for contingent consideration include, but are not limited to,
SPS COMMERCE, INC.
Form 10-K for the Annual Period ended December 31, 2020
discount rates, projected financial results of the acquired businesses based on our most recent internal forecasts, and factors indicating the probability of achieving the forecasted results.
Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table presents our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenues. The increase in revenues resulted from two primary factors: the increase in recurring revenue customers, which is driven by continued business growth and by business acquisitions, and the increase in average recurring revenues per recurring revenue customer, which we also refer to as wallet share.
•
The number of recurring revenue customers increased 8% to 33,151 at December 31, 2020 from 30,771 at December 31, 2019.
•
Wallet share increased 6% to $9,231 at December 31, 2020 from $8,722 at December 31, 2019. This was primarily attributable to increased usage of our solutions by our recurring revenue customers.
Recurring revenues from recurring revenue customers increased 13% in 2020, as compared to 2019, and accounted for 94% of our total revenues in 2020, unchanged from 94% in 2019. We anticipate that the number of recurring revenue customers and wallet share will continue to increase as we increase the number of solutions we offer and increase the penetration of those solutions across our customer base.
SPS COMMERCE, INC.
Form 10-K for the Annual Period ended December 31, 2020
Cost of Revenues. The increase in cost of revenues was primarily due to increased headcount which resulted in an increase of $5.5 million in personnel-related costs, such as salaries and benefits, and an increase of $1.1 million in stock-based compensation expense. Additionally, a $1.5 million increase in depreciation expense pertaining to continued investment in infrastructure to support our platform contributed to the increase in cost of revenue. Last, $0.5 million increase in software subscriptions utilized in optimizing internal productivity. The increases were partially offset by a decrease of $1.0 million in network costs.
Sales and Marketing Expenses. The increase in sales and marketing expense was primarily due to increased headcount which resulted in increases of $2.7 million in personnel-related costs, such as salaries and benefits, and an increase of $1.2 million in stock-based compensation expense. The increase was also partially related to a $1.2 million increase in variable compensation earned by referral partners. Additionally, increases of $0.4 million in promotional expenses and $0.4 million in software subscriptions utilized in optimizing internal productivity.
Research and Development Expenses. The increase in research and development expense was primarily due to increased headcount which resulted in an increase of $0.7 million in personnel-related costs, such as salaries and benefits, and an increase of $1.0 million in stock-based compensation expense. The increase was also partially related to increases in occupancy expense of $0.4 million, depreciation expense of $0.3 million, and $0.3 million in software subscriptions utilized in optimizing internal productivity.
General and Administrative Expenses. The increase in general and administrative expense was primarily due to continued business growth which resulted in increases of $2.2 million in bad debt expense and $0.4 million in credit card fees. Additionally, increases of $2.0 million in charitable donations and $1.0 million in stock-based compensation expenses led to the overall increase, partially offset by a decrease of $0.2 million in personnel-related costs.
Amortization of Intangible Assets. The increase in amortization of intangible assets was driven by the amortization of the acquired intangible assets related to Data Masons.
Other Income (Expense). The decrease in interest income, net, other income (expense), net, and change in earn-out liability was primarily due to decreased interest income from investments and the decrease in the fair value of the earn-out liability, offset by increased realized gains from foreign currency on cash and investments held. The change in fair value of the earn-out liability was driven by an adjustment to the fair value of the EDIAdmin earnout liability due to actual revenue at the earn-out measurement date of December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Expense. The decrease in income tax expense was primarily due to the increase in excess tax deductions from stock activity which decreases income tax expense, partially offset by increases in pre-tax net income. See Note M to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for additional information regarding our income taxes.
Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP measure of financial performance, consists of net income adjusted for depreciation and amortization, investment income (interest income/expense, realized investments gain/loss excluding realized gain/loss from foreign currency on investments), income tax expense, stock-based compensation expense, realized gain/loss from foreign currency on cash and investments held, and other adjustments as necessary for a fair presentation. Other adjustments included the impact of the fair value adjustment for the EDIAdmin earn-out liability, returned escrow shares in 2019 related to the acquisition of Toolbox, and impairment of internally developed software. As part of executing a lease amendment, we incurred accelerated depreciation, included within Depreciation and Amortization, and offsetting accelerated tenant improvement benefit, included within Other. The following table provides a reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA:
SPS COMMERCE, INC.
Form 10-K for the Annual Period ended December 31, 2020
Non-GAAP Income per Share. Non-GAAP income per share, which is also a non-GAAP measure of financial performance, consists of net income plus stock-based compensation expense, amortization expense related to intangible assets, realized gain/loss from foreign currency on cash and investments held, and other adjustments as necessary for a fair presentation, divided by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during each period. Other adjustments included the impact of the fair value adjustment for the EDIAdmin earn-out liability, returned escrow shares in 2019 related to the acquisition of ToolBox, and impairment of internally developed software. As part of executing a lease amendment, we incurred accelerated depreciation, included within Depreciation and Amortization, and offsetting accelerated tenant improvement benefit, included within Other.
To quantify the tax effects, we recalculated income tax expense excluding the direct book and tax effects of the specific items constituting the non-GAAP adjustments. The difference between this recalculated income tax expense and GAAP income tax expense is presented as the income tax effect of the non-GAAP adjustments.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net income to non-GAAP income per share:
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
The discussion of our results from operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 can be found in Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents, certificates of deposit, and short-term investments totaling $187.5 million, and accounts receivable, net of allowance for credit losses, of $33.6 million, compared to $213.5 million and $31.5 million, respectively at December 31, 2019. Certificates of deposit and investments are invested in accordance with our investment policy, with a goal of maintaining liquidity and capital preservation. Our cash equivalents and short-term investments are held in highly liquid money market funds, commercial paper, federal agency securities and corporate debt securities.
The table below summarizes the activity within the consolidated statement of cash flows:
The discussion of our liquidity and capital resources for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 can be found in Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
SPS COMMERCE, INC.
Form 10-K for the Annual Period ended December 31, 2020
Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The increase in operating cash flows was primarily driven by continued business growth, which resulted in increased net income.
Net Cash Flows from Investing Activities
The decrease in cash used in investing activities was primarily due to an additional $87.2 million in cash used for acquisitions of business and intangible assets, driven by the larger acquisition in 2020 as compared to 2019. Additionally, the change was due to a $16.1 million increase in purchases of investments, net of maturities in 2020.
Net Cash Flows from Financing Activities
This change was primarily due to the $12.4 million increase in net proceeds from stock option exercises.
Effect of Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Changes
For information regarding the effect of foreign currency exchange rate changes, refer to the section entitled “Foreign Currency Exchange Risk,” included in Part II, Item 7A, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Adequacy of Capital Resources
Our future capital requirements may vary significantly from those now planned and will depend on many factors, including:
•
costs to develop and implement new solutions and applications, if any;
•
sales and marketing resources needed to further penetrate our market and gain acceptance of new solutions and applications that we may develop;
•
expansion of our operations in the U.S. and internationally;
•
response of competitors to our solutions and applications; and
•
use of capital for acquisitions, if any.
Historically, we have experienced increases in our expenditures consistent with the growth in our operations and personnel, and we anticipate that our expenditures will continue to increase as we expand our business.
We believe our cash, cash equivalents, investments, and cash flows from our operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months.
During the last three years, inflation and changing prices have not had a material effect on our business and we do not expect that inflation or changing prices will materially affect our business in the foreseeable future.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, investments in special purpose entities or undisclosed borrowings or debt. Additionally, we are not a party to any derivative contracts or synthetic leases.
SPS COMMERCE, INC.
Form 10-K for the Annual Period ended December 31, 2020
Contractual and Commercial Commitment Summary
Our contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2020 are summarized below:
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding recent accounting pronouncements, refer to Note A, General, in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in the sections entitled “Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements” and “Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted” as applicable, included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Instruments and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.