Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
About SpartanNash
SpartanNash, headquartered in Grand Rapids, Michigan, is a leading multi-regional grocery distributor and grocery retailer whose core businesses include distributing grocery products to a diverse group of independent and chain retailers, its corporate owned retail stores, and military commissaries and exchanges in the United States. The Company operates three reportable segments: Food Distribution, Military and Retail. These reportable segments are three distinct businesses, each with a different customer base, management structure, and basis for determining budgets, forecasts, and executive compensation.
Overview of 2020
The Company’s top priority continues to be the well-being and safety of its family of associates, customers and communities during the COVID-19 pandemic. SpartanNash recognizes its family of associates for their dedication to serve customers and support local communities during this unprecedented time of need. Collaboration across the organization and the strength and resiliency of its people drives execution in a dynamic operating environment as SpartanNash supports consumer demand related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company’s 2020 accomplishments and developments include:
Food Distribution
●
The Food Distribution segment realized sales growth of 14.9%, driven by sales growth with existing customers as well as increased demand associated with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
●
During the first quarter, the Company made the decision to exit its Caito Fresh Cut operations, as a result of the loss of a significant customer within this business. Wind down of the operations began in March 2020 and was complete as of the end of the first quarter. The Company incurred asset impairment charges, severance costs and operating losses during the wind down period.
Retail
●
Retail comparable store sales were 8.7% in the fourth quarter and 13.1% for the fiscal year, driven by impacts associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. During the year, the Company experienced growth in eCommerce of nearly 200% and realized industry-leading growth in OwnBrand sales as it continues to build on its Customer Growth strategy.
Military
●
The Military segment continued to support DeCA in the expansion of its private brand program, which began in 2017. The Company leveraged its private brand capabilities and expertise in the design and launch of new private brand products. As of January 2, 2021, over 1,000 SKUs of private brand products have been introduced in the DeCA system. DeCA recently renewed the contract for another year and the Company looks forward to continuing its partnership with DeCA in 2021.
●
The Military segment realized gross margin rate improvement of 7.2% despite declining sales. The Military segment has also seen an increase in DeCA private label sales of 35% in the current year compared to the prior year.
Other Highlights
●
During the first quarter, the Company executed cost savings initiatives, which included a voluntary early retirement program, as well as a reduction-in-force. These actions are expected to result in longer-term benefits, however resulted in $5.0 million in incremental expense for the year.
●
During 2020, the Company declared $27.7 million in cash dividends to shareholders. The Company generated net cash from operating activities of $306.7 million in 2020, compared to $180.2 million in 2019, due to increased profitability and changes in working capital.
●
Net long-term debt decreased $197.8 million compared to the prior year as the Company continued to pay down debt. These reductions, combined with increased profitability, resulted in an improvement in net long-term debt to adjusted EBITDA from 3.7x at the end of 2019 to 2.0x at the end of 2020, calculated on a trailing thirteen period basis.
●
During the third quarter, the Company appointed a new President and Chief Executive Officer, Tony Sarsam. Tony brings to the Company an extensive background of executive experience in the food industry. His core values, history of visionary thinking and strategic execution are in alignment with the Company’s vision and strategies.
●
At the beginning of the fourth quarter, the Company extended its commercial agreement with Amazon. In connection with this agreement, the Company issued stock warrants to a subsidiary of Amazon, subject to certain vesting conditions over a 7 year period.
For fiscal 2021, the Company anticipates some normalization of sales trends from the levels experienced in 2020, which will be offset by continued growth with existing Food Distribution customers. While this trend is expected to result in unfavorable comparable store sales, the Company expects comparable sales to be positive on a two-year stacked basis. Profitability will also be impacted by unfavorable sales comparisons, primarily in the Retail segment. The Company anticipates that savings generated through certain initiatives will be more than offset by investments the Company is making in its people and supply chain capabilities.
Results of Operations
The current year results of operations are presented in comparison to the prior year within the section below. For a discussion of the results of fiscal 2019 operations in comparison to fiscal 2018, refer to the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations within the prior year Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain prior year amounts have been adjusted to reflect recently adopted accounting standards, which are described within Note 1, in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
The following table sets forth items from the Company’s consolidated statements of earnings as a percentage of net sales and the percentage change from the preceding year:
Note: Certain totals do not sum due to rounding.
Net Sales - The following table presents net sales by segment and variances in net sales:
Net sales increased $812.4 million, or 9.5%, to $9.35 billion in 2020 from $8.54 billion in 2019. The increase in net sales was driven primarily by continued growth with existing Food Distribution customers, increased consumer demand associated with the COVID-19 pandemic in the Retail and Food Distribution segments, and sales of $158.9 million in the 53rd week in 2020, partially offset by the exit of the Company’s Fresh Production operations and lower comparable sales for the Military segment.
Food Distribution net sales increased $594.6 million, or 14.9%, to $4.58 billion in 2020 from $3.98 billion in the prior year. The increase was due to sales growth with existing customers, as well as incremental volume associated with increased consumer demand related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and sales of $76.4 million in the 53rd week, partially offset by the impact of the Company’s decision to exit Fresh Production operations.
Retail net sales increased $256.6 million, or 10.8%, to $2.64 billion in 2020 from $2.38 billion in the prior year. The increase in net sales was primarily attributable to incremental sales volume associated with increased consumer demand related to the COVID-19 pandemic and $49.1 million of sales in the 53rd week. Comparable store sales were 13.1% in the current year. The Company defines a retail store as comparable when it is in operation for 14 accounting periods (a period equals four weeks), regardless of remodels, expansions, or relocated stores. Acquired stores are included in the comparable sales calculation 13 periods after the acquisition date. Fuel is excluded from the comparable sales calculation due to volatility in price. Comparable store sales is a widely used metric among retailers, which is useful to management and investors to assess performance. The Company’s definition of comparable store sales may differ from similarly titled measures at other companies.
Military net sales decreased $38.7 million, or 1.8%, to $2.13 billion in 2020 from $2.17 billion in the prior year. Prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, sales decreased due to the impact of lower comparable sales at DeCA operated locations. After the onset of the pandemic, base access and commissary shopping restrictions during the second through fourth quarters also led to lower sales volumes. These lower volumes were partially offset by $33.4 million of sales in the 53rd week.
Gross Profit - Gross profit represents net sales less cost of sales, which is described in further detail within Note 1, in the notes to the consolidated financial statements. Gross profit increased $181.1 million, or 14.6%, to $1.42 billion in the current year compared to $1.24 billion in the prior year. As a percent of net sales, gross profit increased from 14.6% to 15.2% primarily due to improvements in margin rates at all three segments, as well as increases in the proportion of Retail and Food Distribution segment sales, which generate higher margin rates than the Military segment.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses - Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses consist primarily of salaries and wages, employee benefits, warehousing costs, store occupancy costs, shipping and handling, utilities, equipment rental, depreciation (to the extent not included in Cost of sales), out-bound freight and other administrative expenses. SG&A expenses increased $125.3 million, or 10.7%, to $1.30 billion in the current year from $1.17 billion in the prior year. As a percent of net sales, SG&A expenses increased from 13.7% to 13.9%, due to a higher rate of incentive compensation expense as a result of improved overall Company performance, a greater proportion of Retail sales which incur a higher rate of expense and increases in supply chain expenses which were compounded by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by improved operating leverage related to retail store labor and other operating expenses, as well as lower healthcare costs.
Merger/Acquisition and Integration Expenses - Merger/acquisition and integration expenses were $0.4 million in the current year compared to $1.4 million in the prior year. The expenses in both years are associated with the acquisition and integration of Martin’s Super Markets (“Martin’s”).
Restructuring, Asset Impairment and Other Charges - In the current year, $24.4 million of net restructuring, asset impairment and other charges were incurred, primarily associated with asset impairment charges and severance costs related to the restructuring of the Company’s Fresh Production business, asset impairment charges primarily related to the decision to abandon a tradename within the Food Distribution segment and retail store closing-related charges. Prior year results included $13.1 million of net restructuring, asset impairment and other charges, predominately as a result of asset impairment charges associated with the decision to reposition Fresh Production operations and losses associated with the disposition of the Fresh Kitchen, which were partially offset by gains on the sale of a previously closed distribution center.
Operating Earnings - The following table presents operating earnings (loss) by segment and variances in operating earnings (loss):
The Company reported operating earnings of $102.4 million in the current year compared to $56.9 million in the prior year. The increase of $45.5 million was attributable to increased sales volume and improved margin rates, partially offset by changes in operating expenses discussed above, including additional compensation for frontline workers and additional sanitation measures associated with COVID-19.
Food Distribution operating earnings decreased $1.5 million to $46.0 million in the current year from $47.4 million in the prior year. The decrease was primarily attributable to higher incentive compensation, higher supply chain expense rates, asset impairment charges, and $6.5 million in non-cash charges associated with stock warrants, partially offset by an increase in sales volume and cycling of prior year operational losses in the Fresh Production business.
Retail operating earnings increased $47.5 million to $66.4 million in the current year compared to $18.8 million in the prior year. The increase was primarily due to the increase in sales volume, improvements in margin rates, including inventory shrink, and favorable leverage of fixed costs, including store labor. These favorable variances were partially offset by higher incentive compensation due to improved segment performance.
Military operating loss increased $0.6 million to $9.9 million in the current year from $9.3 million in the prior year. The change was attributable to increases in the rate of supply chain expenses, as well as increases in corporate administrative expense, partially offset by improved margin rates.
Interest Expense - Interest expense decreased $16.1 million, or 46.7%, to $18.4 million in the current year from $34.5 million in the prior year primarily due to rate decreases executed by the Federal Reserve as well as significant decreases in the average debt balance.
Income Taxes - The Company’s effective income tax rates were 11.1% and (65.5%) for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The differences from the federal statutory rate in the current year were primarily the result of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act and related tax planning during the year, as well as federal tax credits, partially offset by state taxes, non-deductible expenses, and the impacts of stock based compensation during the year. In the prior year, the difference from the federal statutory rate was primarily due to state tax benefits and tax credits.
On March 27, 2020, the U.S. government enacted tax legislation to provide economic stimulus and support businesses and individuals during the COVID-19 pandemic, referred to as the CARES Act. In connection with the CARES Act, the Company recorded net discrete income tax benefits of $9.3 million in 2020, associated with the additional deductibility of certain expenses combined with provisions which enable companies to carry back tax losses to years prior to the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“Tax Reform”), when the federal statutory income tax rate was 35%.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to reporting financial results in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), the Company also provides information regarding adjusted operating earnings, adjusted earnings from continuing operations, and adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“adjusted EBITDA”). These are non-GAAP financial measures, as defined below, and are used by management to allocate resources, assess performance against its peers and evaluate overall performance. The Company believes these measures provide useful information for both management and its investors. The Company believes these non-GAAP measures are useful to investors because they provide additional understanding of the trends and special circumstances that affect its business. These measures provide useful supplemental information that helps investors to establish a basis for expected performance and the ability to evaluate actual results against that expectation. The measures, when considered in connection with GAAP results, can be used to assess the overall performance of the Company as well as assess the Company’s performance against its peers. These measures are also used as a basis for certain compensation programs sponsored by the Company. In addition, securities analysts, fund managers and other shareholders and stakeholders that communicate with the Company request its financial results in these adjusted formats.
Current year adjusted operating earnings, adjusted earnings from continuing operations, and adjusted EBITDA exclude “Fresh Cut operating losses” subsequent to the decision to exit these operations during the first quarter, severance associated with cost reduction initiatives, organizational realignment costs and fees paid to a third-party advisory firm associated with Project One Team, the Company’s initiative to drive growth while increasing efficiency and reducing costs. Adjusted earnings from continuing operations also exclude pension termination income related to refunds from the annuity provider associated with the final reconciliation of participant data, as well as net tax benefits associated with the CARES Act. Prior year adjusted operating earnings, adjusted earnings from continuing operations and adjusted EBITDA exclude “Fresh Kitchen operating losses” subsequent to the decision to exit these operations at the beginning of the third quarter, costs associated with organizational realignment, which include significant changes to the Company’s management team, and fees paid to a third-party advisory firm associated with Project One Team. Pension termination costs, primarily related to non-operating settlement expense associated with the distribution of pension assets, are excluded from adjusted earnings from continuing operations, and to a lesser extent adjusted operating earnings. In 2018, adjusted operating earnings, adjusted earnings from continuing operations, and adjusted EBITDA exclude start-up costs associated with the first year of Fresh Kitchen operations, which concluded during the first quarter of 2018. These measures were adjusted for the impact of the 53rd week in 2020 to provide better comparability to prior years. Each of the adjusted items are considered “non-operational” or “non-core” in nature.
Adjusted Operating Earnings
Adjusted operating earnings is a non-GAAP operating financial measure that the Company defines as operating earnings plus or minus adjustments for items that do not reflect the ongoing operating activities of the Company and costs associated with the closing of operational locations.
The Company believes that adjusted operating earnings provide a meaningful representation of its operating performance for the Company as a whole and for its operating segments. The Company considers adjusted operating earnings as an additional way to measure operating performance on an ongoing basis. Adjusted operating earnings is meant to reflect the ongoing operating performance of all of its distribution and retail operations; consequently, it excludes the impact of items that could be considered “non-operating” or “non-core” in nature, and also excludes the contributions of activities classified as discontinued operations. Because adjusted operating earnings and adjusted operating earnings by segment are performance measures that management uses to allocate resources, assess performance against its peers and evaluate overall performance, the Company believes it provides useful information for both management and its investors. In addition, securities analysts, fund managers and other shareholders and stakeholders that communicate with the Company request its operating financial results in an adjusted operating earnings format.
Adjusted operating earnings is not a measure of performance under GAAP and should not be considered as a substitute for operating earnings, and other income statement data. The Company’s definition of adjusted operating earnings may not be identical to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
Following is a reconciliation of operating earnings to adjusted operating earnings for 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Adjusted Earnings from Continuing Operations
Adjusted earnings from continuing operations is a non-GAAP operating financial measure that the Company defines as earnings from continuing operations plus or minus adjustments for items that do not reflect the ongoing operating activities of the Company and costs associated with the closing of operational locations.
The Company believes that adjusted earnings from continuing operations provide a meaningful representation of its operating performance for the Company. The Company considers adjusted earnings from continuing operations as an additional way to measure operating performance on an ongoing basis. Adjusted earnings from continuing operations is meant to reflect the ongoing operating performance of all of its distribution and retail operations; consequently, it excludes the impact of items that could be considered “non-operating” or “non-core” in nature, and also excludes the contributions of activities classified as discontinued operations. Because adjusted earnings from continuing operations is a performance measure that management uses to allocate resources, assess performance against its peers and evaluate overall performance, the Company believes it provides useful information for both management and its investors. In addition, securities analysts, fund managers and other shareholders and stakeholders that communicate with the Company request its operating financial results in adjusted earnings from continuing operations format.
Adjusted earnings from continuing operations is not a measure of performance under GAAP and should not be considered as a substitute for earnings from continuing operations and other income statement data. The Company’s definition of adjusted earnings from continuing operations may not be identical to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
Following is a reconciliation of earnings from continuing operations to adjusted earnings from continuing operations for 2020, 2019 and 2018.
(a)
The income tax effect on adjustments is computed by applying the applicable tax rate to the adjustments.
(b)
The Company realized income tax benefits related to remeasuring its deferred tax assets and liabilities to reflect the change in the federal statutory rate resulting from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Includes $1.1 million of tax benefits attributable to tax planning strategies related to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act for 2018.
(c)
Represents tax impacts attributable to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act, and related tax planning, primarily related to additional deductions and the utilization of net operating loss carryback.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (“adjusted EBITDA”) is a non-GAAP operating financial measure that the Company defines as net earnings plus interest, discontinued operations, depreciation and amortization, and other non-cash items including share-based payments (equity awards measured in accordance with ASC 718, Stock Compensation, which include both stock-based compensation to employees and stock warrants issued to non-employees) and the LIFO provision, as well as adjustments for items that do not reflect the ongoing operating activities of the Company and costs associated with the closing of operational locations.
The Company believes that adjusted EBITDA provides a meaningful representation of its operating performance for the Company as a whole and for its operating segments. The Company considers adjusted EBITDA as an additional way to measure operating performance on an ongoing basis. Adjusted EBITDA is meant to reflect the ongoing operating performance of all of its distribution and retail operations; consequently, it excludes the impact of items that could be considered “non-operating” or “non-core” in nature, and also excludes the contributions of activities classified as discontinued operations. Because adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA by segment are performance measures that management uses to allocate resources, assess performance against its peers and evaluate overall performance, the Company believes it provides useful information for both management and its investors. In addition, securities analysts, fund managers and other shareholders and stakeholders that communicate with the Company request its operating financial results in an adjusted EBITDA format.
Adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA by segment are not measures of performance under GAAP and should not be considered as a substitute for net earnings, cash flows from operating activities and other income or cash flow statement data. The Company’s definitions of adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA by segment may not be identical to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
Following is a reconciliation of net earnings to adjusted EBITDA for 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Following is a reconciliation of operating earnings (loss) to adjusted EBITDA by segment for 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that may not be readily apparent from other sources. Based on the Company’s ongoing review, the Company makes adjustments it considers appropriate under the facts and circumstances. The Company believes these accounting policies, and others set forth in Note 1, in the notes to the consolidated financial statements, should be reviewed as they are integral to understanding the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. The Company has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these accounting policies with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
An accounting estimate is considered critical if: a) it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and b) different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact the Company’s consolidated financial statements. The Company considers the following accounting policies to represent the more critical estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements:
Customer Exposure and Credit Risk
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. The Company evaluates the collectability of its accounts and notes receivable based on a combination of factors. The Company estimates losses using an expected loss model, by considering both historical data and future expectations, including collection experience, expectations for current credit risks, accounts receivable payment status, the customer’s financial health, as well as the Company’s collateral and creditor position. The Company pools similar assets based on their credit risk characteristics, whereby many of its trade receivables are pooled based on certain customer or aging characteristics. After assets are pooled, an appropriate loss factor is applied based on management’s expectations. Based on the estimated loss, the Company records an allowance to reduce the receivable to an amount the Company reasonably expects to collect. It is possible that the accuracy of the estimation process could be materially affected by different judgments as to the collectability based on information considered and further deterioration of accounts. If circumstances change (e.g., further evidence of material adverse creditworthiness, additional accounts become credit risks, store closures), the Company’s estimates of the recoverability of amounts due could be reduced by a material amount, including to zero.
Funds Advanced to Independent Retailers. From time to time, the Company may advance funds to independent retailers which are earned by the retailers primarily through achieving specified purchase volume requirements, as outlined in their supply agreements with the Company, or in limited instances, for remaining a SpartanNash customer for a specified time period. These advances must be repaid if the purchase volume requirements are not met or if the retailer does not remain a customer for the specified time period. In the event these retailers are unable to repay these advances or otherwise experience an event of default, the Company may be unable to recover the unearned portion of the funds advanced to these independent retailers. The Company evaluates the recoverability of these advances based on a number of factors, including anticipated and historical purchase volume, the value of any collateral, customer financial health and other economic and industry factors, and establishes a reserve for the advances as necessary.
Guarantees of Debt and Lease Obligations of Others. The Company may guarantee debt and lease obligations of independent retailers. In the event these retailers are unable to meet their debt service payments or otherwise experience an event of default, the Company would be unconditionally liable for the outstanding balance of their debt and lease obligations, which would be due in accordance with the underlying agreements. The Company evaluates the likelihood that funding will occur and the expected credit losses on commitments to be funded using an expected loss model.
The Company has guaranteed the outstanding lease obligations of certain independent retailers. These guarantees, which are secured by certain business assets and personal guarantees of the respective independent retailers, represent the maximum undiscounted payments the Company would be required to make in the event of default. When a loss is expected, a liability representing the fair value of the obligations assumed under the guarantees is included in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
The Company also subleases and assigns various leases to third parties. In circumstances when the Company becomes aware of factors that indicate deterioration in a third party’s ability to meet its financial obligations guaranteed or assigned by SpartanNash, the Company records a specific reserve in the amount the Company reasonably believes it will be obligated to pay on the third party’s behalf, net of any anticipated recoveries from the third party. It is possible that the accuracy of the estimation process could be materially affected by different judgments as to the obligations based on information considered and further deterioration of accounts, with the potential for a corresponding adverse effect on operating results and cash flows. Triggering these guarantees or obligations under assigned leases would not, however, result in cross default of the Company’s debt, but could restrict resources available for general business initiatives.
Business Combinations
The Company accounts for acquired businesses using the purchase method of accounting, which requires that the assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date, with any excess purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired being recorded as goodwill.
Significant judgment is required in estimating the fair value of intangible assets and in assigning their respective useful lives. The fair value estimates are based on available historical information and on future expectations and assumptions deemed reasonable by the Company but are inherently uncertain. Also, determining the estimated useful life of an intangible asset requires judgment based on the Company’s expected use of the asset, as different types of intangible assets will have different useful lives and certain assets may even be considered to have indefinite useful lives. The Company typically utilizes the income method to estimate the fair value of intangible assets, which discounts the projected future cash flows attributable to the respective assets. Significant estimates and assumptions inherent in the valuation reflect a consideration of other marketplace competition and include the amount and timing of future cash flows (including expected growth rates and profitability) and the discount rate applied to the cash flows. Unanticipated market or macroeconomic events and circumstances may occur that could affect the accuracy or validity of the estimates and assumptions.
Goodwill and Other Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment on an annual basis (during the last quarter of the year), or whenever events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not indicate an impairment exists. The quantitative impairment evaluation of these assets involves the comparison of their fair value to their carrying values.
Goodwill. The Company has three reporting units, which are the same as the Company’s reportable segments; however, there is no goodwill recorded within the Retail or Military segments. Fair values are determined based on the discounted cash flows and comparable market values of each reporting segment. If a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying value, an impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. The Company’s goodwill impairment analysis also includes a comparison of the estimated fair value of the enterprise as a whole to the Company’s total market capitalization. Therefore, a significant and sustained decline in the Company’s stock price could result in goodwill impairment charges. During times of financial market volatility, significant judgment is given to determine the underlying cause of the decline and whether stock price declines are short-term in nature or indicative of an event or change in circumstances.
The Company estimates the fair value of the Food Distribution reporting unit primarily based on the income approach using a discounted cash flow model and also incorporates the market approach using observable comparable company information. Key assumptions used by the Company in preparing the fair value estimate under the discounted cash flow method include:
●
Weighted average cost of capital (“WACC”): The determination of the WACC incorporates current interest rates, equity risk premiums, and other market-based expectations regarding expected investment returns. The development of the WACC requires estimates of an equity rate of return and a debt rate of return, which are specific to the industry in which the reporting unit operates.
●
Revenue growth rates: The Company develops its forecasts based on recent sales data for existing operations and other factors, including management’s future expectations.
●
Operating profits: The Company uses historical operating margins as a basis for its projections within the discounted cash flow model. Margins within the forecast may vary due to future expectations related to both product and administrative costs.
The Company compares the results of the discounted cash flow model to observable comparable company market multiples to support the appropriateness of the fair value estimates. The Company concludes whether the implied multiple is reasonable with respect to the comparable company range, and whether the assumptions used in the fair value estimate are supportable.
As of the date of the most recent goodwill impairment test, which utilized data and assumptions as of October 3, 2020, the Food Distribution reporting unit had a fair value that was substantially in excess of its carrying value. The Company has sufficient available information, both current and historical, to support its assumptions, judgments and estimates used in the goodwill impairment test; however, if actual results for the Food Distribution segment are not consistent with the Company’s estimates, it could result in the Company recording a non-cash impairment charge.
Other Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets. The estimated fair value of these assets is computed by using a discounted cash flow method, such as the relief-from-royalty methodology. The Company determines future cash flows generated from the use of the asset, generally using estimated revenue growth rates and profitability rates and, in the case of the relief-from-royalty methodology, royalty rates. Discount rates are determined based on the WACC of the reporting unit in which the asset resides, consistent with the discussion above. Impairments of these assets were $8.6 million and $14.0 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. There were no impairments of these assets in 2018.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets to be held and used are evaluated for impairment when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. When the undiscounted future cash flows are not sufficient to recover an asset’s carrying amount, the fair value is compared to the carrying value to determine the impairment loss to be recorded. Long-lived assets are evaluated at the asset-group level, which is the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. Impairments of long-lived assets were $11.5 million, $3.9 million and $2.6 million for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Estimates of future cash flows and expected sales prices are judgments based upon the Company’s experience and knowledge of operations. These estimates project cash flows several years into the future and are affected by changes in the economy, the competitive environment, real estate market conditions and inflation. If the book value of assets is determined to not be recoverable, future cash flows for the expected useful life of the asset group are discounted using a rate based on the WACC of the reporting segment in which the asset resides, consistent with the discussion above.
Long-lived assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of carrying amount or fair value, less cost to sell. Management determines fair values using independent appraisals, quotes or expected sales prices developed by internal real estate professionals. Estimates of expected sales prices are judgments based upon the Company’s experience, knowledge of market conditions and current offers received. Changes in market conditions, the economic environment and other factors, including the Company’s ability to effectively compete and react to competitor openings, can significantly impact these estimates. While the Company believes that the estimates and assumptions underlying the valuation methodology are reasonable, different assumptions could result in a different outcome.
Insurance Reserves
SpartanNash is self-insured through self-insurance retentions or high deductible programs for workers’ compensation, general liability, and automobile liability, and is also self-insured for healthcare costs. Self-insurance liabilities are recorded based on claims filed and an estimate of claims incurred but not yet reported. Workers’ compensation, general liability and automobile liabilities are actuarially estimated based on available historical information on an undiscounted basis. The Company has purchased stop-loss coverage to limit its exposure on a per claim basis for its self-insurance retentions and high deductible programs. On a per claim basis, the Company’s exposure is up to $0.5 million for workers’ compensation and general liability, $1.0 million for automobile liability, and $0.6 million for healthcare per covered life per year. Refer to Note 1, in the notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to self-insurance reserves.
Any projection of losses concerning insurance reserves is subject to a degree of variability. Among the causes of variability are unpredictable external factors affecting future inflation rates, discount rates, litigation trends, changing regulations, legal interpretations, benefit level changes and claim settlement patterns. Although the Company’s estimates of liabilities incurred do not anticipate significant changes in historical trends for these variables, such changes could have a material impact on future claim costs and currently recorded liabilities. The impact of many of these variables may be difficult to estimate.
Stock Warrants
Common stock warrants may be accounted for as either liability or equity instruments depending on the terms of the warrant agreements. The stock warrants issued by the Company are accounted for as equity instruments due to the ability of the Company to settle the warrants though the issuance of available authorized shares and the absence of terms which would require liability classification, including the rights of the grantee to require cash settlement. The Company classifies stock warrants within common stock in the consolidated balance sheets.
Equity instruments are measured at their grant date fair value in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. These instruments are classified within the consolidated statements of earnings in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and ASU 2019-08. To determine the fair value of the warrants in accordance with ASC 718, the Company uses a binomial lattice pricing model. This model is based, in part, upon inputs for which management is required to use judgment. These inputs include the Company’s historical stock volatility and dividend rate, the risk-free interest rate, and the timeframe over which the options are expected to vest.
For awards granted to a customer which are not in exchange for distinct goods or services, the fair value of the awards earned based on vesting conditions is recorded as a reduction of the transaction price. The Company determines the amount of warrant expense based on the customer’s achievement of vesting conditions, which is recorded at grant date fair value per warrant share, as a reduction of revenue on the consolidated statement of earnings.
Income Taxes
The Company reviews deferred tax assets for recoverability and evaluates whether it is more likely than not that they will be realized. In making this evaluation, the Company considers positive and negative evidence associated with several factors, including the statutory recovery periods for the assets, along with available sources of future taxable income, including reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, tax planning strategies, history of taxable income or losses, and projections of future income or losses. A valuation allowance is provided when the Company concludes, based on all available evidence, that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized during the applicable recovery period.
SpartanNash is subject to periodic audits by the Internal Revenue Service and other state and local taxing authorities. These audits may challenge certain of the Company’s tax positions, such as the timing and amount of income credits and deductions and the allocation of taxable income to various tax jurisdictions. The Company evaluates its tax positions and establishes liabilities in accordance with the applicable accounting guidance on uncertainty in income taxes. These tax uncertainties are reviewed as facts and circumstances change and are adjusted accordingly. This requires significant management judgment in estimating final outcomes. Actual results could materially differ from these estimates and could significantly affect the Company’s effective income tax rate and cash flows in future years.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow Information
The following table summarizes the Company’s consolidated statements of cash flows for 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Net cash provided by operating activities. Net cash provided by operating activities in the current year increased compared to the prior year by $126.5 million primarily due to improved profitability and changes in operating asset and liability balances partially related to the deferral of payroll taxes in connection with the CARES Act, and increases in accrued incentive compensation.
Net cash used in investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities decreased $86.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to the Martin’s acquisition in the prior year.
The Food Distribution, Retail and Military segments utilized 37.2%, 50.4% and 12.4% of capital expenditures, respectively, for the current year. Capital expenditures for 2020 primarily related to store remodels and the construction of one retail store, investments in supply chain infrastructure, and IT system upgrades and implementations. Capital expenditures were $67.3 million in the current year and cloud computing application development spend, which is included in operating activities, was $11.6 million, compared to capital expenditures of $74.8 million in the prior year. The Company expects capital expenditures and cloud computing application development spend to range from $80.0 million to $90.0 million in 2021.
Net cash used in financing activities. Net cash used in financing activities increased $222.5 million in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to increased payment of debt balances in the current year, funded by cash provided by operating activities, in addition to borrowings to fund the Martin’s acquisition in the prior year.
Debt Management
Long-term debt and finance lease liabilities, including the current portion, decreased $202.1 million to $486.4 million as of January 2, 2021 from $688.6 million at December 28, 2019. The decrease in total debt was driven by principal payments made throughout 2020.
The Company’s Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) matures on December 18, 2023. The Credit Agreement provides for a Tranche A revolving loan of up to $975 million and a Tranche A-1 revolving loan with $40 million of capacity. The Company has the ability to increase the size of the Credit Agreement by an additional $325 million, subject to certain conditions. The Company’s obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of the Company’s personal and real property. The Company may repay all loans in whole or in part at any time without penalty.
Liquidity
The Company’s principal sources of liquidity are cash flows generated from operations and its senior secured credit facility. As of January 2, 2021, the senior secured credit facility had outstanding borrowings of $440.2 million. Additional available borrowings under the Company’s Credit Agreement are based on stipulated advance rates on eligible assets, as defined in the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement requires that the Company maintains Excess Availability of 10% of the borrowing base, as defined in the Credit Agreement. The Company had excess availability after the 10% requirement of $432.4 million at January 2, 2021. Payment of dividends and repurchases of outstanding shares are permitted, provided that certain levels of excess availability are maintained. The Credit Agreement provides for the issuance of letters of credit, of which $15.6 million were outstanding as of January 2, 2021. The Company believes that cash generated from operating activities and available borrowings under the Credit Agreement will be sufficient to meet anticipated requirements for working capital, capital expenditures, dividend payments, and debt service obligations for the foreseeable future. However, there can be no assurance that the business will continue to generate cash flow at or above current levels or that the Company will maintain its ability to borrow under the Credit Agreement.
The Company’s current ratio (current assets over current liabilities) was 1.47:1 at January 2, 2021 compared to 1.76:1 at December 28, 2019, and its investment in working capital was $325.2 million at January 2, 2021 compared to $431.5 million at December 28, 2019. The net long-term debt to total capital ratio was 0.39:1 at January 2, 2021, compared to 0.49:1 at December 28, 2019. Total net debt is a non-GAAP financial measure that is defined as long-term debt and finance lease liabilities, plus current portion of long-term debt and finance lease liabilities, less cash and cash equivalents. The Company believes both management and its investors find the information useful because it reflects the amount of long-term debt obligations that are not covered by available cash and temporary investments. Total net debt is not a substitute for GAAP financial measures and may differ from similarly titled measures of other companies.
Following is a reconciliation of “Long-term debt and finance lease liabilities” to net long-term debt as of January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019.
Contractual Obligations
The table below presents the Company’s significant contractual obligations as of January 2, 2021, presented on an undiscounted basis. Funding of postretirement benefit obligations and contributions under various multi-employer pension and health and welfare plans, which totaled $14.1 million and $13.7 million, respectively, for the year ended January 2, 2021 are excluded. For additional information, refer to Note 11, in the notes to the consolidated financial statements. Unrecognized tax liabilities are also excluded, as the Company cannot reasonably estimate the timing of potential cash settlement. For additional information, refer to Note 13, in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
(a)
Operating and finance lease obligations do not include common area maintenance, insurance or tax payments for which the Company is also obligated. These costs totaled approximately $14.4 million in 2020.
(b)
The amount of purchase obligations shown in this table represents the amount of product the Company is contractually obligated to purchase in order to earn $12.2 million in advanced contract monies that are receivable under the contracts. At January 2, 2021, $1.8 million in advanced contract monies has been received under these contracts where recognition has been deferred on the consolidated balance sheet. If the Company does not fulfill these purchase obligations, it would only be obligated to repay the unearned upfront contract monies. The amount shown here does not include the following: a) purchase obligations made in the normal course of business as those obligations involve purchase orders based on current Company needs that are typically cancelable and/or fulfilled by vendors within a very short period of time; b) agreements that are cancelable by the Company without significant penalty, including contracts for routine outsourced services; and c) contracts that do not contain minimum annual purchase commitments but include other standard contractual considerations that must be fulfilled in order to earn advanced contract monies that have been received.
The Company has also made certain commercial commitments that extend beyond January 2, 2021. These commitments include standby letters of credit and guarantees of certain customer and third-party business partner lease, debt, and vendor obligations. Refer to Note 1, and Note 3, in the notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding lease guarantees and assigned leases. The Company had $15.6 million of standby letters of credit outstanding as of January 2, 2021, which primarily support the Company’s self-insurance obligations and are due within one year.
Cash Dividends
The Company declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.1925, $0.19 and $0.18 per common share in each quarter of 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Under the Credit Agreement, the Company is generally permitted to pay dividends in any year up to an amount such that all cash dividends, together with any cash distributions and share repurchases, do not exceed $35.0 million. Additionally, the Company is generally permitted to pay cash dividends in excess of $35.0 million in any year so long as its Excess Availability, as defined in the Credit Agreement, is in excess of 10% of the Total Borrowing Base, as defined in the Credit Agreement, before and after giving effect to the repurchases and dividends. Although the Company currently expects to continue to pay a quarterly cash dividend, adoption of a dividend policy does not commit the Board of Directors (the “Board”) to declare future dividends. Each future dividend will be considered and declared by the Board at its discretion. Whether the Board continues to declare dividends depends on a number of factors, including the Company’s future financial condition, anticipated profitability and cash flows and compliance with the terms of its credit facilities.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 1, in the notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to recently adopted accounting standards, as well as the anticipated effect of any impending accounting standards.