ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements regarding our business development plans, timing, strategies, expectations, anticipated expenses levels, business prospects and positioning with respect to market, demographic and pricing trends, business outlook, technology spending and various other matters (including contingent liabilities and obligations and changes in accounting policies, standards and interpretations) and express our current intentions, beliefs, expectations, strategies or predictions. These forward-looking statements are based on a number of assumptions and currently available information and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this annual report.
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is provided in addition to the accompanying financial statements and notes to assist readers in understanding our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. MD&A is organized as follows:
The consolidated financial statements of SRAX, Inc. combine the Sequire business with the consumer-based data platform BIGToken and are prepared in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP).
In the accompanying analysis of financial information, we sometimes use information derived from consolidated financial data but not presented in our financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. Certain of these data are considered “non-GAAP financial measures” under SEC rules. See the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section for the reasons we use these non-GAAP financial measures and the reconciliations to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
Recent Developments
On February 4, 2021, we announced the completion of the separation of our consumer-based data privacy business “BIGToken” from SRAX, Inc. (the Separation), effected by way of a share exchange. On February 21, 2021 we sold warrants to purchase up to 4,545,440 shares of our Class A common stock, $0.001 par value per share, at an exercise price of $7.50 per share (the “Warrants”). Each Warrant to purchase one share of our Class A common stock was sold pursuant to a prospectus supplement (File no. 333-235298) at purchase price of $0.125 per share to certain investors that entered into a letter agreement on February 21, 2021, to exercise all of their outstanding warrants issued on June 30, 2020 (“Old Warrants”). Each investor received one Warrant that expires on January 31, 2022 for every Old Warrant exercised plus the purchase price of $0.125 per Warrant.
Executive Overview of Full Year 2020 Results
Our key operating metrics and financial results for 2020 are as follows:
Sequire platform growth:
● Sequire subscribers of 183 as of March 25, 2021, up from 95 as of November 15, 2020
● Over of 3 million investors within Sequire platform.
Financial results:
● Revenue was $4.5 million and $8.6 million, up 316% and 141% year-over-year for the fourth quarter and year, respectively.
● Full year Net loss of $14.7 million as compared to Net Loss of $16.9 million.
● Cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities were $9 million as of December 31, 2020.
Reportable Segments
Our current operating business is Sequire, which consists of two components: Sequire and LD Micro. We report our financial performance inclusive of the BIGtoken business as we currently hold a majority interest. Our financials include the following segments: Sequire and BIGtoken. The segment amounts included in MD&A are presented on a basis consistent with our internal management reporting. All differences between our internal management reporting basis and accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), along with certain corporate-level and other activity, are included in Corporate and Other.
Metrics
We use metrics in assessing the performance of our business and to make informed decisions regarding the allocation of resources. We disclose metrics to enable investors to evaluate progress against our ambitions, provide transparency into performance trends, and reflect the continued evolution of our products and services.
In 2020, we also continued to focus on our main revenue growth priorities: (i) The continued growth of our Sequire platform user base (ii) the expansion of the LD micro events and offerings.
Our business has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which has resulted in authorities implementing numerous preventative measures to contain or mitigate the outbreak of the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, limitations on business activity, quarantines, and shelter-in-place orders. These measures have caused, and are continuing to cause, business slowdowns or shutdowns in affected areas, both regionally and worldwide, which have significantly impacted our business and results of operations. We are unable to predict the impact of the pandemic on user growth and engagement with any certainty, and we expect these trends to continue to be subject to volatility.
More recently, we believe the pandemic has contributed to an acceleration in the shift of commerce from offline to online, as well as increasing consumer demand for purchasing products as opposed to services, and we experienced increasing demand for our products as a result of these trends. The impact of the pandemic on our overall results of operations, remains highly uncertain for the foreseeable future.
We intend to continue to invest in our business based on our company priorities, and we anticipate that additional investments in our network infrastructure, as well as scaling our headcount to support our growth, will continue to drive expense growth in 2021.
Company Overview
About
We are a technology firm focused on enhancing communications between public companies and their investors. Our unique SaaS platform, Sequire is an operating system for public companies. Among many features it allows issuers to track their shareholders’ behaviors and trends, then use data-driven insights to engage with investors across marketing channels.
Our endeavor to unlock the value of data for our clients drove us to develop this platform, acquire LD Micro, and begin cultivating the Sequire Community. Each piece of the SRAX puzzle delivers valuable insights that assist our clients with their marketing and advertising efforts.
Through Sequire, we offer tools and related data and insight services to allow issuers of publicly traded securities to better understand their position in the market.
Through the acquisition of LD Micro, we organize and host investor conferences within the micro and small- cap space, and plan to create several more niche events for the investor community.
Sequire
In May of 2020 we rebranded our SaaS offering SRAX IR, as Sequire, emphasizing the platform’s strength to secure and acquire investors. The Sequire platform is a central hub where companies reach out and engage with shareholders, manage warrants, and identify potential investors.
This powerful software utilizes machine learning and advanced analytics to bring our clients actionable information that can be used to maximize ROI, as an innovative investor communication tool.
We built the Sequire platform to help our customers understand shareholder behavior, including the ability to identify buyers and sellers. Clients then have the ability to engage with targeted shareholder groups across marketing channels including; email, social media, programmatic, and hyperlocal.
When interpreting data, clients can see gains and losses over time, buying/selling trends, total outstanding shares, new shareholders, and shareholders broken out by percentage. Every bit of this data helps how we target ads and craft messaging to leverage the desired outcome for a client.
An important part of monitoring shareholders is the greater context of the investment landscape. Sequire features real-time level-two trading data, the ability to monitor competition, news alerts, and more.
We are always seeking ways to improve our clients’ communications with their shareholders, and we built a custom survey feature so that they could ask questions to all their shareholders at once or to specified groups.
The Sequire platform also allows users to manage warrants, attaining high-level insight by year and month, including a list of expiring and outstanding warrants. They can then calculate what their proceeds could be if those warrants were issued before they expire. Clients can also keep tabs on investor relations programs and corporate communication firms, all in one place.
We expanded the functionality of Sequire to include the hosting of virtual events, as more and more networking functions are being held in the digital space. Clients can attend an event held by industry guests, or hold a conference themselves. They then have the ability to import contacts from those events directly into their own list for later use and targeting.
Data Targeting
We help our clients build an investor base through targeted advertising and marketing campaigns, tailored to their needs. When our clients succeed, we succeed. Using data-driven insights, we help clients meet their unique marketing objectives, whether they’re messaging existing investors, new investors, or consumers.
Our team of experts takes a deep dive into each company, building out unique messaging to suit their target investors. Once media campaigns are built, they are run through the Sequire platform across multiple target segments. We then track performance and modify the campaign for the best possible results. Our clients have needs to target particular sectors and exchanges, and the value we deliver lies in the hyper-specific investor insights necessary for that kind of focused outreach.
We are maximizing the efficacy of our media campaigns by providing our clients with custom-built landing pages that are crafted to educate, engage, and convert new investors. When a new investor clicks through an ad, they will land on a story-driven page with data-tracking software embedded to collect analytics for later use.
Virtual Events and LD Micro
LD Micro was originally founded in 2006 as an independent resource for the microcap world. It quickly grew into a premier event platform in the space, successfully connecting investors and promoting small cap businesses. In September of 2020, we acquired LD Micro, and hosted the 2020 Main Event on our Sequire Virtual Events platform. We are proud to say we had over 50K attendees and hosted webinars with 250 companies.
The LD Micro Main Event is one of the most influential conferences in the small-cap space, and our acquisition has been able to provide LD access to our growing database of 5M+ investors.
At our core, we are in the business of helping companies connect to their audience, and creating events where companies are presenting to investors is a great way to execute on our mission. The LD Micro Main Event is just the start.
We are currently expanding our slate of events to include specialty conferences for individual industries such as: EdTech, FinTech, Minerals, Pharma, etc. We have built up a retail investor community of 5M+, and the ability to help educate investors with these events is valuable to our investor community.
We see the Sequire Virtual Events platform growing into the premier investor event tool. With the help of our events team, companies have the ability to create and organize their own webinars at scale. The Covid-19 Pandemic certainly created growth in this space, but we believe that virtual events are the future of targeted investor communication.
Through the events platform, we have the ability to host a variety of virtual events and conferences including: investor conferences, earnings calls, shareholder meetings, annual, investor/analyst days, corporate town halls, roadshows, and more.
We believe functionality is key, and some of the features we offer include multi-presenter capabilities, integrated graphic presentation options, tech support, real-time analytics, audience polling, downloadable resource offerings, and more. Each presentation, when concluded, delivers an analytics report to the client for data-driven review.
We are offering users a seamless, centrally-managed virtual events solution that can be customized to any industry. Sequire Virtual Events has already demonstrated success with the LD Micro Main Event, and we will continue to devote resources to the growth of this area of our business.
Sequire Community
Building a thriving community is often an overlooked aspect of business. With a significant number of investors aware of the LDMicro brand, we are moving to ensure that those people become passionate advocates, engaging with each other on a wide range of topics.
We have plans to develop investor education tools, host professional investment events, and cultivate a mature, educated community. Our vision for the Sequire Community is that it becomes a place where people can communicate and network, to learn and grow as investors, and ultimately become brand advocates.
We derive our revenues from the:
● Sale and licensing of our proprietary SaaS platform; and
● Sales of proprietary consumer data; and
● Attendance and sponsorship fees from investor conferences and events; and
● Sales of digital advertising campaigns.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Cash, Cash Equivalents, and Investments
Cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities totaled approximately $9,000,000 and $100,000 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Our marketable securities have been obtained through our Sequire business as payment for our services. They consist predominantly of debt and equity securities, diversified among industries and individual issuers. The investments are all U.S. dollar-denominated securities, but also include foreign issuer securities to diversify risk.
Valuation
In general, and where applicable, we use quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities to determine the fair value of our financial instruments. This pricing methodology applies to our Level 1 investments, such as U.S. government securities, common and preferred stock, and mutual funds. If quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities are not available to determine fair value, then we use quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities or inputs other than the quoted prices that are observable either directly or indirectly. Level 3 investments are valued using internally-developed models with unobservable inputs. Assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis using unobservable inputs are an immaterial portion of our portfolio.
Going Concern
Cash on hand and marketable securities at December 31, 2020 was approximately $451,000 and $8,447,000. Based upon our cash flow projections taking into account cash, our recent capital raise, marketable securities and the projected cash flows from operations we believe we have enough liquidity, taking into account the uncertainty related to the ongoing pandemic and general economic uncertainty, to continue to fund operations at their currently level through the remainder of the year.
The Company has incurred significant losses since its inception and has not demonstrated an ability to generate sufficient revenues from the sales of its services to achieved profitable operations on a consolidated basis. There can be no assurance that profitable operations will ever be achieved, or if achieved, could be sustained on a continuing basis. In addition, the Company’s operations and specifically, the continued consolidation of BIGToken may require additional financial support or additional financing. These factors create uncertainty or doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the consolidated financial statements are issued. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern. Accordingly, the consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a basis that assumes the Company will continue as a going concern and which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities and commitments in the ordinary course of business.
Liquidity
During 2020, our principal sources of liquidity have been proceeds from various debt and equity offerings as well as the sale of our receivables. Cash consists of cash on deposit with banks.
Historically, we have financed our operations primarily from the sale of debt and equity securities. There can be no assurance that profitable operations will ever be achieved, or if achieved, could be sustained on a continuing basis. Based upon our current revenues, expenses and liabilities, we anticipate having to raise additional capital through the private and public sales of our equity or debt securities, or a combination thereof. Although management believes that such capital sources will be available, there can be no assurance that financing will be available to us when needed in order to allow us to continue our operations, or if available, on terms acceptable to us. If we do not raise enough capital in a timely manner, among other things, we may be forced scale back our operations or cease operations all together.
We monitor our cash flow, assess our business plan, and make expenditure adjustments accordingly. If appropriate, we may pursue limited financing including issuing additional equity and/or incurring additional debt. Although we have successfully funded our past operations through additional issuances of equity, there is no assurance that our capital raising efforts will be able to attract additional necessary capital at prices attractive to the Company. If we are unable to obtain additional funding for operations at any time in the future, we may not be able to continue operations as proposed. This would require us to modify our business plan, which could curtail various aspects of our operations.
We expect existing cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities, cash flows from operations, and access to capital markets to continue to be sufficient to fund our operating activities and cash commitments for investing and financing activities, such as debt maturities, for at least the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future. Additionally, we entered into an “At the Market” sales agreement with B. Riley, Inc. (“Sales Agent”) for the sale of up to $3,125,000 of shares of our Class A Common Stock. The at-the-market agreement was entered into pursuant to a takedown from our shelf registration statement declared effective on December 11, 2019 (Registration No. 333-235298). From January 1, 2021 through March 25, 2021, we have sold 53,626 shares under such agreement at an average per share price of $5.47 resulting in gross proceeds of $293,000 and net proceeds of $284,000 after deducting Sales Agent commissions and other costs and expenses associated with such sales. Future sales under our at-the-market sales agreement are limited to $2,832,000, the remaining amount left pursuant to the takedown from our shelf registration statement.
Additionally, on October 30, 2020, we sold our remaining position in TI Health (f/k/a SRAXmd) for a total of $8,000,000 of which $7,000,000 was received upon closing. The remaining $1 million is to be paid the earlier of three years after closing or upon a future sale of the TI-Health business. Substantially, all of these proceeds were used to redeem a portion of Convertible Debentures issued on June 30, 2020.
Goodwill
We allocate goodwill to reporting units based on the reporting unit expected to benefit from the business combination. We evaluate our reporting units on an annual basis and, if necessary, reassign goodwill using a relative fair value allocation approach. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level (operating segment or one level below an operating segment) on an annual basis (December 31 for us) and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. These events or circumstances could include a significant change in the business climate, legal factors, operating performance indicators, competition, or sale or disposition of a significant portion of a reporting unit.
Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assignment of assets and liabilities to reporting units, assignment of goodwill to reporting units, and determination of the fair value of each reporting unit. The fair value of each reporting unit is estimated primarily through the use of a discounted cash flow methodology. This analysis requires significant judgments, including estimation of future cash flows, which is dependent on internal forecasts, estimation of the long-term rate of growth for our business, estimation of the useful life over which cash flows will occur, and determination of our weighted average cost of capital.
The estimates used to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit change from year to year based on operating results, market conditions, and other factors. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and goodwill impairment for each reporting unit.
Components of Results of Operations
Sequire Revenues
Sequire Platform: We recognize revenue from the licensing of our Sequire platform, data, marketing and insight services performed in conjunction with the Sequire platform.
Conference Revenue. We recognize revenue from hosting conferences.
Cost of Revenue and Operating Expenses
Cost of revenue. Our cost of revenue consists primarily of expenses associated with the cost of media and data.
Employee Related Costs. These are the costs we incur to employ our staff.
Platform costs. Consist of the technology and content hosting of our BIGToken platform.
Marketing and sales. These are the costs we incur to market our products and services and third-party selling costs.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and Amortization cost represent an allocation of the costs incurred to acquire the long-lived assets used in our business over their estimated useful lives. Our long-lived assets consist of property and equipment and internally developed software.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of human resources, information technology, professional fees, IT and facility overhead, and other general corporate expense. We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars primarily as a result of the increased costs associated with being a stand-alone public company. However, we also expect our general and administrative expense to fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue in future periods based on fluctuations in our revenue and the timing of such expense.
Results of operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019 (in 1,000s)
Selected Segment Financial Data
Full year 2020 compared to 2019
was the first full year of operations for our Sequire business. During the year-ended December 31, 2020 our customer base grew from approximately 37 subscribing companies to approximately 125 subscribing companies as of year-end. We charge a base monthly license fee for a Sequire subscription, which ranges from $1,000 per month up to $5,000 per month.
Due to a sales initiative, we launched in 2Q 2020 whereby we allow our customers to pay for our services with their securities, mainly common stock, we estimated that there was a greater likelihood we’d be successful with pricing adjustments and our ability to sell additional ancillary services.
During the third quarter, we acquired LD Micro, Inc. LD Micro’s primary line of business was the hosting of investor related conferences. Historically, LD Micro’s investor conferences have been in-person, however, during the fourth-quarter of 2020 we successfully hosted a virtual conference leveraging Sequire’s platform technology to execute the event.
For the first year of operations, we generated revenues of $6,284,000. This compares to $87,000 from the limited operations during the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company had closed sales with total contract value approximating $14,800,000.
Sequire revenues
Sequire revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $6,284,000 or by 7,123% compared to $87,000 during the prior year. Sequire’s continued growth was primarily driven by the growth of the services provided to issuers through the Sequire platform. During the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company had closed sales with total contract value approximating $14,800,000.
Sequire Profit Margin
Sequire’s costs of revenue consist of data and media acquired from third parties to fulfill the data, media and advertising components of our revenues. Sequire’s profit margin for the year ended was 72% and 92% respectively.
Sequire Operating Expenses
Sequire Operating Expenses
Sequire’s operating expenses for the year-ended December 31, 2020 were $3,412,000 this is compared to $462,000 for the year-ended December 31, 2019. Operating expenses consisted of the following:
Employee Related Costs. These are the costs we incur to employ our staff. Employee related costs increased to $1,854,000 or by 739% from $221,000. The increase is primarily the result of an increase in staffing expenses due to an increase in the number of employees in all departments of the business to support the growth in operations during the year. We expect these expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as revenue increases.
Platform costs. Consist of the technology and content hosting. Platform costs for the full year ending December 31, 2020 were $40,000 a 25% increase compared to $32,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. We expect these costs to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to grow but expect that they continue to decrease as a percentage of our revenues.
Marketing, data services and sales. These are the costs we incur to market our products and third-party services and selling costs. Marketing, data services and sales for the full year ending December 31, 2020 were $1,216,000 a 1,348% increase compared to $84,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. We expect these costs to continue to grow in nominal dollars as we continue to grow but expect that they continue to decrease as a percentage of our revenues.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and Amortization cost represent an allocation of the costs incurred to acquire the long-lived assets used in our business over their estimated useful lives. Our long-lived assets primarily consist of internally developed software. For the year ended December 31, 2020 depreciation and amortization expense was $136,000 which represents an increase of $84,000 or 159%. We expect these expenses to continue to increase as we anticipate further investment in long-lived assets to support our business growth.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of, information technology, professional fees, IT and facility overhead. We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars primarily as a result of the increased costs associated with being a stand-alone public company. However, we also expect our general and administrative expense to fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue in future periods based on fluctuations in our revenue and the timing of such expense.
BIGToken revenues
BIGToken revenues for the year-ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $2,168,000 or 33% compared to $3,228,000 during the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is primarily driven by the loss of core customers from our legacy sales verticals.
BIGToken Profit Margin
BIGToken’s costs of revenue consist of media acquired from third parties to fulfill the media and advertising components of our revenues. Profit margin for the year-ended December 31, 2020 increased to 63% as compared to 50% in 2019. The increase is driven by the increase in revenues and enhanced operational execution.
BIGtoken Operating Expenses
Our operating costs for the year-ended December 31, 2020 declined to $5,933,000 or by 45% as compared to $10,751,000 for the year-ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in operating expenses were attributable to the following: to the reductions in staffing related and other general administrative expenses attributable to our legacy media verticals, and the reduction of our BIGToken point liability.
Employee Related Costs. These are the costs we incur to employ our staff. For the year-ended December 31, 2020 employee related costs decreased to $3,211,000 from $6,281,000 for the full year period ending December 31, 2019, representing a decrease of $3,070,000 or approximately 49%. The decrease is primarily due to a reduction in employees in our sales and operations departments.
Platform costs. Consist of the technology and content hosting. Platform costs for the full year ending December 31, 2020 were $707,000 as compared to $580,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $127,000 or 22%. The increase in expenses here is driven by the continued increase in our user database. We expect these costs to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to grow our user database but expect that they continue to decrease as a percentage of our revenues.
Marketing, data services and sales. These are the costs we incur to market our products including the expenses we incur through BIGtoken point redemptions. For the year-ended December 31, 2019 the company incurred $960,000 in expenses related to payments to users for point redemptions and accruals for future redemptions. For the year ended December 31, 2020, BIGtoken user payment and accruals for future payments for point redemptions decreased to $721,000 . Marketing, data services and sales for the full year ending December 31, 2020 were $958,000 as compared to $1,751,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. We expect these costs to continue to grow in nominal dollars as we continue to grow but expect that they continue to decrease as a percentage of our revenues.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and Amortization cost represent an allocation of the costs incurred to acquire the long-lived assets used in our business over their estimated useful lives. Our long-lived assets primarily consist of internally developed software. For the year ended December 31, 2020 depreciation and amortization expense was $531,000 which represents an increase of $182,000 or 52%. We expect these expenses to continue to increase as we anticipate further investment in long-lived assets to support our business growth.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of, information technology, professional fees, IT and facility overhead. General and Administrative expenses were $526,000 for the full year ended December 31, 2020, which represents a decrease of $1,264,000. The decrease in expense in driven by a decrease in the following: bad-debt expenses of $394,000, consulting expenses of $175,000, stock based compensation of $230,000.
We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars primarily as a result of the increased costs associated with moving to an independent stand-alone Company. However, we also expect our general and administrative expense to fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue in future periods based on fluctuations in our revenue and the timing of such expense.
Corporate and Other Operating Expenses
Corporate and Other Operating expense consists primarily of human resources, information technology, professional fees, IT and facility overhead, and other general corporate expense. General and Administrative expenses were $8,310,000 for the full year ended December 31, 2020, which represents a decrease of $239,000 or 3%. The decrease in expense in driven by a decrease in lower staffing costs.
We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to grow our business. However, we also expect our general and administrative expense to decrease as a percentage of our revenues as revenues increase.
The following table presents working capital as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Cash flows from operating activities
The primary use of operating cash is to pay our media, data and platform vendors, employees and our users through point redemptions, others for a wide range of services. Cash flows used in operating activities decreased by $1,861,000 or 12% in 2020 primarily driven by a reduction in operating expenses.
Cash flows from investing activities
Our principal recurring investing activities are the funding of our internal software development and the sale of marketable securities. Expenditures for software development were $1,205,000 and $1,292,000 for the years ended 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the year-ended 2020, the Company generated $916,000 from the sale of marketable securities and $7,000,000 of proceeds from the sale of our investment of TI Health (formerly SRAXMd). Also, we used $697,000 for the acquisition of LD Micro.
Cash flows from financing activities
During the years ended December 31, 2020 net cash provided by financing activities decreased by 41% to $7,862,000 primarily consisting of proceeds, less redemptions, from our OID convertible notes. Also, we received $1,084,000 from the Payroll Protection Program.
During the years ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided from financing activities was $13,393,000 consisting of proceeds from the sales of common stock in the amount totaling $12,197,000 and the proceeds from the exercise of warrants in the amount of $1,196,000.
Employees and Human Capital Resources
As of March 26, 2021, we had 145 full-time employees. 9 are engaged in executive management such as our Chief Executive Officer, 90 in information technology including those participating in our research and development efforts, 22 in sales and marketing, 16 in integration and customer support and 8 in administration. All employees are employed “at will.” We believe our relations with our employees are generally positive and we have no collective bargaining agreements with any labor unions.
Our human capital resources objectives include, as applicable, identifying, recruiting, retaining, incentivizing and integrating our existing and new employees. The principal purposes of our equity and cash incentive plans are to attract, retain and reward personnel, whether existing employees or new hires, through the granting of stock-based and cash-based compensation awards. We believe that this increases value to our stockholders and the success of our company by motivating such individuals to perform to the best of their abilities and achieve our objectives.
As the success of our business is fundamentally connected to the well-being of our employees, we are committed to their health, safety and wellness. We provide our employees and their families with access to convenient health and wellness programs, including benefits that provide protection and security giving them peace of mind concerning events that may require time away from work or that impact their financial well-being; and that offer choice where possible so they can customize their benefits to meet their needs and the needs of their families. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented significant changes that we determined were in the best interest of our employees, as well as the community in which we operate, and which comply with government regulations, including working in a remote environment where appropriate or required.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount in our consolidated financial statements and related notes. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate estimates which are subject to significant judgment. The more critical accounting estimates include estimates related to revenue recognition and accounts receivable allowances. We also have other key accounting policies, which involve the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that are significant to understanding our results, which are described in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 appearing elsewhere in this report.
The following critical accounting policies affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. In addition, you should refer to our accompanying consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the consolidated statements of operations, changes in stockholders’ equity and cash flows for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the related notes thereto, for further discussion of our accounting policies.
On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates compared to historical experience and trends, which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. To the extent that there are material differences between our estimates and our actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe the assumptions and estimates associated with the following have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Going concern assessment
With the implementation of Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) standard on going concern, Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-15, we assess going concern uncertainty in our consolidated financial statements to determine if we have sufficient cash and cash equivalents on hand and working capital, including available loans or lines of credit, if any, to operate for a period of at least one year from the date our consolidated financial statements are issued, which is referred to as the “look-forward period” as defined by ASU No. 2014-15. As part of this assessment, based on conditions that are known and reasonably knowable to us, we consider various scenarios, forecasts, projections, and estimates, and we make certain key assumptions, including the timing and nature of projected cash expenditures or programs, and our ability to delay or curtail those expenditures or programs, if necessary, among other factors. Based on this assessment, as necessary or applicable, we make certain assumptions around implementing curtailments or delays in the nature and timing of programs and expenditures to the extent we deem probable those implementations can be achieved and we have the proper authority to execute them within the look-forward period in accordance with ASU No. 2014-15.
Business Combinations
For all business combinations (whether partial, full or step acquisitions), the Company records 100% of all assets and liabilities of the acquired business, including goodwill, generally at their fair values; contingent consideration, if any, is recognized at its fair value on the acquisition date and, for certain arrangements, changes in fair value are recognized in earnings until settlement and acquisition-related transaction and restructuring costs are expensed rather than treated as part of the cost of the acquisition.
Accounts receivable and allowance for doubtful accounts
Accounts receivable represent customer accounts receivables. The Company provides an allowance for doubtful accounts equal to the estimated uncollectible amounts. The Company’s estimate is based on historical collection experience, general economic environment trends, and a review of the current status of trade accounts receivable. Management reviews its accounts receivable each reporting period to determine if the allowance for doubtful accounts is adequate. Such allowances, if any, would be recorded in the period the impairment is identified. It is reasonably possible that the Company’s estimate of the allowance for doubtful accounts will change. Uncollectible accounts receivables are charged against the allowance for doubtful accounts when all reasonable efforts to collect the amounts due have been exhausted.
Impairment of long-lived assets
We assess the impairment of long-lived assets, which consists primarily of long-lived intangible assets and office equipment, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that such assets might be impaired and the carrying value may not be recoverable. If events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable and the expected undiscounted future cash flows attributable to the asset are less than the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment loss equal to the excess of the asset’s carrying value over its fair value is recorded.
Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets
We account for goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 350 “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other.” Approximately 61% of our total assets as of December 31, 2020, consist of indefinite-lived intangible assets, such goodwill, the value of which depends significantly upon the operating results of our businesses. We believe that our estimate of the value of our goodwill is a critical accounting estimate as the value is significant in relation to our total assets, and our estimates incorporate variables and assumptions that are based on experiences and judgment about future operating performance of our markets and product offerings.
We do not amortize goodwill or other indefinite-lived intangible assets, but rather test for impairment annually or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that an asset may be impaired. We complete our annual impairment tests in the fourth quarter of each year. The fair value measurements for our indefinite-lived intangible assets use significant unobservable inputs that reflect our own assumptions about the estimates that market participants would use in measuring fair value including assumptions about risk. The unobservable inputs are defined in FASB ASC Topic 820 “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures” as Level 3 inputs.
We have the option to assess whether it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired. If it is more likely than not that impairment exists, we are required to perform a quantitative analysis to estimate the fair value of the assets. The qualitative assessment requires significant judgment in considering events and circumstances that may affect the estimated fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets and to weigh these events and circumstances by what we believe to be the strongest to weakest indicator of potential impairment. Our annual test is conducted on December 31st.
The FASB guidance provides examples of events and circumstances that could affect the estimated fair value of indefinite-lived intangible assets; however, the examples are not all-inclusive and are not by themselves indicators of impairment. We considered these events and circumstances, as well as other external and internal considerations. Our analysis, in order of what we consider to be the strongest to weakest indicators of impairment include: (1) the difference between any recent fair value calculations and the carrying value; (2) financial performance, such as operating revenue, including performance as compared to projected results used in prior estimates of fair value; (3) macroeconomic economic conditions, including limitations on accessing capital that could affect the discount rates used in prior estimates of fair value; (4) industry and market considerations such as a declines in market-dependent multiples or metrics, a change in demand, competition, or other economic factors; (5) operating cost factors, such as increases in labor, that could have a negative effect on future expected earnings and cash flows; (6) legal, regulatory, contractual, political, business, or other factors; (7) other relevant entity-specific events such as changes in management or customers; and (8) any changes to the carrying amount of the indefinite-lived intangible asset.
We engage an independent third-party appraisal and valuation firm to assist us with determining the enterprise value. Noble Financial Capital Markets prepared the valuations for the testing period ending December 31, 2020 and 2019.
We performed a sensitivity analysis of certain key assumptions including reducing the long-term revenue growth rate to determine that such changes would have no incremental impact to the carrying value of goodwill associated with our Company.
Debt Issuance Costs, Debt Discount and Detachable Debt-Related Warrants
Costs incurred to issue debt are deferred and recorded as a reduction to the debt balance in our consolidated balance sheets. We amortize debt issuance costs over the expected term of the related debt using the effective interest method. Debt discounts relate to the relative fair value of warrants issued in conjunction with the debt and are also recorded as a reduction to the debt balance and accreted over the expected term of the debt to interest expense using the effective interest method.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASC Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“ASC 606”) using the modified retrospective method. The core principle of ASC 606 requires that an entity recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. ASC 606 defines a five-step process to achieve this core principle and, in doing so, it is possible more judgment and estimates may be required within the revenue recognition process than required under existing U.S. GAAP including identifying performance obligations in the contract, estimating the amount of variable consideration to include in the transaction price and allocating the transaction price to each separate performance obligation.
The following five steps are applied to achieve that core principle:
● Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer;
● Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract;
● Step 3: Determine the transaction price;
● Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
● Step 5: Recognize revenue when the company satisfies a performance obligation.
Results for reporting periods beginning after January 1, 2018 are presented in accordance with ASC 606, while prior period amounts have not been adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with the Company’s historic accounting under ASC 605 - Revenue Recognition (“ASC 605”). Under current and prior revenue guidance, revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services are transferred to the customer, in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those good or services.
The Company’s current payment terms on credits to its customers are ranging from 60 days to 9 months, depending on the creditworthiness of its customers.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for all stock-based payment awards made to employees and directors based on their fair values and recognizes such awards as compensation expense over the vesting period using the straight-line method over the requisite service period for each award as required by FASB ASC Topic No. 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. If there are any modifications or cancellations of the underlying vested or unvested stock-based awards, we may be required to accelerate, increase or cancel any remaining unearned stock-based compensation expense, or record additional expense for vested stock-based awards. Future stock-based compensation expense and unearned stock- based compensation may increase to the extent we grant additional stock options or other stock-based awards.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under the provisions of FASB ASC Topic 740, “Income Tax,” which requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequence attributable to the difference between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rate expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. The Company establishes a valuation when it is more likely than not that the assets will not be recovered.
ASC Topic 740-10, “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes,” defines uncertainty in income taxes and the evaluation of a tax position as a two-step process. The first step is to determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination, including the resolution of any related appeals or litigation based on the technical merits of that position. The second step is to measure a tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not threshold to determine the amount of benefit to be recognized in the financial statements. A tax position is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Tax positions that previously failed to meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold should be recognized in the first subsequent period in which the threshold is met. Previously recognized tax positions that no longer meet the more-likely-than-not criteria should be de-recognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which the threshold is no longer met. Penalties and interest incurred related to underpayment of income tax are classified as income tax expense in the period incurred.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For further information on recently issued accounting pronouncements, see Note 1-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off balance sheet arrangements
As of the date of this report, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors. The term “off-balance sheet arrangement” generally means any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement to which an entity unconsolidated with us is a party, under which we have any obligation arising under a guarantee contract, derivative instrument or variable interest or a retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to such entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support for such assets.