Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this 2020 Form 10-K. For further discussion regarding operating and financial data for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, refer to Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
In 2020, we updated the presentation of the Company’s segment reporting see, Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 18 Segment Reporting in the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. As a result of these changes in segment reporting, all applicable historical segment information has been recast to conform to the new presentation. We are also presenting amounts for the year ended December 31, 2018 in the Results of Operations Revenues and Segment Profitability tables below, but not the comparative discussion as mentioned above.
In addition, we updated service lines to reflect the remaining Hazardous Waste Solutions Services and Manufacturing and Industrial Services in RWCS. This reclassification is driven by the divestiture of the Environmental Solutions business, discussed in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 4 Restructuring, Divestitures, and Impairments, and service line information has been recast to conform to the new presentation.
Overview
Incorporated in 1989, Stericycle is a U.S. based business-to-business services company and leading provider of compliance-based solutions that protects people, promotes health and safeguards the environment. Stericycle serves customers in the U.S. and 17 other countries worldwide with solutions for regulated waste and compliance services, secure information destruction and patient engagement. To our customers, team members and the communities we serve, Stericycle is a company that protects what matters.
Our offering of services appeals to a wide range of business customers. The majority of our customers are healthcare businesses (hospitals, physician and dental practices, outpatient clinics, long-term care facilities, etc.). We also provide services to retailers, manufacturers, financial services providers, professional services providers, governmental entities and other businesses. While we manage large volumes of waste and other materials, the volume per customer site on average is small.
Highlights for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year include:
•Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $2.68 billion, compared to $3.31 billion in 2019. Of the $633.4 million decline, the impact of divestitures was $483.7 million and lower SID revenues, excluding SOP pricing, was $157.1 million, primarily reflecting pandemic-related business disruption. This was partially offset by growth in Regulated Waste and Compliance Services of $36.5 million.
•Income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $31.9 million, compared to a loss from operations of $211.9 million in 2019. The change was primarily due to no goodwill impairment in 2020 compared to goodwill impairment of $228.3 million in 2019, offset by net divestiture losses of $123.6 million in 2020 compared to net divestiture losses of $103.0 million in 2019 for a net divestiture difference of $20.6 million. In addition, we continue to see lower charges associated with our key priorities and other significant matters discussed below.
•Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $57.3 million, or $0.63 diluted loss per share, compared with $346.8 million, or $3.81 diluted loss per share, in 2019. The difference was related to higher income from operations of $243.8 million, lower interest expense of $36.4 million and lower loss on early extinguishment of debt of $23.1 million, which were partially offset by a higher income tax expense of $16.7 million.
•Cash flow from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $530.2 million, compared to $248.0 million in 2019, representing a $282.2 million year-over-year improvement.
•Cash paid for capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $119.5 million compared to $194.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by the timing of 2019 investments in the ERP and disciplined capital management throughout 2020.
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 35
PART II
During 2020, we completed the following debt related transactions:
a) On November 9, 2020, we issued $500.0 million at par of aggregate principal Senior Notes, due January 2029, which are unsecured and bear interest at 3.875% per annum, payable on January 15 and July 15 of each year.
b) On February 25, 2020, we executed the Fifth Amendment which amended the Credit Agreement to, among other things:
•increase the maximum allowable Consolidated Leverage Ratio to 5.00 to 1.00 until the end of the first quarter of 2022 and 4.50 to 1.00 thereafter.
•upon the consummation of the divestiture of the ESOL Disposal Group, each of the foregoing maximum permitted Consolidated Leverage Ratio levels were stepped down to 4.75 to 1.00 and 4.25 to 1.00, respectively.
•allow for continuation of the $200 million of cash add backs to EBITDA through December 31, 2020 and addbacks of $100 million until December 31, 2021, with no further addbacks thereafter.
•increase the leverage ratio pricing tier of greater than 4.50 to 1.00 by 0.125%.
•grant a first-priority security interest to the administrative agent for the benefit of the lenders in substantially all of the personal property of the Company and certain of its material domestic subsidiaries, including certain equity interests held by those entities.
For additional information, see Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 9 - Debt in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Over the course of 2020, we divested our Environmental Solutions business, Expert Solutions business, both reported primarily in our North America reportable segment and operations in Argentina, in our International reportable segment. Divestiture transactions combined generated $498.9 million in net proceeds during 2020 that was primarily used to repay debt. For additional information, see Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 4 - Restructuring, Divestitures, and Impairments in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 virus outbreak a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a global economic impact, including temporary closure of non-essential businesses worldwide and postponement of elective surgeries and preventative care. The Company continues to maintain operations within all business service offerings, although our maritime waste service offering has been significantly and adversely impacted. We are monitoring future implications of the COVID-19 pandemic and continue to take actions to manage spending to align to operational requirements.
The Company’s COVID-19 pandemic response has included efforts to protect the health and well-being of our workforce and our customers. We worked proactively with the Centers for Disease, Control and Prevention, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the Department of Transportation and regulatory agencies around the world to ensure readiness for proper regulated waste management. We have updated and implemented numerous protocols specifically to reduce risk among our front-line team members, and our strategic sourcing team has worked diligently to take measures to provide our field operations employees with appropriate personal protective equipment. We’ve staggered shift times and dedicated trucks to specific drivers to reduce exposure. We’ve implemented more rigorous cleaning protocols for all our facilities. Since March of 2020, we had more than 7,000 team members around the globe sheltering in place, all to protect our staff and communities we serve. We will continue to monitor the safety of our team members as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, but the long-term impact is not known at this point as the scale and severity of the outbreak and related behavioral changes is still uncertain. Additionally, we increased the frequency of our communications with our Board of Directors. At the height of the pandemic, we provided weekly updates to our Board. This communication kept the Board apprised of the evolving impacts of the pandemic to our organization and team members, as well as provided them an opportunity to understand and monitor our response to the pandemic while providing oversight and guidance.
The Company has taken a leadership position related to the COVID-19 pandemic to support our customers and provide industry expertise regarding the effective management of COVID-19 waste.
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 36
PART II
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic across our revenue service categories is as follows:
Key Business Priorities
•Quality of revenue - We have been executing against our foundational initiatives we launched to drive revenue quality. These included a formal cross-functional deal review committee, realignment of sales incentive plans, re-organization of our commercial leadership team around our service lines, key customer channels, and implementation of global customer pipeline management processes for both Regulated Waste and Compliance Services and Secure Information Destruction. In combination with our quality of revenue initiatives, we continue to develop and deploy innovative solutions to meet unmet customer needs, strengthen customer engagement, and drive long-term organic growth. As an example, during 2020, Regulated Waste and Compliance Services innovated to meet customer needs during the pandemic by
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 37
PART II
rapidly deploying solutions to support temporary COVID-19 testing centers and to introduce non-health care PPE disposal options. In Secure Information Destruction Services, we deployed express and priority offerings to address unmet customer needs around service speed and predictability during the pandemic.
•Operational efficiencies - As we manage through volatile times, we remain focused on operational efficiencies, modernization and innovation to control variable and discretionary costs and improving performance and efficiencies in our field operations. Our Engineering and Operations teams have and will continue to implement operational process and performance improvements, which have significantly contributed to our gross profit margin expansion of 390 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020. We are gaining traction on right sizing and balancing our fleet and equipment; driving efficiencies in route and long-haul planning; and optimizing our network and assets. Additionally, we have normalized our workforce following the furloughs experienced earlier this year.
•Debt reduction and leverage improvement - We have reduced net debt by approximately $900.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. We applied $498.9 million in net proceeds from the divestiture of Expert Solutions, operations in Argentina and Environmental Solutions to the repayment of debt during December, August and April 2020, respectively. With the divestitures proceeds and our continued focus on operating margin expansion and free cash flow generation, we reduced our adjusted debt to EBITDA leverage ratio as defined by our Credit Agreement to 3.54 times as of December 31, 2020. We have $947.2 million as of December 31, 2020 available under our Senior Credit Facility, which matures in November 2022.
•Portfolio rationalization - On December 2, 2020, Stericycle divested Expert Solutions for approximately $78.0 million in cash. On August 3, 2020, Stericycle divested all of our operations in Argentina for approximately $3.9 million in cash. On April 6, 2020, we also divested the Environmental Solutions business for $462.5 million in cash. We expect to continue to evaluate opportunities to further optimize our portfolio of businesses.
•ERP implementation - We entered 2020 with a schedule to begin the staged deployment of the commercial, operational and financial systems in North America. Our first stage included the implementation of a human capital management system which was completed in January 2020. However, guided by our commitment to protect what matters, we concluded that the health and travel risks associated with a field deployment in the COVID-19 pandemic environment were substantial, and given our priorities to serve our customers and keep our team members safe, we made the decision to defer the ERP deployment to 2021. In the interim, we are making progress mining data from our legacy systems and tools to gain business insights, build scorecards and improve performance. Additionally, over the past several months, we accelerated the roll-out of certain technologies associated with our North American ERP system, including our new employee travel and expense system and a global tax management system.
Key Priorities and Other Significant matters
The following table identifies key priorities and other significant matters impacting our business (amounts are stated pre-tax except when noted):
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 38
PART II
The above priorities and other significant matters include the following types of activities:
(1)Includes employee and contract termination, facility closure and clean-up costs.
(2)Includes dedicated resources, including project related incentive compensation and stock-based compensation.
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 39
PART II
(3)Includes other costs related to each priority (e.g. software maintenance fees, changes in contingent consideration and environmental provisions).
(4)Includes impairments, accelerated depreciation and/or amortization, gain/loss on disposal and changes in deferred consideration.
Business Transformation
For the years presented and for the cumulative period since the inception of Business Transformation, we have recognized the following, principally reported in Other:
Through 2019, we had completed activities originally contemplated as part of Business Transformation in the areas of investment in cost savings and business capability and other related matters. We have shifted the planned deployment of the rest of our North American ERP system until 2021. In the interim, we accelerated the deployment of certain technologies associated with our North American ERP system, including our new employee travel and expense system and a new global tax management system.
Intangible Amortization
See table above of key priorities and other significant matters for intangible amortization expense from acquisitions for the years presented and how they are classified in the Consolidated Statements of Loss.
The decrease in amortization expense is a result of the reduction of intangible assets related to divestitures. See Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 7 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets in the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
For intangible amortization by segment see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 18 - Segment Reporting in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Acquisition and Integration
See table above of key priorities and other significant matters for acquisition and integration expense for the years presented, primarily in Other, and how they are classified in the Consolidated Statements of Loss.
Details of the acquisition completed in the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 3 - Acquisitions in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 40
PART II
Operational Optimization
Our organization is focused on operation efficiency, modernization and innovation. The aim of our focus is to achieve a culture of continuous improvement that will enhance efficiency, effectiveness and competitiveness to improve our cost base and cash flow and we have taken a number of actions to reduce operating costs and optimize operations. For example, we believe plant throughput and route density are competitive strengths of Stericycle. We maintain such strengths by making adjustments to our network of transportation and treatment facilities, standardizing containers and right sizing fleet levels in an effort to optimize overall logistics and processing capabilities within a service category while reducing operational costs. As part of these efforts, we seek to reduce network redundancies by consolidating facilities, closing redundant facilities, optimizing containers and fleet levels and restructuring the local organization and operations for efficiency.
We recognized the following Operational Optimization expenses:
As we continue to consider each Operational Optimization activity, the amount, timing and recognition of charges will be affected by the occurrence of commitments and triggering events as defined under U.S. GAAP, among other factors. We may incur more charges, cash expenditures, accelerated depreciation and impairments than estimated and may not realize the expected improvement or cost savings on the planned time frame or at all. See Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 4 - Restructuring, Divestitures, and Impairments in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Divestitures
We evaluate our portfolio of services on an ongoing basis with a country-by-country and service line-by-service line approach to assess long-term potential and identify potential business candidates for divestiture. Our decisions regarding divestitures are based upon the following criteria:
•outlook for long-term market conditions;
•potential impact to complementary services or customer relationships;
•ability to leverage infrastructure and customer base for growth;
•potential for margin improvement;
•current divestiture value versus future divestiture value;
•ongoing capital requirements of the business;
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 41
PART II
•return on invested capital;
•impact on overall leverage, including impact on debt leverage ratio;
•implications for our internal control remediation efforts; and
•implications for our new ERP system implementation.
We recognized the following Divestitures (including Divestiture losses (gains), net) in the Consolidated Statements of Loss:
For additional information regarding Divestiture losses (gains), including significant impacts of foreign currency translation adjustments, net, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 4 - Restructuring, Divestitures, and Impairments in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We continue to evaluate the performance of our entire portfolio of assets and businesses. Divestitures resulting from this evaluation may cause us to record significant charges, including those related to goodwill, other intangible assets, long-lived assets, and cumulative translation adjustments. In addition, divestitures we complete may not yield the targeted improvements in our business. Any charges that we are required to record or the failure to achieve the intended financial results associated with the portfolio rationalization evaluation could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations (see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 4 - Restructuring, Divestitures, and Impairments in the Consolidated Financial Statements).
Litigation, Settlements and Regulatory Compliance
We operate in highly regulated industries and must address regulatory inquiries or respond to investigations from time to time. We are also involved in a variety of civil litigation from time to time including the items detailed in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 20 - Legal Proceedings, in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
See table above of key priorities and other significant matters for litigation, settlement and regulatory compliance charges, primarily consulting and professional fees, contingent liability provisions and settlements, net of insurance recoveries, impacting our business for the years presented, primarily in Other, and how they are classified in the Consolidated Statements of Loss.
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 42
PART II
Asset and Goodwill Impairments
Impairment charges comprise the following:
Impairment charges may be recognized in future periods to the extent changes in factors or circumstances occur, including deterioration in the macroeconomic environment or in the equity markets, including the market value of our common shares, deterioration in our performance or our future projections, or changes in our plans for one or more reporting units or specified long-lived assets, among other factors.
For additional information on asset and goodwill impairments, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 4 - Restructuring, Divestitures, and Impairments and Note 7 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other
See table above of key priorities and other significant matters for other charges, primarily consulting and professional fees related to internal control remediation activities as well as the implementation of new accounting standards, impacting our business, primarily in Other, for the years presented and how they are classified in the Consolidated Statements of Loss.
See table above of key priorities and other significant matters for the impact of foreign exchange re-measurement of net monetary assets held in Argentina as a result of its designation as a highly inflationary economy for the years presented and how they are classified in the Consolidated Statements of Loss. Argentina operations were divested in August 2020.
Capital Allocation
Stericycle aims to maintain a structured capital allocation strategy that balances investment in the business, debt reduction and returns to shareholders. Our current capital allocation strategy includes debt reduction and investments in our business.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred a pre-tax loss on early extinguishment of debt of $23.1 million, comprising a “make-whole” premium of $20.4 million, due under the terms of certain of the private placement notes and $2.7 million related to unamortized debt issuance costs, associated with repayments of our private placement notes.
We also incurred $0.2 million of debt modification charges associated with the execution of the Fourth Amendment, which are recorded in Interest expense, net and charges of $3.4 million related to the write-off of the unamortized portion of premiums associated with interest rate locks executed in connection with the issuance of certain of the private placement notes, which are recorded in Interest expense, net.
CARES Act and Tax Reform
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 43
PART II
For further discussion, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 10 - Income Taxes in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Results of Operations
Revenues (including Segment Revenue):
Our various regulated services share a common infrastructure and customer base. We market our regulated and compliance services by offering various pricing options to meet our customers’ preferences and customers move between these different billing paradigms. For example, our customers may contract with us for regulated waste disposal services that are billed based on the weight of waste collected, processed and disposed during a particular period and in a subsequent period, the same customer could move to our standard service, which packages the same regulated waste services with training and education services for a contracted subscription fee. Another example is a customer that purchases our regulated waste disposal and sharps disposal management services which provides the customer with the same regulated services under a different pricing and billing arrangement.
We do not track the movement of customers between the various types of regulated services we offer. Although we can identify directional trends in our services, because the regulated services are similar in nature and there are inherent inaccuracies in disaggregation, we analyze revenues by revenue service category and operating segment. We analyze our revenue growth by identifying changes related to organic growth, acquisitions, divestitures and changes due to currency exchange fluctuations. Organic growth excludes the effect of foreign exchange and acquisitions and divestitures with less than a full year of revenues in the comparative period.
2020 compared to 2019
Year over year movements in Revenues by Service Category and Segment were as follows:
(1)Growth is a change in revenues excluding the impact of SOP pricing, divestitures and foreign exchange.
(2)The comparisons at constant currency rates (foreign exchange) reflect comparative local currency balances at prior period’s foreign exchange rates. Stericycle calculated these percentages by taking current period reported Revenues less the respective prior period reported Revenues, divided by the prior period reported Revenues, all at the respective prior period’s foreign exchange rates. This measure provides information on the change in Revenues assuming that foreign currency exchange rates have not changed between the prior and the current period. Management believes the use of this measure aids in the understanding of changes in Revenues without the impact of foreign currency.
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 44
PART II
For the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year, organic SID and CRS revenues were lower, primarily reflecting COVID-19 pandemic-related business disruption. Organic RWCS revenue was slightly favorable in the current year in comparison to the prior year, primarily reflecting organic growth from our quality of revenue initiatives and sustainable value-added services we provide to customers. RWCS saw COVID-19 pandemic-related headwinds in the maritime waste services business, along with the continued trend of patients deferring elective surgeries. However, these negative trends were largely offset by increased COVID-19 waste and mail-back volume along with our new pop-up testing centers and non-health care PPE service.
North America revenues decreased $550.7 million, or 20.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $2,189.2 million from $2,739.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Divestiture of the Environmental Solutions business in the second quarter 2020 and divestiture of components of the CRS business sold in the fourth quarter of 2019, reduced revenues by $423.4 million, or 15.5%. Organic RWCS revenue was slightly favorable, 0.6%, in the current year in comparison to the prior year, primarily reflecting organic growth from our quality of revenue initiatives and sustainable value-added services we provide to customers. RWCS saw COVID-19 pandemic-related headwinds in the maritime waste services business, along with the continued trend of patients deferring elective surgeries. However, these negative trends were largely offset by increased COVID-19 waste and mail-back volume along with our new pop-up testing centers and non-health care PPE service. SID organic revenue, excluding SOP pricing, decreased $109.4 million or 14.2%, which is reflective of a reduction in service stops. Additionally, there was a decrease in revenue due to the impact of SOP pricing of $12.3 million, or 1.6% as compared to the prior year.
International revenues decreased $82.7 million, or 14.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $486.3 million from $569.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in International segment organic revenue, excluding SOP pricing, was $5.5 million, or 1.0%. Additionally, there was a decrease in revenue due to the impact of SOP pricing of $2.4 million, or 1.8% as compared to the prior year. International RWCS organic growth of 6.2% and CRS growth of 8.6% was more than offset by a decline in SID of 24.9%. The majority of International RWCS revenue growth is attributable to supporting our customers through the COVID-19 pandemic while we estimate the underlying business had slight growth being impacted by delayed elective surgeries. The decline in SID was due to closures of non-essential businesses that lasted longer in international locations than in the U.S. Divestiture components of the CRS business sold in the fourth quarter of 2020, divestiture of Argentina operations in the third quarter 2020, and the divestitures of the U.K. businesses, Chile and Mexico operations in fiscal 2019 reduced revenues by $60.3 million, or 10.6%. The effect of foreign exchange rates unfavorably impacted International revenues in 2020 by $14.5 million, or 2.5%, as foreign currencies, notably those in Latin America, declined against the U.S. dollar.
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 45
PART II
2019 compared to 2018
(1)Growth is a change in revenues excluding the impact of SOP pricing, divestitures and foreign exchange.
(2)The comparisons at constant currency rates (foreign exchange) reflect comparative local currency balances at prior period’s foreign exchange rates. Stericycle calculated these percentages by taking current period reported Revenues less the respective prior period reported Revenues, divided by the prior period reported Revenues, all at the respective prior period’s foreign exchange rates. This measure provides information on the change in Revenues assuming that foreign currency exchange rates have not changed between the prior and the current period. Management believes the use of this measure aids in the understanding of changes in Revenues without the impact of foreign currency.
Gross Profit
The decrease in Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to the divestiture of the Environmental Solutions, Argentina, and Expert Solutions businesses in 2020 and divestitures that occurred during 2019, partially offset by quality of revenue initiatives. In addition, gross profit was lower associated with the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in decreased revenue discussed above specific to SID and CRS. These were partially offset by reductions in variable and discretionary costs, driven by operational efficiency improvements including in transportation and productivity gains. Gross profit as a percentage of revenues has improved as divested businesses historically produced lower margins as compared to core businesses and operational efficiencies noted above. In addition, we continue to see lower charges associated with our key priorities and other significant matters discussed above.
International Gross profit as a percentage of revenues is lower than domestic Gross profit as a percentage of Revenues because our international operations have fewer small account customers, which tend to generate higher Gross profit percentages. Our international operations generate most of their revenues from large account
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 46
PART II
customers, such as hospitals, publicly funded healthcare organizations and government bodies. If our international revenues increase, consolidated Gross profit percentages may experience downward pressure due to this "business mix" shift, which may be offset by additional international small account market penetration, operational optimization and domestic business expansion.
SG&A
The decrease in SG&A for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to disciplined spending on operations and the 2020 divestitures of the Environmental Solutions business, Argentina operations, and components of the CRS business and other divestitures in 2019. Additionally, the Company had lower employee costs due to the impact of furloughed team members, lower commissions and reduced consulting and professional fees related to divestitures, compliance and material weakness remediation costs. The decreases referenced above were partially offset by higher incentive compensation. Further, there was a decrease in intangible asset amortization as assets became fully amortized. As a percentage of revenue, SG&A increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to higher incentive and stock based compensation.
Divestitures losses (gains), net
For additional information regarding Divestiture losses (gains), net, including significant impacts of foreign currency translation adjustments, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 4 - Restructuring, Divestitures, and Impairments in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill Impairment
The Company performed its annual goodwill assessment as of October 1, 2020 and determined no reporting units' carrying values were in excess of their estimated fair value.
During 2019, as a result of our annual goodwill impairment and other periodic assessments, we recognized non-cash goodwill impairment charges for our Canada, Environmental Solutions, and Latin America reporting units of $126.6 million, $80.8 million, and $20.9 million, respectively.
Segment Profitability
Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, we have changed our measure of segment profitability to Adjusted Income from Operations - see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 18 - Segment Reporting in the Consolidated Financial Statements for an explanation of this measure. Segment profitability and a reconciliation of the total for segment profitability to income (loss) from operations was as follows:
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 47
PART II
nm - percentage change not meaningful
(1) See Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 18 - Segment Reporting
2020 compared to 2019
Adjusted Income from Operations for our North America segment increased $11.0 million, or 1.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $606.0 million from $595.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. As a percentage of North America revenues, Adjusted Income from Operations was 27.7% and 21.7%, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Adjusted Income from Operations improved due to reductions in variable and discretionary costs, driven by operational efficiency improvements including compensation, transportation and disciplined spending in operations. The increase was partially offset by 2020 divestitures of the Environmental Solutions business, Argentina operations, and components of the CRS business and divestitures that occurred during 2019. Operating margin improved as certain divested businesses historically produced lower margins as compared to core businesses and operational efficiencies noted above.
Adjusted Income from Operations for our International segment decreased $24.2 million, or 34.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $46.5 million from $70.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decline was primarily a reduction in income from operations due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the related revenue decreases discussed above. As a percentage of International revenues, Adjusted Income from Operations was 9.6% and 12.4% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Adjusted Loss from Operations for Other increased in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year as a result of higher incentive and stock-based compensation, information technology and corporate insurance, partially offset by lower worker’s compensation expense.
Interest Expense, Net
The decrease in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 is a result of a lower weighted-average debt balance as well as lower interest rates. For further information see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 9 - Debt.
Loss on Early Extinguishment of Debt
During 2019, we incurred a pre-tax loss on early extinguishment of debt of $23.1 million, relating to the repayment of our private placement notes, discussed in Capital Allocation above. We did not have any pre-tax loss on early
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 48
PART II
extinguishment of debt in 2020. For further information see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 9 - Debt.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net is primarily comprised of foreign exchange losses including the re-measurement of net monetary assets held in Argentina, prior to divestiture in August 2020, as a result of its designation as a highly inflationary economy.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit was $0.1 million in 2020 compared to income tax benefit of $16.8 million in 2019. The effective tax rates for the years 2020 and 2019 were 0.2% and 4.6%, respectively. In 2020, our effective tax rate was negatively impacted by valuation allowances and divestitures which was partially offset by benefits from the CARES Act. In 2019, our effective tax rate was impacted by the non-deductibility of a portion of the goodwill impairments in certain jurisdictions, and valuation allowances recognized against net operating losses in several countries.
For further information, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 10 - Income Taxes in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Details of our outstanding debt obligations can be found in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 9 - Debt in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company believes that it has sufficient liquidity to support its ongoing operations and to invest in future growth to create value for its shareholders. Operating cash flows and the Company’s $1.20 billion Senior Credit Facility are the Company’s primary sources of liquidity and are expected to be used for, among other things, payment of interest and principal on the Company’s long-term debt obligations, capital expenditures necessary to support growth and productivity improvements, including those associated with shareholder distributions approved by the Board of Directors. To the extent the Company needs to add additional funding options to meet additional liquidity requirements or diversify its funding portfolio, the Company could seek additional financing from alternative sources, including approaching the capital markets.
The Company generated positive impacts to cash flow from operations in 2020 as a result of the CARES Act. The Company received $110.0 million, which was comprised of $48.0 million in July 2020 and $62.0 million in December 2020, of cash tax refunds for 2018 and 2019 U.S. net operating loss carryback claim, respectively. A remaining carryback claims associated with the finalization of the 2019 U.S. federal income tax return is currently filed with the IRS, and the anticipated refund is less than $1.0 million. Additionally, starting in the second quarter of 2020 and continued through the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company deferred payments associated with employer related payroll taxes of approximately $23.3 million under the CARES Act with expected payments in late 2021 and 2022.
Similar tax provisions and other stimulus measures have been granted either before or after December 31, 2020 by certain foreign and U.S. state jurisdictions which the Company continues to evaluate and apply, if applicable. The Company has benefited in the year ended December 31, 2020 from non-U.S. indirect tax payment deferrals of approximately $10.0 million, which will be due in 2021.
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 49
PART II
The Credit Agreement and Fifth Amendment contain a number of covenants, including financial covenants. As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with the Credit Agreement Debt Leverage Ratio covenant, with an actual ratio of 3.54 to 1.00, which was below the allowed maximum ratio of 4.75 to 1.00 as contained in the Fifth Amendment. On April 6, 2020, the Company completed the divestiture of its Environmental Solutions business. Therefore, effective April 6, 2020, the Consolidated Leverage Ratio decreased by 0.25 to 4.75 to 1.00 for fiscal quarters ending on or before December 31, 2021 and 4.25 to 1.00 for fiscal quarters ending on or after March 31, 2022.
Given our current leverage position, we believe we should be able to operate within our covenant thresholds, but due to the unpredictability of the COVID-19 pandemic and situations outside our control, it is reasonably likely that we could exceed this Consolidated Leverage Ratio threshold at some point in the next 12 months. This risk can be mitigated and potentially managed through appropriate spending controls, divestitures, restructuring the Company’s existing indebtedness, amending the Credit Agreement, or seeking temporary relief from the Consolidated Leverage Ratio covenant from the Company’s lenders.
A failure to comply with these covenant provisions could result in an event of default. Upon an event of default, unless waived, the lenders could elect to terminate their commitments, cease making further loans and/or cause their loans to become due and payable in full, foreclose against the assets securing the debt under our Credit Agreement and force us and our subsidiaries into bankruptcy or liquidation.
Working Capital
At December 31, 2020, our working capital decreased $94.3 million to a deficit of $144.6 million compared to a deficit of $50.3 million at December 31, 2019. This change is primarily driven by the divestiture of the Environmental Solutions business in 2020.
Current assets decreased $154.1 million in 2020 to $552.5 million from $706.6 million in 2019 primarily driven by the divestitures of the Environmental Solutions and Expert Solutions businesses. DSO was 52 days and 60 days as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. When excluding the divestiture revenues from the trailing 12-month DSO calculation, DSO was relatively consistent at 56 and 55 days in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Current liabilities decreased $59.8 million in 2020 to $697.1 million from $756.9 million in 2019, primarily driven by the divestiture of the Environmental Solutions business in 2020.
Operating Cash Flows: Net cash from operating activities increased $282.2 million in the year ended 2020 to $530.2 million from $248.0 million in 2019. The current period primarily reflects (i) U.S. CARES Act net operating loss carryback refund received in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 for a total of $110.0 million , (ii) lower payments for legal and professional fees, annual incentive compensation and prepaid software of $55.6 million compared to 2019, (iii) government relief tax-related payment deferrals of $30.2 million in 2020, roughly split two-thirds U.S. and one-third non-U.S., (iv) lower interest payments of $26.0 million in 2020, (v) advances received on executed service agreements of $19.2 million related to the Environmental Solutions divestiture in the second quarter of 2020 and (vi) lower operating expenditures for ERP and other related matters of approximately $20.0 million compared to 2019.
Investing Cash Flows: Net cash from investing activities increased $485.4 million in 2020 to net cash provided of $381.4 million from net cash used of $104.0 million in 2019. Our capital expenditures decreased by $74.7 million to $119.5 million from $194.2 million in 2019, primarily driven by the timing of 2019 investments in the ERP and 2020 disciplined capital management. In 2020, we received $498.9 million in net proceeds from the divestiture of Expert Solutions, operations in Argentina and Environmental Solutions businesses compared to $86.6 million net divestiture proceeds in 2019.
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 50
PART II
Financing Cash Flows: Net cash from financing activities increased $750.9 million for the year ended 2020 to $892.5 million from $141.6 million in 2019. The change related to our net repayments on our Senior Credit Facility and term loan for $1,337.4 million principally due to the proceeds received from the new debt issuance of Senior Notes, divestiture of the Environmental Solutions and Expert Solutions businesses and higher net cash from operating activities generated in 2020. Additionally, the Company made payments of other long-term debt and foreign debt of $40.0 million in 2020. The decrease was partially offset by proceeds of $500.0 million associated with debt issuance of the Senior Notes in 2020. During 2019, net borrowings of $114.8 million included repayment of private placement notes and $600.0 million new debt issuance of Senior Notes and additional borrowings on the Senior Credit Facility and term loan. As a result of the 2019 repayment of private placement notes, the Company paid $20.4 million for a make whole premium.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and cash commitments at December 31, 2020:
(1)These amounts represent the scheduled principal payments related to our long-term debt, excluding interest (see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 9 - Debt in the Consolidated Financial Statements).
The Company establishes asset retirement obligations for the present value of estimated future costs to retire long-lived assets at the termination or expiration of a lease. Asset retirement obligations are not presented above but the timing of such payments is not fixed and determinable (see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies in the Consolidated Financial Statements).
Payments for unrecognized tax benefits are excluded from contractual obligations. Based on the uncertain nature of our liability for unrecognized tax benefits, we are unable to make an estimate of the period of potential settlement, if any, with the applicable taxing authorities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $79.5 million of stand-by letters of credit outstanding against our senior credit facility, $37.9 million of surety bonds and $21.2 million of bank guarantees. The bank guarantees are issued mostly by our international subsidiaries for various purposes, including leases, seller notes, contracts and permits. The surety bonds are used for performance guarantees. Neither the bank guarantees nor the surety bonds affect our ability to use our various lines of credit.
We anticipate that our operating cash flows, together with additional borrowings available under our Senior Credit Facility, as amended on February 25, 2020, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated future operating expenses, key priorities such as our new ERP implementation, capital expenditures and debt service obligations as they become due during the next 12 months and the foreseeable future.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Although management believes that its estimates and assumptions are reasonable, they are based upon information available when they are made and therefore, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Our most critical accounting policies are those that may be material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change and those policies that have a material impact on the financial condition or operating performance of the Company. Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 51
PART II
Summary of Significant Accounting Polices in the Consolidated Financial Statements provides a detailed description of all of our material accounting policies; however, we have identified the following as our most critical accounting policies and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for these good or services. Revenue is recognized net of revenue-based taxes assessed by governmental authorities.
The Company provides RWCS, which provide collection and processing of regulated and specialized waste, including medical, pharmaceutical and hazardous waste, for disposal and compliance programs; SID Services, which provide for the collection of personal and confidential information for secure destruction and recycling of shredded paper; and CRS which includes communication services such as appointment reminders, secure messaging, event registration and other communications for hospitals and IDN’s. The associated activities for each of these are a series of distinct services that are substantially the same and have the same pattern of transfer over time; therefore, the respective services are treated as a single performance obligation.
We recognize revenue by applying the right to invoice practical expedient as our right to consideration corresponds directly to the value provided to the customer for performance to date. Revenues for our regulated waste and secure information destruction services are recognized upon waste collection. Our compliance services are recognized over the contractual service period. Revenues from communication services are recorded as the services are performed.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The Company reports accounts receivable at their net realizable value, which is management’s best estimate of the cash that will ultimately be received. The Company maintains an allowance for doubtful accounts to reflect the expected uncollectability of accounts receivable based on historical collection data and specific risks identified among uncollected accounts, as well as management’s expectation of future economic conditions. If current or expected future economic trends, events, or changes in circumstances indicate that specific receivable balances may be impaired, further consideration is given to the collectability of those balances and the allowance is adjusted accordingly. The adequacy of allowances for uncollectible accounts is reviewed at least quarterly and adjusted as necessary based on such reviews. Management’s judgment is required to assess the collectability of an account, based on detailed analysis of the aging of the receivables, the creditworthiness of the Company’s customers, historical collection trends, and current and future expected economic trends.
Accounts receivable written off in subsequent periods can differ from the allowance for doubtful accounts provided, but historically our provision has been adequate. Allowance for doubtful accounts was $56.2 million and $67.9 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Property, Plant and Equipment and Intangible Assets (definite-lives), Net: Long-lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment and amortizing intangible assets are reviewed whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. Impairment of assets with definite-lives is generally determined by comparing projected undiscounted cash flows to be generated by the asset, or appropriate grouping of assets, to its carrying value. If impairment is identified, a loss is recognized equal to the excess of the asset's net book value over its fair value and the cost basis is adjusted.
Determining the extent of impairment, if any, typically requires various estimates and assumptions including using management's judgment, cash flows directly attributable to the asset, the useful life of the asset and residual value, if any. When necessary, the Company uses internal cash flow estimates, quoted market prices and appraisals as appropriate to determine fair value. Actual results could vary from these estimates. In addition, the remaining useful life of the impaired asset is revised, if necessary.
(For additional information, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 5 - Property, Plant and Equipment and Note 7 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets in the Consolidated Financial Statements).
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 52
PART II
Intangible Assets (indefinite-lived): Indefinite-lived intangibles consist primarily of permits and tradenames. Indefinite-lived intangibles are assessed for impairment annually, as of October 1, or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change and are not subject to amortization but are assessed for impairment in the same manner as goodwill. Indefinite lived intangibles may be assessed using either a qualitative or quantitative approach. The qualitative approach first determines if it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the asset is less than the carrying value. If no such determination is made, then the impairment test is complete. If, however, it is determined that there is a likely impairment, a quantitative assessment is performed. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we performed our annual impairment test on indefinite-lived intangibles, other than goodwill, using the qualitative approach for certain assets and the quantitative approach for the remaining assets. The calculated fair value of our indefinite-lived intangibles is based upon, among other things, certain assumptions about expected future operating performance, internal and external processing costs and an appropriate discount rate determined by management.
Future changes in our assumptions or the interrelationship of the assumptions described above may negatively impact future valuations that would require non-cash charges and may have a material effect on our financial condition and operating results.
Goodwill: Goodwill is assessed for impairment annually as of October 1 of each year, or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that could reduce the value of a reporting until below its carrying value.
We used a quantitative approach to assess goodwill for impairment. The fair value of each reporting unit is calculated using the income approach (including DCF) and validated using a market approach with the involvement of a third-party valuation specialist. Our reporting units are: Domestic RWCS, Domestic SID, Domestic CRS, Canada, Europe, Asia Pacific and Latin America. The income approach uses expected future cash flows of each reporting unit and discounts those cash flows to present value. Expected future cash flows are calculated using management assumptions of growth rates, including long-term growth rates, capital expenditures and cost efficiencies. Future acquisitions or divestitures are not included in the expected future cash flows. We use a discount rate based on a calculated weighted average cost of capital which is adjusted for each of our reporting units based on size, country and company specific risk premiums. The market approach compares the valuation multiples of similar companies to that of the associated reporting unit. In addition, we analyze differences between the sum of the fair value of the reporting units and our total market capitalization for reasonableness, taking into account certain factors including control premiums.
The fair value is then compared to its carrying value including goodwill. If the fair value is in excess of its carrying value, the related goodwill is not impaired. If the fair value is less than its carrying value, we recognize an impairment charge in the amount that the carrying value exceeds the fair value but not to exceed the carrying value of any goodwill.
We performed our annual goodwill assessment as of October 1, 2020. As a result of this assessment, no goodwill impairment charges were recognized in 2020. For additional information, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 7 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
A measure of sensitivity of the amount of goodwill impairment charges to key assumptions is the amount by which each reporting unit's fair value exceeds their respective carrying value. As of the October 1, 2020 assessment, the estimated fair value of each reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by at least 20%. We performed sensitivity analysis on our estimated fair values, noting that a 50 basis point increase in the discount rate or a 50 basis point reduction in the long-term growth rate would not result in impairments for any of our reporting units.
Intangible Assets Lives
We have determined that certain of our operating permits and certain tradenames have indefinite lives due to our ability to renew them with minimal additional cost and therefore they are not amortized.
Our finite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their useful lives using the straight-line method. Our customer relationships have useful lives from 10 to 25 years based upon the type of customer. We have non-compete covenant intangibles with useful lives of 5 years. We also have tradename intangibles with useful lives from 15 to 40 years.
We evaluate the useful life of our intangible assets annually to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to their remaining useful life and changes are reflected prospectively as the intangible asset is
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 53
PART II
amortized over the revised remaining useful life. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we performed the annual assessment of the useful life of our finite-lived intangibles and made no changes to useful lives.
Assets and Liabilities Held-for-Sale
We classify Long-lived assets or disposal groups as held-for-sale when management having the appropriate authority, generally our Board of Directors or certain of our Executive Officers, commits to a plan of sale, the disposal group is ready for immediate sale, an active program to locate a buyer has been initiated and the sale is probable and expected to be completed within one year. Once classified as held-for-sale disposal groups are valued at the lower of their carrying amount or fair value less estimated selling costs. Where the disposal group constitutes substantially all, generally more than 90% of the assets and liabilities of our operations in a foreign country, the balance in the cumulative currency translation adjustment associated with that country is included in the carrying value of the disposal group. If the carrying value, including any amount associated with the cumulative currency translation, adjustment exceeds the fair value less estimated selling costs a held-for-sale impairment charge is recorded to reduce the carrying value.
The estimate for fair value is reviewed at the end of every reporting period that the disposal group is classified as held-for-sale and the carrying value adjusted whenever the estimated fair value less costs to sell is less than the carrying value.
Contingencies and Litigation
We are subject to various legal proceedings, claims and regulatory matters, the outcomes of which are subject to significant uncertainty. We determine whether to disclose or accrue for loss contingencies based on an assessment of whether the risk of loss is remote, reasonably possible or probable, and whether it can be reasonably estimated. We analyze our litigation and regulatory matters based on available information to assess the potential liabilities. Management’s assessment is developed based on an analysis of possible outcomes under various strategies. We record and disclose loss contingencies pursuant to the applicable accounting guidance for such matters (For additional information, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 20 - Legal Proceedings in the Consolidated Financial Statements).
Income Taxes
We record a provision for income taxes for the anticipated tax consequences of our reported results of operations using the asset and liability method. Deferred income taxes are recognized by applying enacted statutory tax rates applicable to future years to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis as well as net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. The measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance for any tax benefits for which future realization is uncertain.
Although we believe our assumptions, judgments and estimates are reasonable, changes in tax laws or our interpretation of tax laws and the resolution of any tax audits could significantly impact the amounts provided for income taxes in our Consolidated Financial Statements.
In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, in full or in part, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including our past operating results, and our forecast of future earnings, future taxable income and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. The assumptions utilized in determining future taxable income require significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying businesses. Actual operating results in future years could differ from our current assumptions, judgments and estimates. However, we believe that it is more likely than not that most of the deferred tax assets recognized on our Consolidated Balance Sheets will ultimately be realized. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the net amount that we believe is more likely than not to be realized.
We did not recognize certain tax benefits from uncertain tax positions within the provision for income taxes. We may recognize a tax benefit only if it is more likely than not the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement. At December 31, 2020, our estimated gross unrecognized tax benefits were $24.3 million, of which $23.2 million, if recognized, would favorably impact our future earnings. Due to uncertainties in any tax audit outcome, our estimates of the ultimate settlement of our unrecognized tax positions may change and the actual tax benefits may differ significantly from the estimates.
2020 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 54
PART II
The Tax Act established GILTI provisions that impose a tax on foreign income in excess of a deemed return on intangible assets of foreign corporations. We recognize the taxes on GILTI as a period expense rather than to recognize deferred taxes for basis differences that are expected to affect the amount of GILTI inclusion upon reversal.
For further information see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 10 - Income Taxes in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Insured and Self-Insured Claims
The Company’s insurance for workers’ compensation, auto/fleet, general liability, property and employee-related health care benefits is obtained using high deductible insurance policies, if any, meaning that the Company has retained a significant portion of the risks related to the claims associated with these programs. The estimated exposure for unpaid claims and associated expenses, including incurred but not reported losses, is based on a calculation performed by a third-party actuarial specialist using the Company’s historical claims experience. The accruals for these liabilities could be revised if future occurrences or loss developments significantly differ from the assumptions used. Estimated recoveries associated with insured claims are recognized as assets when the receipt of such amounts is probable.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award. That cost is recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award-the requisite service period, usually the vesting period. Performance based awards are recognized consistent with performance metrics and Accounting Standards Codification Section 718 Compensation - Stock Compensation. No compensation cost is recognized for equity instruments for which employees do not render the requisite service.
We use the Black-Scholes valuation model and the Monte Carlo simulation model to determine the fair value of stock options and PSU’s, respectively, once the related performance criteria have been established. The fair value models include various assumptions, including the expected volatility and expected life of the awards. Given the considerable judgment involved in these assumptions and complex modeling, we typically obtain assistance from third-party valuation specialists. The fair value of RSU's is determined based on closing price of our common stock on the date of grant. If an equity award is modified after the grant date, we assess the impact of the modification and where necessary record compensation cost calculated as any incremental fair value of the modified award over the fair value of the original award immediately before the modification.
For further detail, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 14 - Stock Based Compensation in the Consolidated Financial Statements.