ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis provide information management believes is useful in understanding the operating results, cash flows and financial condition of Surmodics. The following discussion should be read together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this report. Any discussion and analysis regarding our future financial condition and results of operations are forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, as more fully identified in “Forward-looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.” Our actual future financial condition and results of operations may differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements.
Overview
Surmodics, Inc. and subsidiaries (referred to as “Surmodics,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” “our” and other like terms) is a leading provider of surface modification technologies for intravascular medical devices and chemical components for in vitro diagnostic (“IVD”) immunoassay tests and microarrays. Surmodics is pursuing development and commercialization of highly differentiated medical devices that are designed to address unmet clinical needs and engineered to the most demanding requirements. This key growth strategy leverages the combination of the Company’s expertise in proprietary surface technologies, along with enhanced device design, development, and manufacturing capabilities. The Company mission remains to improve the detection and treatment of disease.
Acquisition of Vetex Medical Limited
On July 2, 2021, Surmodics completed the acquisition of all outstanding shares of Vetex Medical Limited (“Vetex”). Vetex, which was formerly privately held and is based in Galway, Ireland, develops and manufactures medical devices focused on venous clot removal solutions. Surmodics acquired Vetex with an upfront cash payment of $39.9 million funded using cash on hand and $10 million from the Company’s $25 million revolving credit facility. Additional payments of up to $7 million, $3.5 million of which are guaranteed, may be made upon achievement of certain product development and regulatory milestones.
The transaction expands Surmodics’ thrombectomy portfolio with a second Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) 510(k)-cleared device, the ReVeneTM Venous Thrombectomy Catheter for use in venous vascular beds that is specifically designed to remove large, mixed-morphology blood clots commonly found with venous thromboembolism (“VTE”). The ReVene Venous Thrombectomy Catheter has also received Conformité Européenne Mark (“CE Mark”) approval, which is a prerequisite for commercialization in the European Union (“E.U.”) The device’s dual action technology efficiently removes mixed-morphology clot in a single session, minimizing the need for thrombolytics and without capital equipment. Refer to the Product Development discussion below for a description of our current and planned activities related to the ReVene Venous Thrombectomy Catheter.
Vascular Intervention Product Development
Within our Medical Device segment, we develop and manufacture our own proprietary vascular intervention medical device products, which leverage our expertise in surface modification coating technologies, product design and engineering capabilities. We believe our strategy of developing our own medical device products has increased, and will continue to increase, our relevance in the medical device industry. This strategy is key to our future growth and profitability, providing us with the opportunity to capture more revenue and operating margin with vascular intervention products than we would by licensing our device-enabling technologies. Below is a summary of our pipeline of medical device products under development and recently commercialized, grouped by product platform.
Drug-coated balloons
Surmodics’ drug-coated balloons (“DCBs”) are designed for vascular interventions to treat peripheral arterial disease (“PAD”), a condition that causes a narrowing of the blood vessels supplying the extremities.
•
SurVeilTM DCB - paclitaxel-coated DCB to treat PAD in the upper leg (superficial femoral artery). In fiscal 2018, we entered into an agreement (the “Abbott Agreement”) with Abbott Vascular, Inc. (“Abbott”) that provides Abbott with exclusive worldwide commercialization rights to the SurVeil DCB product. Our SurVeil DCB utilizes a proprietary paclitaxel drug-excipient formulation for a durable balloon coating and is manufactured using an innovative process to improve coating uniformity.
We announced in January 2021 that our TRANSCEND clinical trial, the pivotal trial for the SurVeil DCB, met both the primary safety and primary efficacy endpoints, and the SurVeil DCB was found to be non-inferior in those endpoints to the Medtronic IN.PACT® Admiral® DCB, while delivering a substantially lower drug dose.
In the second quarter of fiscal 2021, we delivered to Abbott the written clinical report and related materials that demonstrated the primary safety endpoint and primary efficacy endpoint for the TRANSCEND clinical study were met. As a result, we received a $15 million milestone payment from Abbott in the second quarter of fiscal 2021, of which $111.3 million was recognized as license fee revenue in fiscal 2021.
In June 2021, we submitted the fourth and final module of our application to the FDA for premarket approval (“PMA”) of our Surveil DCB, including certain long-term vital status data required by the FDA. The Agency has requested certain additional data, and we continue to work closely with the Agency to fulfill requirements regarding our PMA application. Receipt of PMA from the FDA, if granted, would be expected to fulfill the requirements for a $30 million (if received by December 31, 2022) or $27 million (if received after December 31, 2022) milestone payment pursuant to the Abbott Agreement.
•
SundanceTM DCB - sirolimus-coated DCB for the treatment of below-the-knee PAD. We commenced the SWING first-in-human, 35-patient clinical study of our Sundance DCB in the third quarter of fiscal 2020 and completed enrollment in the second quarter of fiscal 2021. We expect to develop the clinical report to provide to Abbott in the first quarter of fiscal 2022. Pursuant to the Abbott Agreement, Abbott has the option to negotiate a commercialization agreement for Sundance DCB product.
•
AvessTM DCB - paclitaxel-coated DCB for the treatment of arteriovenous (“AV”) fistulae commonly associated with hemodialysis. In fiscal 2019, we commenced and completed enrollment in a first in-human, 12-patient clinical study of our Avess DCB. In fiscal 2020, initial study results were received and demonstrated promising early safety data and performance insights, with greater than 90% of treated patients free from revascularization at six months. In fiscal 2021, we completed design verification for the full matrix of balloon sizes for the base balloon catheter and began the process validation work on the base catheter. Additionally, the FDA has provided high-level feedback on Avess pivotal clinical trial design considerations. In fiscal 2022, we plan to evaluate our strategy for further clinical investment in the Avess DCB based on the experience we gain from the PMA application process for SurVeil DCB.
Thrombectomy
Surmodics’ thrombectomy products are mechanical devices designed for the removal of clots from venous and arterial vascular beds without the need for capital equipment, while minimizing the need for thrombolytics.
•
Arterial Clot Removal - In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we received FDA 510(k) clearance on our first thrombectomy device, the PounceTM Arterial Thrombectomy System, intended for the non-surgical removal of thrombi and emboli (clots) from the peripheral arterial vasculature. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, we received FDA 510(k) clearance for an indication expansion to use the Pounce Arterial Thrombectomy System in smaller vessels down to 3.5 mm, which expands the therapeutic applicability of the device to include both superficial femoral arteries and infrapopliteal (below-the-knee) arteries. Clinical product evaluations are an important precursor to commercialization and provide product performance experience from physicians in real-world case settings. Clinical product evaluations of our Pounce Arterial Thrombectomy System began in the third quarter of fiscal 2021 and are expected to continue through early fiscal 2022.
•
Venous Clot Removal - On July 2, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Vetex and expanded our thrombectomy portfolio to include a second FDA 510(k)-cleared device, our ReVene Venous Thrombectomy Catheter specifically designed to remove large, mixed-morphology blood clots commonly found with VTE. Process and manufacturing validations for our ReVene Venous Thrombectomy Catheter are underway and are expected to continue through the second quarter of fiscal 2022. We expect to initiate clinical product evaluation activities for our venous thrombectomy catheter in the second half of fiscal 2022.
For more information regarding our product development and commercialization strategy, see Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
CARES Act Employee Retention Credit
In fiscal 2021, a benefit of $3.6 million was recorded to reduce operating costs and expenses as a result of our eligibility for the employee retention credit under the provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act") enacted in March 2020. This $3.6 million benefit in fiscal 2021 reflects anticipated reimbursement of personnel expenses we incurred in fiscal 2021 and 2020 and provided a $0.5 million benefit to product costs, a $2.2 million benefit to research and development (“R&D”) expense, and a $0.9 million benefit to selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expense. Subsequent to fiscal 2021, we do not expect to file for additional employee retention credit benefits.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
Our business, operations and financial condition and results have been and may continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In fiscal 2020, we experienced significant and unpredictable reductions in both royalties and license fee revenue and product sales, primarily in our Medical Device business, as our customers were negatively impacted by the decline in the volume of elective procedures that resulted from the global healthcare system’s response to COVID-19. As fiscal 2021 progressed, we observed a diminishing degree of COVID-related impacts to our reported revenue. However, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the Company’s results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning the severity and longevity of COVID-19 and its variants, the resurgence of COVID-19 in regions that have begun to recover from the initial impact of the pandemic, the impact of COVID-19 on economic activity, and the actions to contain its impact on public health and the global economy. For further information, refer to “Risk Factors” in Part II, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Years Ended September 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Revenue. Fiscal 2021 revenue was $105.1 million, a $10.3 million or 11% increase from fiscal 2020 revenue. Fiscal 2020 revenue was $94.9 million, a $(5.2) million or (5)% decrease from fiscal 2019 revenue. The following is a summary of revenue streams within each reportable segment.
Medical Device. Revenue in our Medical Device segment was $78.3 million in fiscal 2021, a 10% increase from $71.4 million in fiscal 2020, primarily driven by increased royalties and license fees revenue.
•
Medical Device product revenue of $21.8 million in fiscal 2021 was essentially flat compared to fiscal 2020. Growth from sales of coating reagents and from sales of specialty catheter products first commercialized in fiscal 2020 was largely offset by a decline in sales of legacy, contract-manufactured balloon catheters.
•
Medical Device coatings royalties revenue increased 8% to $30.8 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $28.6 million in fiscal 2020. Fiscal 2021 royalties revenue benefited from broad-based, year-over-year growth, most notably from our latest generation SereneTM coating customers, which more than offset the approximately $1.2 million tail-end impact to fiscal 2021 from the expiration of our fourth-generation hydrophilic patents. Royalties revenue from our latest generation Serene coating grew 38% year-over-year in fiscal 2021 and comprised 26% of total fiscal 2021 royalties revenue, compared to 20% of total royalties revenue in fiscal 2020. With respect to COVID-19, fiscal 2020 provides a favorable comparison due to the relative decline in magnitude of impacts to royalties revenue from reduced procedure volumes in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.
•
License fee revenue from the Abbott Agreement for our SurVeil DCB increased to $16.0 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $12.0 million in fiscal 2020, primarily due to the receipt of milestone payments. In fiscal 2021, Abbott Agreement license fee revenue included $11.3 million in revenue recognized on a $15.0 million milestone payment received during the period. In fiscal 2020, Abbott Agreement license fee revenue included $7.0 million in revenue recognized on a $10.8 million milestone payment received during the period.
Abbott Agreement license fee revenue is recognized as costs are incurred on a proportional basis to total expected costs for the TRANSCEND pivotal clinical trial. The percentage of costs incurred relative to total estimated costs for the TRANSCEND pivotal clinical trial of our SurVeil DCB was approximately 76%, 65% and 51% as of September 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We estimate this percentage will be approximately 83% by the end of fiscal 2022, with the remaining 17% of costs incurred and revenue recognized over the subsequent final three years of the TRANSCEND trial follow-up and clinical reporting period.
Future license fee revenue related to the Abbott Agreement will depend extensively on whether and when we receive the $30 milestone payment associated with receipt of the PMA of the SurVeil DCB. Approximately $25 million of the $30 million milestone payment would be recognized as license fee revenue in the period in which it is received. If PMA is received after December 31, 2022, the milestone payment is reduced to $27 million pursuant to the terms of the Abbott Agreement.
•
Medical Device R&D and other revenue increased 3% to $9.4 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $9.2 million in fiscal 2020, driven by commercial development projects with several of our coatings customers. This increase was partly offset by a decline in coating services revenue due to lifecycle attrition for certain customer products.
In fiscal 2020, revenue in our Medical Device segment was $71.4 million, a (9)% decline from $78.4 million in fiscal 2019. The decrease in fiscal 2020 revenue was primarily driven by the expiration of our fourth-generation hydrophilic coating patents and the impact of COVID-19.
•
Medical Device product revenue increased by $2.8 million in fiscal 2020, compared to the prior year, largely driven by recently commercialized specialty catheter products, partly offset by softness in orders in the second half of fiscal 2020 as our customers managed inventory in response to reductions in procedures due to COVID-19.
•
Medical Device coatings royalties revenue decreased to $28.6 million in fiscal 2020, compared to $34.8 million in fiscal 2019. Royalties revenue in fiscal 2020 declined by approximately $5.5 million due to the expiration of our fourth-generation hydrophilic patents. In addition, royalties revenue in fiscal 2020 was impacted by the reduction in procedures as a result of COVID-19, as well as by $1.0 million in revenue recognized in fiscal 2019 associated with the extension of an existing hydrophilic coating technology license. These decreases were partly offset by growth in royalties revenue from our Serene hydrophilic coating technology, which grew approximately 27% year-over-year, driven by customer product launches and resulting market share increases associated with the customer device applications that incorporate this latest generation coating technology.
•
Medical Device license fee revenue under the Abbott Agreement decreased to $12.0 million in fiscal 2020, compared to $13.5 million in fiscal 2019, driven primarily by relatively higher spending in fiscal 2019 to support the TRANSCEND clinical trial during the active trial enrollment phase. In fiscal 2020, Abbott Agreement license fee revenue included $7.0 million in revenue recognized on a $10.8 million milestone payment received during the period. In fiscal 2019, Abbott Agreement license fee revenue included $5.1 million in revenue recognized on a $10.0 million milestone payment received during the period.
•
Medical Device R&D and other revenue decreased by $(2.1) million in fiscal 2020, compared to the prior year, due to the timing of new product development projects with several of our contract R&D customers, as well as by a decline in coating services revenue in the second half of fiscal 2020 as a result of COVID-19.
In Vitro Diagnostics. Revenue in our IVD segment was $26.9 million in fiscal 2021, a 15% increase from $23.5 million in fiscal 2020, driven primarily by increased sales volume of our distributed antigen products and customer development projects.
•
IVD product revenue increased 9% or $2.0 million in fiscal 2021, compared to fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2021, we saw sustained growth of our distributed antigen products used in autoimmune diagnostic testing. Revenue growth in fiscal 2021 was also driven by steady growth in sales of our protein stabilization and colorimetric substrate products, partly offset by a decline in sales volume of our microarray slide/surface products. With respect to COVID-19, the fiscal 2020 period provides a favorable comparison as we observed modest COVID-related impacts to revenue in the second half of fiscal 2020.
•
IVD research, development and other revenue was $2.2 million in fiscal 2021, an increase of $1.4 million compared to $0.8 million in fiscal 2020, driven by customer development projects utilizing our microarray slide/surface products. The IVD business cultivates new product revenue opportunities by partnering with customers on their testing and development of new or improved diagnostic test products that utilize our enabling technology.
In fiscal 2020, revenue in our IVD segment was $23.5 million, an 8% increase from $21.7 million in fiscal 2019. Revenue growth in fiscal 2020 was driven by growth in demand for our microarray DNA slide products, partly offset by a decline in demand for our antigen and stabilization products in the second half of fiscal 2020 as certain customers managed inventory levels in response to the impacts of COVID-19.
Major costs and expenses and their percentage of total revenue were as follows:
Product costs. Product gross margins (defined as product sales less related product costs, as a percentage of product sales) were 63%, 65% and 66% in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Fiscal 2021 product gross margin was unfavorably impacted by a product replacement matter for one of the contract-manufactured products in our Medical Device business, which resulted in $0.7 million in product cost charges, as well as a modest decline in revenue. Fiscal 2021 product gross margin was also unfavorably impacted by a shift in product mix within the IVD business due to sales growth from relatively lower margin products. These decreases in fiscal 2021 product gross margin were offset, in part, by the $0.5 million benefit associated with the employee retention credit under the CARES Act. For fiscal 2020, product gross margin was relatively consistent with the prior year. As we grow our Medical Device business, product gross margins may continue to be impacted by the shift in revenue mix to towards medical device sales at relatively lower margins, particularly during the scale-up phase after initial commercialization.
Research and development expense. R&D expense decreased by $3.5 million in fiscal 2021 and was 45% of revenue, compared to 53% of revenue in fiscal 2020. Fiscal 2021 R&D expense included a benefit of $2.2 million associated with the employee retention credit under the CARES Act. Clinical trial spending and other costs related to our SurVeil DCB declined in fiscal 2021, compared to fiscal 2020, with the progression of the TRANSCEND pivotal clinical trial from patient follow up in fiscal 2020 to preparation of the clinical report and submission of the final PMA modules in fiscal 2021.
In fiscal 2020, R&D expense declined by $2.7 million compared to fiscal 2019 and was 53% of revenue in both fiscal 2020 and 2019. Clinical trial spending decreased in fiscal 2020, principally for the TRANSCEND clinical trial for our SurVeil DCB with the progression from active enrollment in fiscal 2019 to patient follow up in fiscal 2020, as well as for the fiscal 2019 clinical study for our Avess DCB. These decreases were partly offset by fiscal 2020 expenses related to our SWING first-in-human clinical study for the Sundance DCB, manufacturing readiness activities for our Sublime radial access platform, and continued investments in human capital within our R&D team.
Selling, general and administrative expense. SG&A expense increased by $2.3 million in fiscal 2021 and was 29% of revenue, compared to 30% of revenue in fiscal 2020. The increase in SG&A expense in fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by personnel and other investments to support product development and strategic initiatives. These increases were offset, in part, by a benefit of $0.9 million recorded to SG&A expense in fiscal 2021 associated with the employee retention credit under the CARES Act. We expect SG&A expense to increase between $11 million and $15 million in fiscal 2022, compared to fiscal 2021, exclusive of the $0.9 million benefit associated with the employee retention credit, primarily to support initial commercialization of our Sublime radial access and Pounce thrombectomy system platforms.
In fiscal 2020, SG&A expense increased by $4.4 million to 30% of revenue, compared to 24% of revenue in fiscal 2019. The increase in SG&A expense in fiscal 2020 was primarily driven by personnel and other investments to support product development and strategic initiatives. Also contributing to the increase in SG&A expense in fiscal 2020 was a $0.6 million reduction to expense in fiscal 2019 resulting from a claim that was settled for less than the amount we had reserved.
Acquired intangible asset amortization. We have previously acquired certain intangible assets through business combinations, which are amortized over periods ranging from six to 14 years. In fiscal 2021, we recorded $0.5 million in intangible asset amortization associated with the Vetex developed technology acquired in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. Acquisition intangible asset amortization was generally consistent in fiscal 2020 and 2019.
Acquisition transaction, integration and other costs. In fiscal 2021, we incurred $1.0 million in legal, accounting and other due diligence costs specifically related to the acquisition of Vetex.
Contingent consideration expense (gain). We have contingent consideration obligations related to business combinations. Expense (gain) recognized is related to changes in the probability and timing of achieving certain contractual milestones, as well as accretion expense for the passage of time. In fiscal 2021, contingent consideration expense consists of accretion for liabilities associated with the fiscal 2021 Vetex acquisition. In fiscal 2019, the contingent consideration gain of $(0.2) million resulted from changes in the estimated fair value of our contingent consideration obligations associated with fiscal 2016 business acquisitions, for which we made the final contingent consideration payment of $3.2 million to the sellers of NorMedix, Inc. (“NorMedix”) in fiscal 2020.
Acquired in-process R&D. We acquired certain intellectual property assets in fiscal 2019 that resulted in a charge to acquired in-process R&D expense totaling $0.9 million in fiscal 2019.
Other (expense) income. Major classifications of other (expense) income were as follows:
Investment income declined in fiscal 2021 and 2020 relative to the respective prior year commensurate with a decline in interest rates, as well as due to the decline in the balance of available-for-sale investments. Fiscal 2021 interest expense increased, compared to the prior year, due to utilization of our revolving credit facility. Foreign currency (losses) gains result primarily from the impact of U.S. dollar to Euro exchange rate fluctuations on certain intercompany obligations. In fiscal 2020, we recognized a $0.5 million impairment loss on our strategic investment in ViaCyte, Inc. to reduce the carrying value to zero.
Income tax (provision) benefit. We recorded income tax expense of $(2.1) million in fiscal 2021 and an income tax benefit of $2.6 million and $0.1 million in fiscal 2020 and 2019, respectively. The following is a reconciliation of our statutory U.S. federal tax rates and our effective tax rates:
(1)
Includes non-deductible stock-based compensation.
The difference between the respective U.S. federal statutory tax rates and our annual effective tax rates reflects the impact of differences between amounts recorded in our consolidated financial statements and our tax returns.
Our effective tax rate in fiscal 2021 differed from the U.S. federal statutory rate due primarily to the remeasurement of deferred tax assets and liabilities associated with the CARES Act, partly offset by impacts of the U.S. federal R&D tax credit and excess tax benefits associated with stock-based compensation. In addition, our effective tax rate in fiscal 2021 was impacted by operating losses generated by Creagh Medical, where the 12.5% statutory rate tax benefits are offset by a full valuation allowance.
Our effective tax rate in fiscal 2020 differed from the U.S. federal statutory rate due primarily to a $1.7 million discrete tax benefit recorded as a result of the CARES Act, which included significant business tax provisions. In fiscal 2020, we recorded a discrete tax benefit of $1.7 million as a result of our ability under the CARES Act to carry back NOLs incurred to periods when the statutory tax rate was 35% versus our current tax rate of 21%. In addition, our effective tax rate in fiscal 2020 was impacted by the U.S. federal R&D tax credit, the impact of which was partly offset by related tax reserve changes as well as operating losses in Ireland, where the 12.5% statutory rate tax benefits are offset by a full valuation allowance.
Our effective tax rate in fiscal 2019 differed from the U.S. federal statutory rate due primarily to our U.S. federal R&D tax credit, the impact of which was partly offset by related tax reserve changes, as well as operating losses in Ireland, where the 12.5% statutory rate tax benefits are offset by a full valuation allowance.
During fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, we recognized net excess tax benefits from share options exercised, expired, forfeited or vested totaling $0.9 million, $0.4 million and $0.5 million, respectively.
Segment Operating Results
Operating results for each of our reportable segments were as follows:
Medical Device. Our Medical Device business reported operating income of $4.7 million in fiscal 2021, compared to an operating loss of $(3.2) million in fiscal 2020, representing 6% and (5)% of Medical Device revenue in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively.
•
The year-over-year contribution to operating income (loss) from royalties and license fee revenue increased $6.4 million in fiscal 2021, compared to the prior year. License fee revenue reflects the timing of Abbott milestone payments received and increased $4.3 million in fiscal 2021, compared to the prior year, as a result of the $15.0 million milestone payment received in fiscal 2021 and the $10.8 million milestone payment received in fiscal 2020. Royalties revenue increased $2.2 million in fiscal 2021, compared to the prior year, driven by broad-based growth and significant prior-year COVID-19 impacts.
•
In fiscal 2021, Medical Device operating income includes a $2.6 million benefit associated with the employee retention credit under the CARES Act.
•
Medical Device product gross profit declined $0.6 million year-over-year in fiscal 2021, and product gross margins were 58.0% and 61.3% for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. Product gross margins were unfavorably impacted by both a product replacement matter for one of our contract-manufactured products in fiscal 2021, which resulted in $0.7 million in product cost charges, and by unfavorable overhead absorption due to lower volume from the COVID-related decline in coating reagent sales in the first half of fiscal 2021. These impacts were offset, in part, by a $0.2 million benefit in fiscal 2021 associated with the employee retention credit under the CARES Act.
•
Medical Device operating expenses, excluding product costs, declined $(1.9) million year-over-year in fiscal 2021. Fiscal 2021 Medical Device operating costs and expenses, excluding product costs, include a benefit of $2.4 million associated with the employee retention credit under the CARES Act. SG&A expense in our Medical Device business increased $1.3 million year-over-year in fiscal 2021, which is net of a $0.6 million benefit associated with the employee retention credit, as we invested in sales and marketing personnel and infrastructure to execute our long-term growth strategy. The fiscal 2021 Vetex acquisition added $1.1 million in expenses for R&D personnel and acquired intangible amortization. These increases were offset, in part, by a year-over-year decline in R&D expenditures associated with the TRANSCEND pivotal clinical trial.
In fiscal 2020, our Medical Device business reported an operating loss of $(3.2) million, compared to operating income of $4.8 million in fiscal 2019, representing (5)% and 6% of Medical Device revenue in fiscal 2020 and 2019, respectively.
•
The year-over-year contribution to operating loss (income) from royalties and license fee revenue declined $7.8 million related to the expiration of our fourth-generation hydrophilic coating patents, the impact of COVID-19 on procedure volume, and a decline in Abbott Agreement license fee revenue.
•
Medical Device operating performance was positively impacted by an increase in product gross profit of $1.3 million in fiscal 2020, compared to fiscal 2019, as a result of leverage on higher product revenue. Product gross margin declined to 61.3% for fiscal 2020, compared to 63.2% in fiscal 2019, due primarily to the unfavorable impact of fiscal 2020 product mix. In fiscal 2020, certain legacy medical device customers reduced order volume as a result of COVID-19, and revenue volume increased from initial orders of newly developed specialty catheter products.
•
Medical Device operating expenses, excluding product costs, declined $(0.4) million in fiscal 2020, compared to the prior year. We reported $0.9 million in acquired in-process R&D expense in fiscal 2019. Fiscal 2020 increases in SG&A to support our vascular intervention product strategy were partly offset by a decline in R&D from higher clinical study costs in fiscal 2019. SG&A increased year-over-year in fiscal 2020, as we invested in the talent and capabilities necessary to support product development decisions and accelerate the development and management of our existing product platforms, including physician feedback and product evaluations.
In Vitro Diagnostics. Our IVD business reported operating income of $13.8 million in fiscal 2021, an increase of 17% or $2.0 million compared to fiscal 2020. IVD operating income was 51% and 50% of revenue in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. The contribution to operating income from R&D and other revenue increased $1.4 million year-over-year in fiscal 2021 from customer development project opportunities. In fiscal 2021, IVD operating income included a $0.5 million benefit associated with the employee retention credit under the CARES Act. IVD product gross profit increased $0.9 million year-over-year in fiscal 2021, and product gross margins were 67.5% and 69.4% for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. Fiscal 2021 product gross margins were favorably impacted by leverage on revenue growth and a $0.2 million benefit associated with the employee retention credit under the CARES Act. This was more than offset by a shift in revenue mix towards distributed antigen products with relatively lower gross margins.
In fiscal 2020, our IVD business reported operating income of $11.8 million, an increase of 11% or $1.2 million, compared to fiscal 2019, as a result of revenue growth. Product gross profit increased by $1.1 million in fiscal 2020, compared to the prior year. Product gross margin increased to 69.4% in fiscal 2020 from 68.6% in fiscal 2019 driven by both leverage on revenue growth and a shift in revenue mix towards products with relatively higher gross margins.
Corporate. The Corporate category includes expenses for administrative corporate functions, such as executive management, corporate accounting, legal, human resources and Board of Directors related fees and expenses, which we do not fully allocate to the Medical Device and IVD segments. Corporate also includes expenses, such as acquisition-related costs and litigation, which are not specific to a segment and thus not allocated to our reportable segments. The unallocated Corporate expense operating loss was $(11.8) million, $(9.8) million and $(8.9) million in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The year-over-year increase in Corporate expense in fiscal 2021 of $2.0 million, or 20%, was primarily driven by $1.0 million in Vetex acquisition transaction, integration and other costs and increased compensation expenses, partly offset by a $0.5 million benefit associated with the fiscal 2021 employee retention credit. In fiscal 2020, the $0.8 million, or 9% year-over-year increase in Corporate expense was primarily driven by compensation expenses.
Cash Flow Operating Results
The following is a summary of cash flow results:
Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities totaled $15.4 million, $14.0 million and $8.0 million in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, we reported net income of $4.2 million, $1.1 million and $7.6 million, respectively. Net changes in operating assets and liabilities (reduced) increased cash flows from operating activities by $(4.9) million, $1.1 million and $(9.9) million in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Significant changes in operating assets and liabilities affecting cash flows during fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019 included:
•
Cash (used in) provided by accounts receivable and contract asset was $(2.5) million, $3.5 million and $(1.6) million in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In fiscal 2021, cash used was primarily driven by an increase in royalties receivable from customers (contract asset), reflecting underlying growth and diminishing impacts from COVID-19. In fiscal 2020, the cash provided was primarily due to a reduction in fiscal 2020 contract asset related to reduced royalty payments receivable from customers subsequent to the expiration of our fourth-generation hydrophilic coatings patents and as a result of the impact of COVID-19. In addition, timing fluctuations in accounts receivable balances were unfavorable to cash flow in the fiscal 2021 period and favorable to cash flow in fiscal 2020.
•
Cash (used in) provided by prepaids and other was $(2.4) million, $0.4 million and $(2.1) million in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In fiscal 2021, cash used was primarily driven by a $3.6 million receivable recorded at the end of the period associated with the employee retention credit under the provisions of the CARES Act. In fiscal 2020 and 2019, cash provided (used) was primarily related to a decrease (increase), respectively, in reimbursable Irish R&D expenses.
•
Cash provided by (used in) accrued liabilities was $1.4 million, $1.8 million and $(2.2) million in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In fiscal 2021, the cash provided by accrued liabilities was primarily due to a $1.9 million increase in accrued compensation related to incentive compensation, partly offset by a reduction in accrued clinical trial costs. In fiscal 2020, the cash provided by accrued liabilities was primarily due to a $2.0 million increase in accrued compensation related to incentive compensation and accrued vacation. In fiscal 2019, the cash used in accrued liabilities was primarily due to a $1.1 million reduction in accrued compensation due to lower incentive compensation in fiscal 2019, as well as a $1.0 million reduction from a customer claim settlement in fiscal 2019.
•
Cash used in deferred revenue was $(1.0) million, $(1.2) million and $(3.5) million in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This was driven by the timing of the receipt of SurVeil DCB upfront and milestone payments from Abbott which totaled $15.0 million and $10.8 million in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, offset by related license fee revenue recognition of $16.0 million, $12.0 million and $13.5 million in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
For fiscal 2020, income taxes also impacted cash provided by operating activities. Primarily as a result of the NOL carryback provisions of the CARES Act, income tax receivable increased to $2.4 million as of September 30, 2020, compared to $0.6 million as of September 30, 2019, and deferred income taxes increased to $7.3 million as of September 30, 2020, compared to $6.2 million as of September 30, 2019.
Additionally, the portion of acquisition-related contingent consideration payments classified as reduction of cash flows from operations was $0.6 million and $2.0 million in fiscal 2020 and 2019, respectively, as it related to accretion expense, which increased these obligations from the acquisition date through settlement.
Investing Activities. Cash (used in) provided by investing activities totaled $(25.2) million, $(9.1) million and $9.8 million in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
•
In fiscal 2021, we invested $39.6 million in the acquisition of Vetex, which represents the upfront cash payment of $39.9 million net of acquired cash. We invested $5.3 million, $3.7 million and $6.0 million in property and equipment in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Capital expenditures in each fiscal year were primarily related to investments in property and equipment to facilitate our vascular intervention product strategy, including the buildout of an additional facility in Eden Prairie, Minnesota.
•
Net purchases and maturities of available-for-sale investments were a source (use) of cash totaling $20.6 million, $(5.4) million and $16.5 million in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
•
In fiscal 2019, we invested $0.8 million in in-process R&D assets to expand our product development pipeline.
Financing Activities. Cash provided by (used in) financing activities totaled $10.2 million, $(4.6) million and $(11.0) million in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
•
In fiscal 2021, we funded the Vetex acquisition, in part, from $10 million in borrowings on our $25 million revolving credit facility.
•
In fiscal 2020, we paid contingent consideration of $3.2 million related to the NorMedix acquisition, with $0.6 million and $2.6 million classified as cash used in operating and financing activities, respectively. In fiscal 2019, we paid contingent consideration of $11.0 million related to the Creagh Medical acquisition, with $2.0 million and $9.1 million classified as cash used in operating and financing activities, respectively.
•
In fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, we paid $2.8 million, $2.5 million and $2.7 million, respectively, to purchase common stock to pay employee taxes resulting from the exercise of stock options and vesting of other stock awards.
•
In fiscal 2020, we paid $1.0 million to Embolitech, LLC related to our fiscal 2018 acquisition of in-process R&D.
•
We generated $3.1 million, $1.6 million and $0.7 million in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, from the sale of common stock related to our stock-based compensation plans.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of September 30, 2021, working capital totaled $40.4 million, a decrease of $27.3 million from September 30, 2020. We define working capital as current assets minus current liabilities. Cash and cash equivalents and available-for-sale investments totaled $40.9 million as of September 30, 2021, a decrease of $20.2 million from $61.1 million as of September 30, 2020. In fiscal 2021, we completed the Vetex acquisition, which was funded using $29.9 million of cash on hand and $10 million in short-term borrowings on our $25 million revolving credit facility. In fiscal 2021, we received a $15 million clinical report milestone payment under the Abbott Agreement.
Subject to the terms of the Abbott Agreement, the Company is to receive a $30 million PMA milestone payment under the Abbott Agreement if the SurVeil DCB receives PMA on or before December 31, 2022. The PMA milestone payment is reduced to $27 million under the Abbott Agreement if PMA is received after December 31, 2022. The Company cannot be sure whether the PMA milestone payment will be received on or before December 31, 2022, if at all.
The Company proactively manages its access to capital to support liquidity and continued growth. Surmodics has access to a revolving credit facility, which provides for availability of up to $25 million. The outstanding balance on the revolving credit facility was $10 million as of September 30, 2021. The current scheduled maturity date of the revolving credit facility is September 14, 2022, and the Company has one additional extension period remaining. If we elect to extend the maturity date at least 60 days prior to the scheduled maturity date, and if the extension conditions are met, which include no material adverse effect, default, or event of default under the revolving credit facility, the revolving credit facility will mature, and any outstanding balance will become payable, on September 14, 2023.
As of September 30, 2021, the Company’s shelf registration statement with the SEC allows the Company to offer potentially up to $200 million in debt securities, common stock, preferred stock, warrants, and other securities or any such combination of such securities in amounts, at prices, and on terms announced if and when the securities are ever offered.
The Company’s investment policy excludes ownership of collateralized mortgage obligations, mortgage-backed derivatives and other derivative securities without prior written approval of the Board of Directors. Our investments primarily consist of commercial paper and corporate bond securities and are reported at fair value as available-for-sale investments and totaled $9.7 million as of September 30, 2021. Our investment policy requires that no more than 5% of investments be held in any one credit or issue, excluding U.S. government and government agency obligations. The primary investment objective of the portfolio is to provide for the safety of principal and appropriate liquidity, while generating an above-benchmark (Barclays Short Treasury 1-3 Month Index) total rate of return on a pre-tax basis.
In fiscal 2022, we anticipate an increase in SG&A expenditures of between $11 million and $15 million, as well as an increase in capital expenditures of up to $3 million. We expect that increasing SG&A expenditures in fiscal 2022 will exceed any associated increases in revenues, and therefore will reduce our cash flow from operations. We also anticipate R&D expenses will continue to be significant in fiscal 2022, primarily related to medical device product development, including readiness for commercialization of our Pounce and Sublime platforms. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and available-for-sale investments, which totaled $40.9 million as of September 30, 2021, together with cash flow from operations and our revolving credit facility, will provide liquidity sufficient to meet our cash needs and fund our operations and planned capital expenditures for fiscal 2022. There can be no assurance, however, that our business will continue to generate cash flows at historic levels.
Beyond fiscal 2022, our cash requirements will depend extensively on the timing of market introduction and extent of market acceptance of products in our medical device product portfolio, including our SurVeil DCB. Our long-term cash requirements also will be significantly impacted by the level of our investment in commercialization of our vascular intervention products and whether we make future corporate transactions. We cannot accurately predict our long-term cash requirements at this time. We may seek additional sources of liquidity and capital resources, including through borrowing, debt or equity financing or corporate transactions to generate cashflow. There can be no assurance that such transactions will be available to us on favorable terms, if at all.
Below is a summary of short-term and long-term anticipated cash requirements under contractual obligations existing as of September 30, 2021.
(1)
The Company leases U.S. facilities for research, office, manufacturing and warehousing.
(2)
Asset acquisition obligations consist of the gross value of payments to be made in connection with in-process R&D technology asset acquisitions completed in fiscal 2019 and 2018, excluding amounts that are contingent upon unmet regulatory or commercial milestones. Business combination obligations consist of the gross value of guaranteed milestone payments to be made in association with the Vetex acquisition, excluding amounts that are contingent upon unmet product development and regulatory milestones.
(3)
Clinical Research Organization (“CRO”) obligations represent contractual periodic payments for services performed and milestone payments to third-party CROs for services related to our ongoing clinical trials. The timing of payments and recognition of expenses under these contracts is dependent on enrollment in our ongoing clinical trials and may be different from the amounts presented, which are estimated based on projected enrollment rates.
For additional information regarding the above obligations, see Notes 2, 11 and 12 to the consolidated financial statements in “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
As of September 30, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that is material to investors.
Share Purchase Activity
Our Board of Directors has authorized the repurchase of up to an additional $25.3 million of the Company’s outstanding common stock in open-market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, block trades, accelerated share repurchase transactions, tender offers or by any combination of such methods. The authorization has no fixed expiration date.
Customer Concentrations
Revenue from customers that equaled or exceeded 10% of total revenue was as follows:
Our licensed technologies provide royalties and license fee revenue. We have agreements with a diverse base of customers, and certain customers have multiple products using our technology. Abbott and Medtronic plc (“Medtronic”) are our largest customers. Abbott has several separately licensed products, including the SurVeil DCB license, which generate royalties and license fee revenue for Surmodics. Revenue from the SurVeil DCB license represented 15%, 13% and 13% of total revenue for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Medtronic has several separately licensed products that generate royalty revenue for Surmodics, none of which represented more than 5% of our total revenue for fiscal 2021.
Our licensing agreements with many of our customers, including most of our significant customers, cover many licensed products that each separately generates royalties revenue. This structure reduces the potential risk to our operations that may result from reduced sales (or the termination of a license) of a single product for any specific customer.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding new accounting pronouncements is included in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements is based in part on the application of significant accounting policies, many of which require management to make estimates and assumptions; see Notes 1 and 2 to the consolidated financial statements in “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences could materially impact our results of operations. Critical accounting policies are those policies that require the application of management’s most challenging subjective or complex judgment, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Critical accounting policies involve judgments and uncertainties that are sufficiently likely to result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. We believe the following are critical areas in the application of our accounting policies that currently affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We license technology to medical device manufacturers (third parties) and collect royalties based on the greater of the contractual percentage of a customer’s sales of products incorporating our licensed technologies or minimum contractual royalties. Sales-based royalties revenue is recognized as our license customers sell products containing our technologies, which is generally reported to us a quarter after those sales occur. This requires us to estimate the revenue earned on these arrangements and record it prior to our customers reporting the underlying sales to us. Sales-based royalties are estimated using the most-likely amount method based on historical sales information, adjusted for known changes, such as product launches and patent expirations. We also consider macroeconomic factors affecting the medical device market. These inputs require significant management judgement and are updated quarterly. Minimum royalty fees are recognized through the non-cancellable period, which is generally 90 days, but can be up to one year. Revenue related to contingent milestones is recognized upon the achievement of the milestone, provided collectability is assured. Customer advances are accounted for as a liability (deferred revenue) until all criteria for revenue recognition have been met.
Revenue associated with our license and development agreement with Abbott is recognized as the clinical and regulatory activities are performed on a proportional performance basis based on actual costs incurred relative to the expected total cost of the underlying activities, most notably the completion of the TRANSCEND clinical trial. A significant component of the cost of this trial is the cost of our outsourced clinical trial CRO consultants, which are estimated based on executed statements of work, project budgets, and patient enrollment and follow-up timing, among other things. Costs related to the clinical and regulatory activities are expensed in the period incurred. A significant change to the Company’s estimate of the costs to complete the TRANSCEND clinical trial could have a material effect on the Company’s results of operations. The total expected cost of the trial is a significant management estimate and is reviewed and assessed each reporting period. The current portion of deferred revenue on the consolidated balance sheet represents the amount of deferred revenue that is expected to be recognized over the next year, based on estimated costs to be incurred. The estimate of future revenue from the Abbott Agreement will continue to be monitored and adjusted based on estimates in effect each period-end. For further disclosures related to revenue recognition, see Notes 2 and 4 to the consolidated financial statements in “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Goodwill and Other Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
We record all assets and liabilities acquired in business acquisitions at fair value, including goodwill and other intangible assets. The initial recognition of goodwill and other intangible assets requires management to make subjective judgments concerning estimates of how the acquired assets will perform in the future using valuation methods including discounted cash flow analysis.
On an ongoing basis, goodwill and certain indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized but are subject, at a minimum, to annual tests for impairment at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is an operating segment, or component thereof, for which discrete financial information is available and reviewed by management on a regular basis. Management has determined that our reporting units consist of our Medical Device and IVD segments.
Goodwill in our reporting units is evaluated for impairment in two ways. First, an assessment of qualitative factors is performed to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, the Company determines it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then performing an impairment test, as described below, becomes unnecessary. If events or circumstances occur that would indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired, or if the Company otherwise determines it necessary, the quantitative impairment test would be performed. Evaluation of goodwill for impairment requires management to make significant judgments and estimates, most of which are based on each reporting unit’s projected future cash flows. Our estimates associated with the annual test of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are considered critical due to the amount of these assets recorded on our consolidated balance sheets and the judgment required in determining fair value, including projected future cash flows and, in the case of a quantitative test and impairment measurement, applicable discount rates.
We perform our annual assessment of goodwill for impairment as of July 1st of each fiscal year. Based on the results of these assessments, no goodwill impairment charges were recorded during fiscal 2021, 2020 or 2019. During fiscal 2019, we recorded impairment charges on our indefinite-lived intangible assets of $0.3 million as a result of decreases in future revenue estimates associated with these assets. No impairment charges were recorded in fiscal 2021 and 2020 related to indefinite-lived intangible assets.
Income Taxes
Significant judgment is required in evaluating our tax positions, and in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against our deferred tax assets. We evaluate the recoverability of deferred tax assets based on available evidence. This process involves significant management judgment about assumptions that are subject to change from period to period based on changes in tax laws or variances between future projected operating performance and actual results. Under GAAP, we establish a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets if we determine, based on available evidence at the time the determination is made, that it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In making this determination, we evaluate all positive and negative evidence as of the end of each reporting period. Future adjustments (either increases or decreases) to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance are determined based upon changes in the expected realization of the net deferred tax assets. The realization of the deferred tax assets ultimately depends on the existence of sufficient taxable income or tax liability in either the carry-back or carry-forward periods under the tax law. Due to significant estimates used to establish the valuation allowance and the potential for changes in facts and circumstances, it is reasonably possible that we will be required to record adjustments to the valuation allowance in future reporting periods that could have a material effect on our results of operations.
We establish reserves when, despite our belief that our tax return positions are fully supportable, we believe that certain positions are likely to be challenged and that we may or may not prevail. Under GAAP, if we determine that a tax position is more likely than not of being sustained upon audit, based solely on the technical merits of the position, we recognize the benefit. We measure the benefit by determining the amount that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement. We presume that all tax positions will be examined by a taxing authority with full knowledge of all relevant information. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations. We regularly monitor our tax positions and tax liabilities. We reevaluate the technical merits of our tax positions and recognize an uncertain tax benefit, or derecognize a previously recorded tax benefit, when there is: (i) a completion of a tax audit, (ii) effective settlement of an issue, (iii) a change in applicable tax law including a tax case or legislative guidance, or (iv) the expiration of the applicable statute of limitations. Significant judgment is required in accounting for tax reserves. Although we believe that we have adequately provided for liabilities resulting from tax assessments by taxing authorities, positions taken by these tax authorities could have a material impact on our results of operations.
Business Acquisitions
We account for acquired businesses using the acquisition method of accounting which requires that the assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at the date of acquisition at their respective fair values. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value assigned to each class of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as well as asset lives, can materially impact net income. Accordingly, for significant items, we typically engage a third-party valuation firm. There are several methods that can be used to determine the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. For intangible assets, we historically have utilized the income method. The income method starts with a forecast of all of the expected future net cash flows attributable to the subject intangible asset. These cash flows are then adjusted to present value by applying an appropriate discount rate that reflects the risk factors associated with the cash flow streams. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions inherent in the income method (or other methods) include the projected future cash flows (including timing) and the discount rate reflecting the risks inherent in the future cash flows. Estimating the useful life of an intangible asset also requires judgment. For example, different types of intangible assets will have different useful lives, influenced by the nature of the asset, competitive environment and rate of change in the industry. All of these judgments and estimates can significantly impact the determination of the amortization period of the intangible asset, and thus net income. Contingent consideration liabilities are remeasured to fair value each reporting period using discount rates, probabilities of payment and projected payment dates. Increases or decreases in the fair value of the contingent consideration liability can result from changes in the timing or likelihood of achieving value-enhancing milestones and changes in discount periods and rates. Projected contingent payment amounts are discounted back to the current period using a discount cash flow model. For further disclosures related to acquisitions and contingent consideration, see Notes 2, 5 and 12 to the consolidated financial statements in “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.