Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes and other information that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under the cautionary note regarding “Forward-Looking Statements” contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Additionally, you should read the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Sorrento Therapeutics, Inc., together with its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company”, “we”, “us”, and “our”) is a clinical stage and commercial biopharmaceutical company focused on delivering innovative and clinically meaningful therapies to address unmet medical needs.
At our core, we are antibody-centric and leverage our proprietary G-MAB™ library and targeted delivery modalities to generate the next generation of cancer therapeutics. Our fully human antibodies include PD-1, PD-L1, CD38, CD123, CD47, CTLA-4, CD137 and SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies, among others. We also have programs assessing the use of our technologies and products in autoimmune, inflammatory, viral and neurodegenerative diseases.
Our vision is to leverage these antibodies in conjunction with proprietary targeted delivery modalities to generate the next generation of cancer therapeutics. These modalities include proprietary chimeric antigen receptor T-cell therapy (“CAR-T”), dimeric antigen receptor T-cell therapy (“DAR-T”), antibody drug conjugates (“ADCs”) as well as bispecific antibody approaches. We acquired Sofusa®, a revolutionary drug delivery technology, in July 2018, which delivers biologics directly into the lymphatic system to potentially achieve improved efficacy and fewer adverse effects than standard parenteral immunotherapy. Additionally, our majority-owned subsidiary, Scilex Holding Company (“Scilex Holding”), acquired the assets of Semnur Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (“Semnur”) in March 2019. Semnur’s SEMDEXATM (“SP-102”) compound has the potential to become the first Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”)-approved epidural steroid product for the treatment of sciatica. In response to the global SARS-CoV-2 (“COVID-19”) pandemic, we are utilizing the Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (“BTK”) inhibitor (in-licensed from ACEA Therapeutics, Inc.) in a U.S. Phase II study of cytokine storm associated with a COVID-19 infection and in a Phase II trial in Brazil in mild, moderate and severe COVID-19 patients, and we are also internally developing potential coronavirus antiviral therapies and vaccines, including ACE-MABTM, COVIDTRAPTM, COVI-MABTM, COVI-GUARDTM, COVI- SHIELDTM , COVI-AMG™ and T-VIVA-19TM; and diagnostic test solutions, including COVI-TRACK™, COVI-STIX™ and COVI-TRACE™.
With each of our clinical and pre-clinical programs, we aim to tailor our therapies to treat specific stages in the evolution of a disease, from elimination, to equilibrium and escape. In addition, our objective is to focus on tumors that are resistant to current treatments and where we can design focused trials based on a genetic signature or biomarker to ensure patients have the best chance of a durable and significant response. We have several immuno-oncology programs that are in or near to entering the clinic. These include cellular therapies, oncolytic viruses (SeprehvecTM) and a palliative care program targeted to treat intractable cancer pain. Our cellular therapy programs focus on CAR-T and DAR-T for adoptive cellular immunotherapy to treat both solid and liquid tumors.
From the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, our mission has been to leverage our deep expertise in developing targeted antibodies for cancer immunotherapy to create best-in-category treatments and diagnostics to ease suffering and assist in the global response to COVID-19. We have leveraged, and continue to leverage, our G-MAB library and antibody development engineering capabilities to advance a number of promising diagnostics and neutralizing antibody candidates to test and treat COVID-19 and the immune reactions associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Our first generation SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibody was STI-1499 (COVI-GUARD™), which was engineered to prevent antibody dependent enhancement. This antibody was then optimized to produce the highly potent STI-2020, which is currently being developed in two outpatient formations: COVI-AMG (IV-push injection) and COVI-DROPS (nasal). COVI-AMG has been cleared by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) for a Phase I study of healthy volunteers, a Phase II study in outpatients with COVID-19 and a Phase II study in hospitalized patients with moderate or severe COVID-19, and we are awaiting FDA clearance for a Phase I study of COVI-DROPS of healthy volunteers and patients with mild COVID-19. Sorrento also has developed two promising potential rescue treatments with Abivertinib, an oral next generation dual EGFR/BTK inhibitor, to treat moderate to severe hospitalized COVID-19 patients and COVI-MSC™, a human allogeneic adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells for patients suffering from COVID-19-induced acute respiratory distress (ARD). Both have been cleared by the FDA and are in Phase Ib clinical studies. We are also working with Brazilian regulators (“ANVISA”) to conduct a COVID-19 study with Abivertinib and potentially with COVI-AMG TM. In pre-clinical development, we are rapidly screening new neutralizing antibodies to address the multiple emerging variants of SARS-CoV-2 to potentially add to STI-2020 in a cocktail (COVI-SHIELD™) and exploring novel mechanistic
approaches such as soluble recombinant fusion protein traps (COVIDTRAPTM) to potentially inhibit the binding of SARS-CoV-2’s spike protein with host ACE2 receptors, thereby potentially preventing viral cell entry.
In furtherance of our goal to develop products across the entire continuum of COVID-19 solutions, we are further developing a number of highly sensitive and rapid diagnostic tests. COVI-STIX™ is a lateral flow antigen test that uses a proprietary platinum-based colloid and antibody combination, resulting in high sensitivity and accuracy. This is a simple and rapid (15-minute) test with a shallow nasal swab and is designed for point-of-care and at-home use. COVI-TRACK™ is a rapid SARS-CoV-2 IgG/IgM antibody test kit intended for use initially in clinical laboratories and in point of care settings to quickly identify individuals with anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies post-infection or post- vaccination. COVI-TRACE™ was licensed from Columbia University as a rapid single step on-site colorimetric detection test for SARS-COV-2 genomic RNA from a saliva sample using targeted nucleic acid amplification for high throughput point-of-care situations.
We have reported early data from Phase I trials of our carcinoembryonic antigen (“CEA”)-directed CAR-T program. We have treated five patients with stage 4, unresectable adenocarcinoma (four with pancreatic and one with colorectal cancer) and CEA-positive liver metastases with anti-CEA CAR-T. We successfully submitted an Investigational New Drug application (“IND”) for anti-CD38 CAR-T for the treatment of refractory or relapsed multiple myeloma (“RRMM”), obtained clearance from the FDA and commenced a human clinical trial for this indication in early 2018. We have dosed eleven patients. We intend to close this study to further enrollment and start up a similar anti-CD38 CAR-T construct without the myc-tag (which cannot be used in Europe), and to continue treating RRMM patients in a Phase Ib/IIa study, which will begin enrollment in the first quarter of 2021. We filed INDs for our CD47 mAb and the first of our DAR-T platform product candidates in the first quarter of 2021.
Broadly speaking, we believe we are one of the world’s leading CAR-T and DAR-T companies today due to our investments in technology and infrastructure, which have enabled significant progress in developing our next-generation non-viral, “off-the-shelf” allogeneic DAR-T solutions. With “off-the-shelf” solutions, DAR-T therapy can truly become a drug product platform rather than a treatment procedure.
With respect to our ADC program, we began enrolling patients in the first quarter of 2021 in a Phase Ib ascending dose study of our CD38 ADC for systemic Amyloid light-chain amyloidosis. Based upon our recently announced exclusive license from Mayo Clinic for its antibody-drug-nanoparticle albumin-bound (“ADNAB”) platform, the next generation in ADC technology, we intend to file several INDs to treat various cancer targets.
Outside of immuno-oncology programs, as part of our global aim to provide a wide range of therapeutic products to meet underserved markets, we have made investments in non-opioid pain management. These include resiniferatoxin (“RTX”), which is a non-opioid-based toxin that specifically targets transient receptor potential vanilloid-1 (“TRPV1”) which, depending on the site of injection, can ablate, or destroy, nerves expressing TRPV1 or temporarily defunctionalize them. TRPV1 is responsible for the noxious chronic and inflammatory pain signaling that occurs post injury or trauma, but leaves other nerve functions intact. RTX has been granted orphan drug status for the treatment of intractable pain with end-stage cancer and two Phase Ib trials (intrathecal and epidural routes) in that indication have or will soon be completed. A Phase Ib trial studying tolerance and efficacy of RTX for the control of moderate to severe osteoarthritis knee pain was initiated in late 2018 and intermediate results have shown efficacy with no dose limiting toxicities. The osteoarthritis trial enrolled the last patient in the first quarter of 2020, and we expect to release the final safety clinical data by the middle of 2021. We plan to start knee arthritis registrational trials after the completion of required preclinical studies.
Also, in this area, we have developed in-house and acquired proprietary technologies to responsibly develop next generation, branded pharmaceutical products to better manage patients’ medical conditions, maximize the quality of life of patients and assist healthcare providers. The flagship product of our majority-owned subsidiary, Scilex Pharmaceuticals Inc. (“Scilex Pharma”), ZTlido® (lidocaine topical system 1.8%) (“ZTlido”), is a next-generation lidocaine delivery system, which was approved by the FDA for the treatment of postherpetic neuralgia, a severe neuropathic pain condition in February 2018, and was commercially launched in October 2018. Scilex Pharma has now built a full commercial organization, which includes sales, marketing, market access and medical affairs. ZTlido has demonstrated superior adhesion in comparative head-to-head studies as compared to Lidoderm and is manufactured by our Japanese partner in their state-of-the-art manufacturing facility.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
We are closely monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential impact on our business. We are an “Essential Critical Infrastructure Provider”, as our operations are critical to the continued operations of the healthcare infrastructure of the United States, as set forth by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency. In an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees, we took proactive action from the earliest signs of the outbreak, which included implementing social distancing policies at our facilities, facilitating remote working arrangements and imposing employee travel restrictions.
The COVID-19 pandemic has created uncertainties in the expected timelines for clinical stage biopharmaceutical companies such as ours, including possible delays in clinical trials and disruptions in the supply chain for raw materials used in clinical trial work.
Such delays could materially impact our business in future periods. Furthermore, the spread of COVID-19, which has caused a broad impact globally, may materially affect us economically. While the potential economic impact brought by, and the duration of, COVID-19 may be difficult to assess or predict, a widespread pandemic could result in significant disruption of global financial markets, reducing our ability to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. Policymakers around the globe have responded with fiscal policy actions to support the healthcare industries and economies as a whole. The magnitude and overall effectiveness of these actions remain uncertain. Accordingly, the extent to which the COVID-19 global pandemic impacts our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and are difficult to predict. These developments include, but are not limited to, the duration and spread of the outbreak, its severity, the actions to contain the virus or address its impact, U.S. and foreign government actions to respond to the reduction in global economic activity, and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume. For more information on the risks associated with COVID-19, refer to Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” herein.
Results of Operations
The following discussion of our operating results explains material changes in our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company operates in two operating and reportable segments, Sorrento Therapeutics and Scilex.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues. Revenues were $40.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $31.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenue in our Sorrento Therapeutics segment increased from $10.4 million to $13.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year and was primarily attributed to higher contract manufacturing service revenues.
Revenue in our Scilex segment increased from $21.0 million to $26.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year due to increased product sales of ZTlido.
Cost of revenues. Cost of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $9.9 million and $12.2 million, respectively, and relate to product sales, the sale of customized reagents and providing contract manufacturing services. The costs generally include employee-related expenses, including salary and benefits, direct materials and overhead costs including rent, depreciation, utilities, facility maintenance and insurance.
Cost of revenues for our Sorrento Therapeutics segment increased by $1.4 million and is primarily attributable to higher contract manufacturing service revenues.
Cost of revenues for our Scilex segment decreased by $3.7 million as compared to the prior year and is primarily attributed to the release of an inventory provision as the result of a favorable change in shelf-life expiration requirements.
Research and development expenses. Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $111.3 million and $106.9 million, respectively. Research and development expenses primarily include expenses associated with isolating and advancing human antibody drug candidates derived from our libraries, as well as advancing our RTX, COVID-19, SP-102, Oncolytic Virus, antibody drug conjugate (“ADC”) and oncology programs. Such expenses consist primarily of salaries and personnel-related expenses, stock-based compensation expense, clinical development expenses, preclinical testing, lab supplies, consulting costs, depreciation and other expenses.
Research and development expenses for our Sorrento Therapeutics segment increased by $4.9 million as compared to the prior fiscal year and were primarily driven by increased clinical development costs across our research and development platforms.
Research and development expenses for our Scilex segment decreased by $0.4 million as compared to the prior fiscal year and were primarily driven by reduced costs associated with our research and development product portfolio.
We expect research and development expenses for both segments to increase as we: (i) advance various product candidates into clinical trials and pursue other development, acquire, develop and manufacture clinical trial materials and increase other regulatory operating activities, (ii) incur incremental expenses associated with our efforts to further advance a number of potential product candidates into preclinical development activities, (iii) continue to identify and advance a number of fully human therapeutic antibody and ADC preclinical product candidates, (iv) incur higher salary, lab supply and infrastructure costs in connection with supporting all of our programs, (v) invest in our joint ventures, collaborations or other third party agreements, and (vi) expand our corporate infrastructure.
Acquired in-process research and development expenses. Acquired in-process research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $43.0 million. These expenses primarily related to various licensing arrangements entered into during the year, as well as other investments in new technologies and preclinical programs. We recognized $75.3 million of expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019, which were incurred due to acquired in-process research and development expenses associated with the acquisition of Semnur in March 2019.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $116.2 million and $103.6 million, respectively and consisted primarily of salaries and personnel-related expenses, stock-based compensation expense, professional fees, infrastructure expenses, legal and other general corporate expenses.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for our Sorrento Therapeutics segment increased by approximately $34.7 million as compared to the prior fiscal year and were primarily attributed to increased legal fees, professional fees and stock-based compensation expense compared to the same period of the prior year.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for our Scilex segment decreased by approximately $22.1 million as compared to the prior fiscal year and were primarily attributed to cost savings resulting from a more focused marketing strategy for ZTlido and savings arising from the transfer of a contracted to in-house sales force.
Gain (loss) on derivative liabilities. Gain on derivative liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $6.6 million compared to a loss of $36.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gain on derivative liabilities for our Sorrento Therapeutics segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $5.8 million and was primarily attributed to the full repayment of the term loans provided by certain funds and accounts managed by Oaktree Capital Management, L.P. (the “Term Loans”) during 2020 as further described in Note 8 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Gain on derivative liabilities for our Scilex segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.8 million and was primarily attributed to revised probabilities and revised sales forecasts as further described in Note 3 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Gain on contingent liabilities and acquisition consideration payable. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a gain on contingent liabilities and acquisition consideration payable of approximately $11.1 million, which was comprised of $10.4 million attributed to the settlement of the acquisition consideration payable associated with the acquisition of Virttu Biologics Limited and an additional $0.7 million due to changes in fair value of other contingent liabilities.
Interest expense. Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $20.2 million and $36.1 million, respectively. The decrease resulted primarily from a decrease in interest expense associated with the Term Loans.
Loss on debt extinguishment. Loss on debt extinguishment for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $51.9 million compared to $27.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Loss on debt extinguishment for our Sorrento Therapeutics segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $51.9 million and was attributed to the repayments of outstanding principal on the Term Loans as further described in Note 8 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We recognized a loss on debt extinguishment of $27.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the conversion of the Notes associated with the March 2018 Securities Purchase Agreement as further described in Note 8.
Income tax benefit. Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $2.0 million and $0.5 million. The increase in the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted primarily from the impact of our valuation allowance in 2020 compared to 2019.
Loss on equity method investments. Loss on equity investments for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $5.8 million compared to a loss on equity investments of $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was attributed to the recognition of our portion of the loss from operations from our investments along with an impairment loss of approximately $3.8 million related to an equity method investment for which we determined the investment’s value is no longer supportable. (See Note 5 of the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Net loss. Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $314.4 million as compared to a net loss of $363.0 million for 2019.
For a discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, please refer to the discussion under the heading “Results of Operations- Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018” in Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 2, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $56.5 million in cash and cash equivalents attributable in part to the following financing arrangements:
Debt Financings
2018 Oaktree Term Loan Agreement
In November 2018, we entered into a Term Loan Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) with certain funds and accounts managed by Oaktree Capital Management, L.P. (collectively, the “Lenders”) and Oaktree Fund Administration, LLC, as administrative and collateral agent, for an initial term loan of $100.0 million (the “Initial Loan”). In May 2019, we entered into an amendment to the Loan Agreement, under which terms the Lenders agreed to make available to us $20.0 million (collectively, with the Initial Loan, the “Term Loans”). During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repaid $120.0 million of the outstanding principal under the Term Loans plus approximately $9.4 million of related prepayment premium, exit fees and accrued interest thereon.
Scilex Notes
Scilex Pharma entered into purchase agreements (the “2018 Purchase Agreements”) with certain investors (collectively, the “Scilex Note Purchasers”) and us. Pursuant to the 2018 Purchase Agreements, on September 7, 2018, Scilex Pharma issued and sold to the Scilex Note Purchasers senior secured notes due 2026 in an aggregate principal amount of $224.0 million (the “Scilex Notes”) for an aggregate purchase price of $140.0 million (the “Scilex Notes Offering”). In connection with the Scilex Notes Offering, Scilex Pharma also entered into an Indenture (the “Indenture”) governing the Scilex Notes with U.S. Bank National Association, a national banking association, as trustee and collateral agent, and us. Pursuant to the Indenture, we agreed to irrevocably and unconditionally guarantee, on a senior unsecured basis, the punctual performance and payment when due of all obligations of Scilex Pharma under the Indenture.
We identified a number of embedded derivatives that require bifurcation from the Scilex Notes and were separately accounted for in the consolidated financial statements as derivative liabilities. Certain of these embedded features include default interest provisions, contingent rate increases, contingent put options, optional and automatic acceleration provisions and tax indemnification obligations. The fair value of the derivative liabilities associated with the Scilex Notes was estimated using the discounted cash flow method under the income approach combined with a Monte Carlo simulation model. This involves significant Level 3 inputs and assumptions, including a risk adjusted net sales forecast, an effective debt yield, estimated marketing approval probabilities for SP-103 and an estimated probability of an initial public offering by Scilex Holding that satisfies certain valuation thresholds and timing considerations. We re-evaluate this assessment each reporting period.
The 2018 Purchase Agreements and Indenture provide that, upon the occurrence of an event of default, the lenders thereunder may, by written notice to us, declare all of the outstanding principal and interest under the Indenture immediately due and payable. For purposes of the Indenture, an event of default includes, among other things, (i) a failure to pay any amounts when due under the Indenture, (ii) a breach or other failure to comply with the covenants (including financial, notice and reporting covenants) under the Indenture, (iii) a failure to make any payment on, or other event triggering an acceleration under, other material indebtedness of us,
and (iv) the occurrence of certain insolvency or bankruptcy events (both voluntary and involuntary) involving us or certain of our subsidiaries. We are subject to certain customary default clauses under the Indenture and are in compliance with the event of default clauses under the Indenture.
On December 14, 2020, we, Scilex Pharma, the Company, U.S. Bank National Association, a national banking association, as trustee (the “Trustee”) and collateral agent, and the beneficial owners of the Scilex Notes and the Scilex Note Purchasers entered into a Consent Under and Amendment No. 3 to Indenture and Letter of Credit (the “Amendment”), which amended: (i) the Indenture, and (ii) the Letter of Credit.
On December 14, 2020, and in connection with the Amendment, the aggregate $45.0 million in restricted funds held in previously established reserve and collateral accounts were released and Scilex Pharma utilized such funds to repurchase an aggregate of $45.0 million in principal amount of the Scilex Notes. Scilex Pharma also repurchased an aggregate of $20.0 million in principal amount of the Scilex Notes on December 16, 2020. Pursuant to the foregoing repurchases, the aggregate principal amount of the Scilex Notes was reduced by an aggregate of $65.0 million.
Equity Financings
Universal Shelf Registration Statement
In March 2020, we filed a universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (the “Shelf Registration Statement”) with the SEC, which was declared effective by the SEC on March 20, 2020. The Shelf Registration Statement provides us with the ability to offer up to $1.0 billion of securities, including equity and other securities as described in the registration statement. Pursuant to the Shelf Registration Statement, we may offer such securities from time to time and through one or more methods of distribution, subject to market conditions and our capital needs. Specific terms and prices will be determined at the time of each offering under a separate prospectus supplement, which will be filed with the SEC at the time of any offering. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $292.0 million of securities remain available and unallocated for offerings of securities under the Shelf Registration Statement after reserving for the Amended Sales Agreement (discussed below).
Common Stock Purchase Agreement
In April 2020, we entered into a Common Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Arnaki Ltd. (the “Purchaser”), pursuant to which the Purchaser was committed to purchase up to an aggregate of $250.0 million of shares of our common stock over the 36-month term of the Purchase Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold an aggregate of 1,423,077 shares of our common stock pursuant to the Purchase Agreement for aggregate net proceeds of $8.0 million. Effective October 27, 2020, we voluntarily terminated the Purchase Agreement. The Purchase Agreement was terminable at will by us with no penalty.
Amended Sales Agreement
On December 4, 2020, we entered into Amendment No. 1 (the “Amendment”) to that certain Sales Agreement dated April 27, 2020 (the “Sales Agreement”), with A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners (the “Agent”). The Sales Agreement provided that we could offer and sell through or to the Agent up to $250.0 million in shares of its common stock. The Amendment amends the Sales Agreement to provide that we may offer and sell, from time to time, through or to the Agent, up to an additional $450.0 million in shares of our common stock (the “Additional Shares”), such that we may offer and sell up to an aggregate of $700.0 million in shares of our common stock (the “Offering”) pursuant to the Sales Agreement, as amended by Amendment No. 1 (the “Amended Sales Agreement”). We have no obligation to sell any shares of our common stock pursuant to the Amended Sales Agreement and may at any time suspend offers under the Amended Sales Agreement. The Offering will terminate upon (i) the election of the Agent upon the occurrence of certain adverse events, (ii) three business days’ advance notice from one party to the other, or (iii) the sale of all $700.0 million of shares of our common stock pursuant thereto. Under the terms of the Amended Sales Agreement, the Agent will be entitled to a commission at a fixed rate of 3.0% of the gross proceeds from each sale of shares of our common stock under the Amended Sales Agreement.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold an aggregate of 30,991,918 shares of our common stock pursuant to the Amended Sales Agreement for aggregate net proceeds to us of approximately $227.7 million.
Purchase Agreement with Aspire Capital
In February 2020, we entered into a Common Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Aspire Purchase Agreement”) with Aspire Capital Fund, LLC (“Aspire Capital”), pursuant to which Aspire Capital was committed to purchase up to an aggregate of
$75.0 million of shares of our common stock over a 24-month term. Upon execution of the Aspire Purchase Agreement, we issued to Aspire Capital 897,308 shares of our common stock as a commitment fee. We have used the proceeds we receive under the Aspire Purchase Agreement for working capital and general corporate purposes and for the repayment of debt. The Aspire Purchase Agreement was terminable by us at any time without any liability to us. Generally, Aspire Capital could terminate the Aspire Purchase Agreement at any time that an event of default existed. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued and sold an aggregate of 38,825,010 shares of our common stock to Aspire Capital under the Aspire Purchase Agreement for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $75.0 million. On April 24, 2020, the Aspire Purchase Agreement terminated effective immediately in accordance with its terms as we had issued and sold, as of such date, the full $75.0 million of shares available for issuance thereunder.
Contingent Consideration
We have contingent consideration obligations in connection with certain acquisition and licensing transactions that are contingent upon achieving certain specified milestones or the occurrence of certain events, including those described within the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements of this Form 10-K. Upon the achievement of such milestones or the occurrence of such events, we will be obligated to make certain cash or stock payments in accordance with the terms of such acquisition and license agreements.
Use of Cash
Cash Flows from Operating Activities. Net cash used for operating activities was $159.5 million for 2020 as compared to $173.0 million for 2019. Net cash used reflects the cash spent on our research activities and cash spent to support the commercial launch of our products.
We expect to continue to incur substantial and increasing losses and negative net cash flows from operating activities as we seek to expand and support our clinical and pre-clinical research and development activities and support the commercial launch of our products.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities. Net cash used for investing activities was $39.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We invested approximately $31.1 million in licensing arrangements, which are further described in Note 7 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We also invested approximately $2.3 million in new technologies and preclinical programs and spent approximately $7.2 million on equipment and building improvements. During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used by investing activities was $38.2 million and was attributed to $17.0 million associated with the Semnur acquisition, $11.4 million for equipment and building improvements and $1.2 million in capital contributions to joint ventures related to our preclinical programs.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $174.2 million for 2020 as compared to $78.9 million for 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $317.9 million from equity offerings, proceeds from short-term debt of $18.6 million and proceeds of $98.4 million from common stock issuances and warrant exercises. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repaid $120.0 million of outstanding principal under the Term Loans, paid $6.3 million of related exit and prepayment fees thereon, made payments of $69.8 million on the Scilex Notes and repaid $9.4 million in short-term debt. We also paid $55.0 million related to the Semnur Share Exchange as further described in Note 7 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. During the same period in the prior year, cash provided by financing activities was primarily driven by proceeds from equity offerings of approximately $46.7 million, $9.8 million from common stock issuances and warrant exercises and $18.9 million in debt financing, net of issuance costs, from the Term Loans.
Future Liquidity Needs. We have principally financed our operations through underwritten public offerings and private debt and equity financings, as we have not generated any significant product related revenue from our principal operations to date. We will need to raise additional capital before we exhaust our current cash resources in order to continue to fund our research and development, including our plans for clinical and preclinical trials and new product development, as well as to fund operations generally. We will seek to raise additional funds through various potential sources, such as equity and debt financings or through corporate collaboration, grant agreements and license agreements. We can give no assurances that we will be able to secure such additional sources of funds to support our operations, or, if such funds are available to us, that such additional financing will be sufficient to meet our needs. These conditions, among others, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. If we issue additional equity securities to raise funds, the ownership percentage of existing stockholders would be reduced. New investors may demand rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing holders of common stock. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development or
commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. We may also seek collaborators for one or more of our current or future product candidates at an earlier stage than otherwise would be desirable or on terms that are less favorable than might otherwise be available. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of these uncertainties.
We anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses into the foreseeable future as we: (i) advance our product pipeline and other product candidates into clinical trials, (ii) continue our development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates in clinical trials, (iii) expand our corporate infrastructure, and (iv) incur our share of joint venture and collaboration costs for our products and technologies.
Uses of Cash. We have and plan to expand our business and intellectual property portfolio through the acquisition of new businesses and technologies as well as entering into licensing arrangements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
We believe the following accounting policies and estimates are most critical to aid in understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition. Our revenues are generated from product revenues, the sale of customized reagents and other materials, contract manufacturing services, grant revenue and other service revenues. We do not have significant costs associated with costs to obtain contracts with our customers. Substantially all of our revenues and accounts receivable result from contracts with customers.
We recognize revenue when control of the products is transferred to the customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive from the customers in exchange for those products and services. This process involves identifying the contract with a customer, determining the performance obligations in the contract and the contract price, allocating the contract price to the distinct performance obligations in the contract and recognizing revenue when the performance obligations have been satisfied. A performance obligation is considered distinct from other obligations in a contract when it provides a benefit to the customer either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and is separately identified in the contract. We consider a performance obligation satisfied once we have transferred control of a good or service to the customer, meaning the customer has the ability to use and obtain the benefit of the good or service. We recognize revenue for satisfied performance obligations only when no significant reversals are expected. (See Note 1 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Investments in Other Entities. We hold a portfolio of investments in equity securities. Investments in entities over which we have significant influence but not a controlling interest are accounted for using the equity method, with our share of earnings or losses reported in loss on equity investments. Our other equity investments are carried at cost, less impairment, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for identical or similar investments.
All investments are reviewed on a regular basis for possible impairment. If an investment’s fair value is determined to be less than its net carrying value and the decline is determined to be other-than-temporary, the investment is written down to its fair value. Such an evaluation is judgmental and dependent on specific facts and circumstances. Factors considered in determining whether an other-than-temporary decline in value has occurred include: the magnitude of the impairment and length of time that the estimated market value was below the cost basis; financial condition and business prospects of the investee; our intent and ability to retain the investment for a sufficient period of time to allow for recovery in market value of the investment; issues that raise concerns about the investee’s ability to continue as a going concern; any other information that we may be aware of related to the investment. We do not report the fair value of our equity investments in non-publicly traded companies because it is not readily determinable.
Debt, Including Debt With Detachable Warrants. Debt with detachable warrants are evaluated for the classification of warrants as either equity instruments, derivative liabilities, or liabilities depending on the specific terms of the warrant agreement. In circumstances in which debt is issued with equity-classified warrants, the proceeds from the issuance of convertible debt are first allocated to the debt and the warrants at their relative estimated fair values. The portion of the proceeds so allocated to the warrants are
accounted for as paid-in capital and a debt discount. The remaining proceeds, as further reduced by discounts created by the bifurcation of embedded derivatives and beneficial conversion features, are allocated to the debt. We account for debt as liabilities measured at amortized cost and amortize the resulting debt discount from the allocation of proceeds, to interest expense using the effective interest method over the expected term of the debt instrument. We consider whether there are any embedded features in debt instruments that require bifurcation and separate accounting as derivative financial instruments pursuant to Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging. Embedded features that require bifurcation are initially and subsequently measured at fair value. See Note 3 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion on the derivative liabilities associated with embedded features in our debt instruments.
If the amount allocated to the convertible debt results in an effective per share conversion price less than the fair value of our common stock on the commitment date, the intrinsic value of this beneficial conversion feature is recorded as a discount to the convertible debt with a corresponding increase to additional paid in capital. The beneficial conversion feature discount is equal to the difference between the effective conversion price and the fair value of our common stock at the commitment date, unless limited by the remaining proceeds allocated to the debt.
We may enter financing arrangements, the terms of which involve significant assumptions and estimates, including future net product sales, in determining interest expense, amortization period of the debt discount, as well as the classification between current and long-term portions. In estimating future net product sales, we assess prevailing market conditions using various external market data against our anticipated sales and planned commercial activities. Consequently, we impute interest on the carrying value of the debt and record interest expense using an imputed effective interest rate. We reassess the expected payments each reporting period and account for any changes through an adjustment to the effective interest rate on a prospective basis, with a corresponding impact to the classification of our current and long-term portions.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development Expense. We have acquired and may continue to acquire the rights to develop and commercialize new drug candidates. The up-front payments to acquire a new drug compound or drug delivery devices, as well as future milestone payments associated with asset acquisitions that do not meet the definition of a derivative and are deemed probable to achieve the milestones, are immediately expensed as acquired in-process research and development provided that the drug has not achieved regulatory approval for marketing and, absent obtaining such approval, have no alternative future use. Intangible assets acquired in a business combination that are used for in-process research and development activities are considered indefinite lived until the completion or abandonment of the associated research and development efforts. Upon commercialization of the relevant research and development project, the Company amortizes the acquired in-process research and development over its estimated useful life. Capitalized in-process research and development is reviewed annually for impairment or more frequently as changes in circumstance or the occurrence of events suggest that the remaining value may not be recoverable.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, our primary contractual obligations are as follows:
•
Short-term operating lease liabilities as disclosed in Note 11 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K;
•
Future minimum payments under the Scilex Notes, based on a percentage of projected net sales of ZTlido, as disclosed in Note 8 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K; and
•
Approximately $10.0 million of indebtedness in connection with the Scilex Holding accounts receivable revolving loan facility, as disclosed in Note 8 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our primary material long-term contractual obligations include:
•
Long-term operating lease liabilities as disclosed in Note 11 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K; and
•
Future minimum payments under the Scilex Notes, based on a percentage of projected net sales of ZTlido, as disclosed in Note 8 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.