ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition should be read in conjunction with the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this annual report.
BUSINESS DESCRIPTION AND OVERVIEW
Startek is a leading global provider of technology-enabled business process management solutions. The Company provides omni-channel customer experience, digital transformation and technology services to some of the finest brands globally. Startek is committed to impacting clients’ business outcomes by focusing on enhancing customer experience and digital enablement across all touch points and channels. Startek has more than 42,000 CX experts globally spread across 46 delivery campuses in 13 countries. The Company services over 220 clients across a range of industries such as Telecommunications, E-commerce & Consumer, Financial & Banking Services, Media & Cable, Travel & Hospitality, Technology, Education & Healthcare, Energy and Utilities.
Startek manages over half a billion customer moments of truth each year for the world’s finest brands. We help these brands increase their revenues by enabling better experiences for their customers across multiple channels. As a leading provider of technology-enabled business process management solutions for major global brands-we drive business value through omni-channel customer experiences, digital transformation, and technology services.
SIGNIFICANT DEVELOPMENTS
Coronavirus
The global outbreak of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and a national emergency by the U.S. government in March 2020. The pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets, and resulted in significant travel restrictions, mandated facility closures and shelter-in-place and social distancing orders in numerous jurisdictions around the world. Certain of our customer engagement centers have been impacted by local government actions restricting facility access or are operating at lower capacity utilization levels. In response to COVID-19, we have prioritized the safety and wellbeing of our employees, business continuity for our clients and supporting the efforts of governments around the world to contain the spread of the virus. In light of our commitment to help our clients as they navigate unprecedented business challenges while protecting the safety of our employees, we have taken numerous steps, and will continue to take further actions, to address the COVID-19 pandemic. We continue to work closely with our clients to support them as they implemented their contingency plans, helping them access our services and solutions remotely. In discussion with our clients, we continue to maintain many of our employees on a work-at-home model.
The impact of COVID-19 in the last quarter of fiscal 2020 was not significant on the Company. The extent of the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance, including our ability to execute our operations within the expected parameters, will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic and related actions taken by the various governments to prevent disease spread, all of which remain uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Key matters pertaining to subsidiaries
Debt Refinancing
On February 18, 2021, CSP Alpha Holdings Pte. Ltd., a subsidiary of the Company entered into a new facility agreement that provided for a $165 million term loan facility and a $20 million revolving credit facility, in each case with a maturity date 60 months after the date of first utilization of the term loan facility. Amortization of the term loan starts from a date falling in November 2022, i.e. 21 months from the first utilization date of the loan. The term loan facility and the revolving loan facility each bear interest at a rate per annum equal to a LIBOR rate plus an applicable margin of between 3.75% and 4.50%, depending on an adjusted leverage ratio. The Facilities Agreement also contains financial covenants, including cash flow cover, adjusted leverage and limitations on capital expenditures. ING Bank N.V. and DBS Bank Ltd. served as underwriters for the new senior debt facility and were the lead lenders of the previous senior debt facility, which is now repaid in full. Under the new senior debt facilities, covenant testing will be carried out from the quarter ended March 2021.
On February 22, 2021, the Company used proceeds from the above facilities agreement to prepay and terminate the existing credit facility made available to it under that certain Amended and Restated Senior Term and Revolving Facilities Agreement, dated October 27, 2017.
Strategic Investment
On February 25, 2021, the Company has announced a strategic investment in CSS Corp. (“CSS”), a new-age IT services and technology support solutions company that harnesses the power of AI, automation, analytics, cloud and digital to address customer needs. Capital Square Partners (“CSP”), a Singapore based Private Equity Fund Manager and Startek’s majority shareholder, acquired a controlling stake in CSS on February 25, 2021. CSP Alpha Holdings Pte. Ltd., a subsidiary of the Company, participated in this transaction by contributing a total of $30 million in a limited partnership managed by CSP to acquire both an indirect beneficial interest of approximately 26% in CSS, as well as an option to acquire a controlling stake which is currently not exercisable. The option to acquire a majority stake in CSS is at the sole discretion of Startek, and the Company has no obligation to do so.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 AND 2019
Revenue
Our gross revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 2.6% to $641,844 as compared to $659,205 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Our net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Our net revenues adjusted for warrant contra revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was lower at $640,222 compared to $657,910 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Lower net revenues were largely a result of adverse movement in foreign currencies relative to US dollar. The temporary supply side shocks faced across various geographies that the Company operates in during the onset of the Pandemic during the first half of 2020 was offset by the rebound in the second half of 2020 as the restrictions began to ease. The breakdown of our net revenues from various industry verticals for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
Our concentration to telecom revenue decreased to 34% of our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 38% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The volumes in the telecom vertical during 2020 remained strong. Telecommunication was one of the key essential services during the Pandemic leading to strong underlying demand. The decrease in revenues is largely driven by Company’s decision to not renew the contract with a government-owned telecom client and partially also due to depreciation of certain currencies relative to the US Dollar. The Company has partially offset this contraction in revenue percentage from telecom vertical with expansion in revenues from other verticals.
While our net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were negatively impacted by COVID-19, primarily due to lockdowns and lower active workforce, the Company did see improvement in the second half of the year as countries and states began to gradually re-open.
Cost of Services and Gross Profit
Overall, cost of services as a percentage of revenue increased to 86% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 83.1% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Employee expenses, rent costs and Depreciation and amortization are the most significant costs for the Company, representing 75.5%, 5.7% and 4.1% of total Cost of services, respectively. The breakdown of cost of services is listed in the table below:
Employee expenses: Our business heavily relies on our employees to provide professional services to our clients. Thus, our most significant costs are payments made to agents, supervisors, and trainers who are directly involved in delivering services to the clients.
Employee expenses as a percentage of revenues increased to 64.9% for the current period as compared to 63.5% for the previous period. The increase in employee costs, as a percentage of revenues, was largely attributable to deleveraging resulting from COVID 19 negative impact on revenues. The Company also had to incur higher costs on ensuring employees had a safe and secure work environment and following all the protocols and guidelines issued by various local authorities across the geographies we operate in. On a year on year basis, the costs were also impacted negatively by increase in minimum wages, primarily in India.
Rent expense: Rent expense as a percentage of revenue increased to 4.9% for the current period as compared to 4.6% for previous period. Rent expense increased as a percentage of sales driven by deleveraging resulting from the COVID-19 negative impact on revenues.
Depreciation and amortization: Depreciation and amortization expense as a percentage of revenue for the current period was marginally higher at 3.5% as compared 3.3% for the previous period.
Other expense includes technology, utility, travel and outsourcing costs. As a percentage of revenue, these costs marginally increased from 11.8% to 12.7%. The increase was due to higher outsourcing expenses, communication expenses, insurance and rates and taxes which was partly offset by lower traveling and recruitment expenses.
As a result, gross profit as a percentage of revenue for the current period decreased to 14% as compared to 16.9% for the previous period.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses (SG&A) as a percentage of revenue decreased from 13.9% in the previous year to 9.7% in the current year. The decrease was partly due to full year impact of cost rationalization steps taken during the previous year and partly due to lower travel, recruitment, and outsourcing expenses in the current fiscal year.
Impairment Losses and Restructuring Charges, Net
Impairment losses and restructuring costs, net totaled $37,799 for the current year as compared to $9,827 for the previous year. The expense for the current year primarily relates to goodwill impairment losses of $35,944 and restructuring expenses of $1,855. As a result of the global economic disruption and uncertainty due to the novel coronavirus ("COVID-19") pandemic, the company performed interim impairment testing which resulted in goodwill impairment charge of $15,820, $4,332 and $2,556 for India, South Africa and Australia reporting units respectively due to decline in forecasted business outlook in the quarter ended March 31, 2020. Further, annual impairment testing resulted in impairment charge of $4,991 in Argentina owing primarily to the devaluation of the local currency, $4,041 in Australia, $2,626 in India and $1,578 in South Africa reporting units due to decline in forecasted business outlook.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net totaled $13,376 for the current year as compared to $15,824 for the previous year. The interest expense is on our term debt and revolving line of credit facilities.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Income tax expense for the current period was $7,760 compared to $4,791 for the previous period. The movement in effective tax rate was primarily due to shifts in earnings among the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Additionally, movement of funds between various geographies primarily to service our debt facilities also attract withholding taxes.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows generated by operating activities, our working capital facilities, and term debt. We have historically utilized these resources to finance our operations and make capital expenditures associated with capacity expansion, upgrades of information technologies and service offerings, and business acquisitions. Due to the timing of our collections of receivables due from our major customers, we have historically needed to draw on our working capital facilities periodically for ongoing working capital needs. We have also entered into factoring agreements with financial institutions to sell certain of our accounts receivables under non-recourse agreement. The Company expects to meet all its debt obligations in a timely manner. As per an amended and restated senior facilities agreement, testing of covenants were waived for the calendar year 2020. Under the new senior debt facilities, covenant testing will be carried out from the quarter ended March 2021.
During the year, the Company had entered into an amended and restated senior facilities agreement which provides us deferment of principal repayments scheduled between May 2020 and January 2021. Under the conditions laid down in the aforementioned Agreement, the November 2020 principal repayment of $4.2 million that was earlier deferred, became due and was duly paid. The Company also raised capital by issuing fresh equity shares on a private placement basis to entities affiliated to Capital Square Partners, the principal shareholder of the Company. Additionally, we continue to limit discretionary spending across the organization and re-prioritizing our capital projects amid the COVID-19 pandemic. In February 2021, the Company repaid the amounts due under the amended and restated senior facilities and entered into a new debt facility.
Cash and cash equivalents
As at December 31, 2020, cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash held by the Company and all its foreign subsidiaries increased by $17,933 to $50,559 as compared to $32,626 as at December 31, 2019. The restricted cash balance as at December 31, 2020 stood at $6,052 as compared to $12,162 as at December 31, 2019. The restricted cash pertains to debt service reserve account (DSRA) that we have to maintain in accordance with the Senior Term Agreement and also for certain term deposits that need to be maintained in accordance with some of our lease and client agreements.
Cash flows from operating activities
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 we reported net cash flows generated from operating activities of $66,053 and $27,971 respectively. The $38,082 increase in net cash flows from operating activities was due to a net increase of $29,667 in cash flows from assets and liabilities, a $28,778 increase in non-cash reconciling items such as goodwill impairment, deferred tax expense, depreciation and amortization and warrant contra revenue, and a decrease of $(20,363) in net income. The increase in cash flows from assets and liabilities was driven primarily by sale of certain accounts receivables under a non-recourse factoring arrangement.
Cash flows used in investing activities
For the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 we reported net cash used in investing activities of $17,019 and $14,256 respectively. Net cash used in investing activities for both the periods primarily consisted of capital expenditures.
Cash flows used in financing activities
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 we reported net cash flows used in financing activities of $31,207 and $5,362, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020 our net borrowings decreased by $40,233 mainly due to full repayment of asset-backed line of credit facility in the USA from the proceeds of the non- recourse factoring arrangement and repayment of senior term loan. The Company collected $9,026 from the issuance of common stock out of which $7,500 was from the issue of common stock to an affiliate of Capital Square Partners, the principal shareholder of the Company.
Other factors impacting liquidity
Our business currently has a high concentration in a few principal clients. The loss of a principal client and/or changes in timing or termination of a principal client's product launches or service offerings could have a material adverse effect on our business, liquidity, operating results, or financial condition. These client relationships are further discussed in Item 1A, "Risk Factors". To limit our credit risk, management from time to time will perform credit evaluations of our clients. Management does not believe substantial credit risk existed as of December 31, 2020.
To meet short term cash needs, we borrow cash from our working capital facilities. These borrowings are typically outstanding for a short period of time before they are repaid. However, our debt balance can fluctuate significantly during any given quarter as part of our ordinary course of business. While we have been successful in bringing our debt levels (net of cash and cash equivalents) down by considerable amount over the past few quarters, our debt balance at the end of any given period is not necessarily indicative of the debt balance at any other time during that period.
Contractual Obligations
Smaller reporting companies are not required to provide the information required by this item.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
Apart from certain non-recourse receivables factoring as mentioned in the Note 9. "Debt" to our notes to consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, we have no other material off-balance sheet transactions, unconditional purchase obligations or similar instruments, and we are not a guarantor of any other entities’ debt or other financial obligations
Debt instruments and related covenants
For more information, refer to Note 9, "Debt," to our notes to consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
VARIABILITY OF OPERATING RESULTS
We have experienced and expect to continue to experience some quarterly variations in revenue and operating results due to a variety of factors, many of which are outside our control, including: (i) timing and amount of costs incurred to expand capacity in order to provide for volume growth from existing and future clients; (ii) changes in the volume of services provided to principal clients; (iii) expiration or termination of client projects or contracts; (iv) timing of existing and future client product launches or service offerings; (v) seasonal nature of certain clients’ businesses; and (vi) variability in demand for our services by our clients depending on demand for their products or services and/or depending on our performance.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
In preparing our consolidated financial statements in conformity with US-GAAP, management must undertake decisions that impact the reported amounts and related disclosures. Such decisions include the selection of the appropriate accounting principles to be applied and assumptions upon which accounting estimates are based. Management applies its best judgment based on its understanding and analysis of the relevant circumstances to reach these decisions. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. Accordingly, actual results may vary significantly from the estimates we have applied.
Please refer to Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 for a complete description of our critical accounting policies and estimates.