ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Forward-Looking Statements and Associated Risks.
This Form 10-K contains certain statements that are forward-looking within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. For this purpose, any statements contained in this Form 10-K that are not statements of historical fact may be deemed to be forward-looking statements. Without limiting the foregoing, words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” or “continue,” or comparable terminology are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements by their nature involve substantial risks and uncertainties, and actual results may differ materially depending on a variety of factors, many of which are not within our control. These factors include but are not limited to economic conditions generally and in the industries in which we may participate; competition within our chosen industry, including competition from much larger competitors; technological advances and failure to successfully develop business relationships.
Based on our financial history since inception, our auditor has expressed substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. As reflected in the accompanying financial statements, as of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit totaling $319,062. This raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Plan of Operation
Our plan of operations is to raise debt and/or equity to meet our ongoing operating expenses with opportunities for growth in return for shares of our common stock to create value for our shareholders. There can be no assurance that we will successfully complete this series of transactions. In particular, there is no assurance that any stockholder will realize any return on their shares after such a transaction. Any merger or acquisition completed by us can be expected to have a significant dilutive effect on the percentage of shares held by our current stockholders.
We believe we are an insignificant participant among the firms which engage in the acquisition of business opportunities. There are many established venture capital and financial concerns that have significantly greater financial and personnel resources and technical expertise than we have. In view of our limited financial resources and limited management availability, we will continue to be at a significant competitive disadvantage compared to our competitors.
We intend to seek, investigate and, if such investigation warrants, acquire an interest in business opportunities presented to us by persons or firms which desire to seek the advantages of an issuer who has complied with the
Securities Act of 1934 (the “1934 Act”). We will not restrict our search to any specific business, industry or geographical location, and we may participate in business ventures of virtually any nature. This discussion of our proposed business is purposefully general and is not meant to be restrictive of our virtually unlimited discretion to search for and enter into potential real estate development and construction opportunities. We anticipate that we may be able to participate in only a few projects initially because of our lack of financial resources.
We may seek a business opportunity with entities which have recently commenced operations, or that desire to utilize the public marketplace in order to raise additional capital in order to expand into new products or markets, to develop a new product or service, or for other corporate purposes. We may acquire assets and establish wholly owned subsidiaries in various businesses or acquire existing businesses as subsidiaries.
We expect that the selection of a business opportunity will be complex and risky. Due to general economic conditions, rapid technological advances being made in some industries and shortages of available capital, we believe that there are numerous firms seeking the benefits of an issuer who has complied with the 1934 Act. Such benefits may include facilitating or improving the terms on which additional equity financing may be sought, providing liquidity for incentive stock options or similar benefits to key employees, providing liquidity (subject to restrictions of applicable statutes) for all stockholders and other factors. Potentially, available business opportunities may occur in many different industries and at various stages of development, all of which will make the task of comparative investigation and analysis of such business opportunities extremely difficult and complex. We have, and will continue to have, essentially no assets to provide the owners of business opportunities. However, we will be able to offer owners of acquisition candidates the opportunity to acquire a controlling ownership interest in an issuer who has complied with the 1934 Act without incurring the cost and time required to conduct an initial public offering.
The analysis of new business opportunities will be undertaken by, or under the supervision of, our sole director. We intend to concentrate on identifying preliminary prospective business opportunities which may be brought to our attention through present associations of our director, professional advisors or by our stockholders. In analyzing prospective business opportunities, we will consider such matters as (i) available technical, financial and managerial resources; (ii) working capital and other financial requirements; (iii) history of operations, if any, and prospects for the future; (iv) nature of present and expected competition; (v) quality, experience and depth of management services; (vi) potential for further research, development or exploration; (vii) specific risk factors not now foreseeable but that may be anticipated to impact the proposed activities of the company; (viii) potential for growth or expansion; (ix) potential for profit; (x) public recognition and acceptance of products, services or trades; (xi) name identification; and (xii) other factors that we consider relevant. As part of our investigation of the business opportunity, we expect to meet personally with management and key personnel. To the extent possible, we intend to utilize written reports and personal investigation to evaluate the above factors.
We will not acquire or merge with any company for which audited financial statements cannot be obtained prior to or within a reasonable period of time after closing of the proposed transaction.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 COMPARED TO THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019
We are a publicly quoted real estate development company seeking to develop or redevelop residential, commercial or mixed used properties.
Revenue
We recognized no revenue during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019 as we had no revenue generating activities during these periods.
General and Administrative Expenses
During the period ended December 31, 2020, we incurred general and administrative expenses of $126,928 comprising officers’ compensation of $63,000, accounting, auditing, legal and share transfer agent fees totaling $61,416 and sundry other expenses of $2,512. During the period ended December 31, 2019, we incurred general and
administrative expenses of $222,452 comprising officers’ compensation of $147,500, accounting, auditing, legal and share transfer agent fees totaling $64,045 and sundry other expenses of $10,907.
The decrease of $84,500 in officer’s compensation between the year ended December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2019 arose due to $75,500 decrease in stock-based compensation issued to an officer in 2019 as compared to $0 of stock compensation issued during the year ended December 31, 2020 and a decrease of $9,000 of accrued compensation following the resignation of one of our directors during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The decrease of $2,629 in accounting, auditing, legal and share transfer agent fees was largely due to decreases in legal and accounting fees that were higher in the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 2020 due to the extra work required to make the Company fully reporting for SEC purposes during 2019.
The decrease of $8,395 in sundry office expense was largely due to a decrease in travel costs and office expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the decrease in corporate activity arising from the impact of the COVID-19 virus.
Operating Loss
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred an operating loss of $126,928 due to the factors discussed above compared to an operating loss of $222,452 during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest and Other Income (Expenses)
During the period ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $7,257 in related party interest expense as compared to $4,890 during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in interest expense between the two years was due to the increase in the funds advanced to us by our former principal shareholder and chief executive officer to fund our working capital needs.
Loss before Income Tax
During the period ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a net loss before income taxes of $134,185 due to the factors discussed above compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, during which we incurred a loss of $227,342.
Provision for Income Tax
No provision for income taxes was recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 as we incurred taxable losses in both years.
Net Loss
During the period ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a net loss of $134,185 due to the factors discussed above, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, during which we incurred a loss of $227,342.
CASH FLOW
At December 31, 2020, we did not have any revenue generating activities or other sources of income and we had total liabilities of $329,277 and a shareholders deficit of ($325,988).
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $134,185 an increase in prepaid expenses of $3,250, an increase in accounts payable of $4,076 and an increase in accruals - related parties of $70,257 resulting in net cash of ($63,102) being used in operations.
During the period ended December 31, 2019, we had a net loss of ($227,342) which included $75,500 in stock-based compensation, a decrease in accounts payable of ($24) and an increase in accrued expenses - related parties of $76,890 resulting in net cash of ($74,976) being used in operations.
Investing Activities
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no investing activities.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $62,897 by way of loan from one of our directors and officers resulting in a total of $62,897 generated from financing operations.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received $65,620 by way of loan from one of our directors and officers, $10,000 from the sale of preferred stock and paid off our $400 overdrawn bank account resulting in a total of $75,220 generated from financing operations.
We are dependent upon the receipt of capital investment or other financing to fund our ongoing operations and to execute our business plan to become a profitable real estate development company seeking to develop or redevelop residential, commercial or mixed used properties. In addition, we are dependent upon our controlling shareholder to provide continued funding and capital resources. If continued funding and capital resources are unavailable at reasonable terms, we may not be able to implement our plan of operations.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
All companies are required to include a discussion of critical accounting policies and estimates used in the preparation of their financial statements. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our critical accounting policies and estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 3 of our Financial Statements on page. These policies were selected because they represent the more significant accounting policies and methods that are broadly applied in the preparation of our financial statements.
Inflation
In the opinion of management, inflation has not and will not have a material effect on our operations in the immediate future.
Management will continue to monitor inflation and evaluate the possible future effects of inflation on our business and operations.
Share-based Compensation
The cost of equity instruments issued to non-employees in return for goods and services is measured by the fair value of the equity instruments issued in accordance with ASC 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation.”
Measurement date for non-employees is the grant date of the stock-based compensation. The cost of employee services received in exchange for equity instruments is based on the grant date fair value of the equity instruments issued.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
We have reviewed all the recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements and do not believe any of these pronouncements will have a material impact on our financial statements.