Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements, other than purely historical information, including estimates, projections, statements relating to our business plans, objectives, and expected operating results, and the assumptions upon which those statements are based, are “forward-looking statements.” These forward-looking statements generally are identified by the words “believes,” “project,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “estimates,” “intends,” “strategy,” “plan,” “may,” “will,” “would,” “will be,” “will continue,” “will likely result,” and similar expressions. Forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and assumptions that are subject to risks and uncertainties which may cause actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements. Our ability to predict results or the actual effect of future plans or strategies is inherently uncertain. Factors which could have a material adverse effect on our operations and future prospects on a consolidated basis include, but are not limited to: changes in economic conditions, legislative/regulatory changes, availability of capital, interest rates, competition, and generally accepted accounting principles. These risks and uncertainties should also be considered in evaluating forward-looking statements and undue reliance should not be placed on such statements.
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
The Company had no revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively.
Operating Expenses
The following table presents our total operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating expenses consist mostly of the maintenance fees of the corporate entity and the preparation and filing of reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The increase in operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was mainly due to the increase in general and administrative expenses as compared with 2019 because the Company complied more fully with its periodic reporting requirements and related obligations in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since its inception, the Company has financed its cash requirements from the sale of common stock and advances from related parties. Uses of funds have included activities to establish our business, professional fees and other general and administrative expenses.
We believe the Company will need additional resources to implement its strategic objectives in upcoming quarters. Due to our lack of operating history, however, our auditors have stated their opinion that there currently exists substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $459,042. The Company intends to fund operations through equity financing arrangements, which may be insufficient to fund its capital expenditures, working capital and other cash requirements for the next twelve months.
The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon, among other things, obtaining additional financing to continue its filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission in 2021. In response to this and other potential problems, management intends to raise additional funds through public or private placement offerings. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
The following table provides detailed information about our net cash flow for years presented in this report.
Cash Flow
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 consisted of net loss as well as the effect of changes in working capital. In 2020, the Company had a net loss of $30,665 offset by an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $12,759. By comparison, in 2019, the Company had a net loss of $10,921 increased by a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $7,175.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by our investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $0.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by our financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0. In the year ended December 31, 2019, investing activities provided $35,000 in cash, consisting entirely of an advance from our majority shareholder.
Pending our completion of a future potential business combination, we are not conducting any business activities. Our only operating activities are to comply with Securities and Exchange Commission reporting requirements and to seek to complete a business combination through the acquisition of, or merger with, an existing company seeking the perceived advantages of being a publicly traded corporation.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 there were no off balance sheet arrangements.
Going Concern
We have experienced recurring losses and had an accumulated deficit of $459,042 as of December 31, 2020. To date, we have not been able to produce sufficient sales to become cash flow positive and profitable on a consistent basis. The success of our business plan during the next 12 months and beyond will be contingent upon generating sufficient revenue to cover our costs of operations and/or upon obtaining additional financing. For these reasons, our auditor has raised substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Critical Accounting Policies
In December 2001, the SEC requested that all registrants list their most “critical accounting polices” in the Management Discussion and Analysis. The SEC indicated that a “critical accounting policy” is one which is both important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and results, and requires management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. We do not believe that any accounting policies currently fit this definition.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Our management has considered all recent accounting pronouncements issued since the last audit of our financial statements. Our management believes that these recent pronouncements will not have a material effect on our financial statements.