Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Report. Dollar amounts are reported in thousands, except per share and per treatment data.
Introduction, Outlook and Overview of Business Operations
STRATA Skin Sciences is a medical technology company in Dermatology and Plastic Surgery dedicated to developing, commercializing and marketing innovative products for the treatment of dermatologic conditions. Its products include the XTRAC® excimer laser and VTRAC® lamp systems utilized in the treatment of psoriasis, vitiligo and various other skin conditions.
The XTRAC device is utilized to treat psoriasis, vitiligo and other skin diseases. The XTRAC device received FDA clearance in 2000 and has since become a widely recognized treatment among dermatologists. The system delivers targeted 308um ultraviolet light to affected areas of skin, leading to psoriasis clearing and vitiligo repigmentation, following a series of treatments. As of December 31, 2020, there were 832 XTRAC systems placed in dermatologists’ offices in the United States under our dermatology recurring procedure model, up from 820 at the end of December 31, 2019. Under the dermatology recurring procedure model, the XTRAC system is placed in a physician's office and fees are charged on a per procedure basis or a fee is charged on a periodic basis not to exceed an agreed upon number of procedures. The XTRAC system’s use for psoriasis is covered by nearly all major insurance companies, including Medicare. The VTRAC Excimer Lamp system, offered internationally in addition to the XTRAC, provides targeted therapeutic efficacy demonstrated by excimer technology with the simplicity of design and reliability of a lamp system. There are approximately 7.5 million people in the United States and up to 125 million people worldwide suffering from psoriasis, and 1% to 2% of the world’s population suffers from vitiligo. In 2020, domestically, we estimate over 241,000 XTRAC laser treatments were performed.
Effective February 1, 2017, we entered into an exclusive OEM distribution agreement with Esthetic Education, LLC to be the exclusive marketer and seller of private label versions of the SkinStylus® MicroSystem and associated parts under the name of STRATAPEN. This three-year agreement has minimum annual sales requirements for renewal. The agreement expired in January 2020, but we continue to sell the product on a purchase order basis.
Since 2019, we have been transitioning our international equipment sales through our master distributor to a direct distribution model for equipment sales and recurring revenue on a country by country basis. We have signed contracts in Korea (in 2019), Japan (in 2020) and China (in January 2021).
These agreements are expected to increase recurring revenues over time, but will have an initial impact of reducing sales of dermatology procedures equipment in the near term as the contract is to apply a similar recurring revenue model as we have in the United States.
In late 2019, there was an outbreak of a new strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) which became a global pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains, constrained work force participation and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. In addition, the pandemic led to the suspension of elective procedures in the U.S. and to the temporary closure of many physician practices which are our primary customers. We do not know the extent of the impact on our customers and their potential for permanent closure. While many offices have been reopening, the on-going impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operational and financial performance, including its ability to execute its business strategies and initiatives in the expected time frames, will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the COVID-19 outbreak, continued restrictions on business operations and transport and the continued impact on worldwide economic and geopolitical conditions, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Domestically, as the procedures in which our devices are used are elective in nature; and as social distancing, travel restrictions, quarantines and other restrictions have become prevalent in the United States, this has had a negative impact on our recurring revenue model and our financial position and cash flow. The impact to the Company’s customers may also result in an increase in past due accounts receivable or customer bankruptcies. The virus has disrupted the supply chain from China and other countries and may continue to do so. We depend upon our supply chain to provide a steady source of components to manufacture and repair our devices. A shut-down of suppliers within our supply chain would severely disrupt our ability to sell, place and repair our products, and this would have a material impact on our financial position and cash flow.
To mitigate the impact of COVID-19, the Company has taken a variety of measures to ensure the availability and functioning of its critical infrastructure by implementing business continuity plans and to promote the safety and security of its employees while complying with various government mandates, including work-from-home arrangements and social-distancing initiatives to reduce the transmission of COVID-19, such as providing face masks for employees at facilities significantly impacted and requiring on-site body temperature monitoring before entering facilities. In addition, we have created programs utilizing its direct to consumer advertising and call center contact to patients and partner clinics to restart our partners’ businesses. In order to conserve its cash during this time period, the Company furloughed employees, reduced all discretionary spending, reduced all inventory purchases and delayed payments to vendors. We continue to manage our expenses and cash disbursements. Delayed payments to vendors were cumulatively, approximately $678 as of December 31, 2020. With the receipt of the PPP loan, we brought back most of our employees on a leave of absence. In December 2020, we submitted an application for loan forgiveness to the SBA and subject to the SBA’s approval, of 100% of the loan proceeds.
In the event our own employees are impacted through direct or ancillary contact with a person who has the virus, we may need to devise other methods of transacting business in our offices by working from home and or potentially ceasing operations for a period of time.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on the Company’s results of operations and financial performance for the first three quarters of fiscal 2020, and the Company expects it will continue to have a negative impact on its revenue, earnings and cash flows in the next quarter and as long as the pandemic continues. Accordingly, current results and financial condition discussed herein may not be indicative of future operating results and trends.
Key Technology
•
XTRAC® Excimer Laser. XTRAC originally received FDA clearance in 2000 and has since become a widely recognized treatment among dermatologists for psoriasis and other skin diseases. The XTRAC excimer laser delivers ultra-narrowband ultraviolet B (“UVB”) light to affected areas of skin. Following a series of treatments typically performed twice weekly, psoriasis remission can be achieved, and vitiligo patches can be re-pigmented. XTRAC is endorsed by the National Psoriasis Foundation, and its use for psoriasis is covered by nearly all major insurance companies, including Medicare. We estimate that more than half of all major insurance companies now offer reimbursement for vitiligo as well, a figure that is increasing.
•
In the third quarter of 2018 we announced the FDA granted clearance for our Multi Micro Dose (MMD) tip for our XTRAC excimer laser. The MMD tip accessory is indicated for use in conjunction with the XTRAC laser system to filter the Narrow Band UVB (“NB-UVB”) light at delivery in order to calculate and individualize the maximum non-blistering dose for a particular patient.
•
In the third quarter of 2018 we announced the launch of our S3, the next generation XTRAC. The S3 is smaller, faster and has a smart user interface.
•
In January 2020, we announced the FDA granted clearance of our XTRAC Momentum Excimer Laser platform.
•
VTRAC® Lamp. VTRAC received FDA clearance in 2005 and provides targeted therapeutic efficacy demonstrated by excimer technology with the simplicity of design and reliability of a lamp system.
Recent Developments
Home by XTRAC™
In January 2020, we introduced Home by XTRAC business, leveraging in-house resources including an at-home insurance reimbursed treatment option for patients with certain skin diseases that do not qualify for in-office treatments.
Chinese Distribution Agreement
In February 2021, the Company signed an agreement with our Chinese distributor for a combination of direct capital sales and recurring revenues for the country of China. The initial term ends December 2024 and thereafter automatically renews for a period of twelve months subject to certain conditions.
Japanese Distribution Agreement
In September 2020, we signed a direct distribution agreement with our Japanese distributor for a combination of direct capital sales and recurring revenue for the Country of Japan. This
agreement is expected to increase recurring revenues over time, but will have an initial impact of reducing sales of dermatology procedures equipment in the near term as the contract is to apply a similar recurring revenue model as we have in the United States. The term ended December 2020 and is automatically renewed for twelve months, subject to certain conditions.
Korean Distribution Agreement
In the third quarter of 2019, we signed a direct distribution agreement with our Korean distributor for a combination of direct capital sales and recurring revenues for the country of South Korea. This agreement is expected to increase recurring revenues over time, but will have an initial impact of reducing sales of dermatology procedures equipment in the near term as the contract is to apply a similar recurring revenue model as we have in the United States. The current term is until July 2021 with up to three additional twelve-month terms, subject to certain conditions.
MidCap Credit Facility Extinguishment and Fixed Rate-Term Promissory Note
On May 29, 2018, we entered into a Fourth Amendment to Credit Agreement (the “Amendment”), pursuant to which the Company repaid $3.0 million in principal of the existing $10.6 million credit facility established with MidCap Financial Trust in 2015. The terms of the credit facility were amended to impose less restrictive covenants and lower prepayment fees for the Company and extended the maturity date to May 2022. The Amendment modified the principal payments payable under the Credit Agreement including a period of 18 months where there were no principal payments due. Principal payments beginning December 2019 were $252 plus interest per month. The interest rate on the credit facility was one-month LIBOR plus 7.25%.
On December 30, 2019, we closed on a $7.3 million loan with a commercial bank pursuant to a one-year Fixed Rate - Term Promissory Note (the “Note”). Our obligations under the Note are secured by an Assignment and Pledge of Time Deposit, under which we have pledged, to the commercial bank, the proceeds of a time deposit account in the amount of the Note. We concurrently fully repaid (including payment of termination and exit fees) our existing long-term debt credit facility with MidCap Financial Trust. The Note was renewed through December 30, 2021.
Paycheck Protection Program
On April 22, 2020, we closed on a loan of $2.0 million (the “PPP loan”) from a commercial bank, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The PPP loan matures on May 1, 2022 and bears an interest rate of 1% per annum. Payments of principal and interest of any unforgiven balance was scheduled to commence on December 1, 2020 but is deferred until the SBA approves of the forgiveness amount. Under the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020 (the “PPP Flexibility Act”), (i) the first payment date for the PPP loan will be the earlier of (a) 10 months after the end of the “covered period” (as determined under the PPP) or (b) the date the bank receives a remittance of the forgiven amount from the SBA, and (ii) the PPP loan’s maturity is extended to five years (from 2 years).
All or a portion of the PPP loan may be forgiven by the lender upon application by US beginning 60 days after loan approval and upon documentation of expenditures in accordance with the requirements set forth by the Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) pursuant to the CARES Act. Under the CARES Act, loan forgiveness is available for the sum of documented payroll costs, covered rent payments, covered mortgage interest and covered utilities at either; our discretion, the eight-week period or twenty-four week period beginning on the date of disbursement of proceeds from the PPP loan. For purposes of the CARES Act, payroll costs exclude compensation of an individual employee in excess of $100, prorated annually. Not more than 40% of the forgiven amount may be for non-payroll costs. Forgiveness is reduced under certain circumstances if full-time headcount declines or if salaries and wages for employees with salaries of $100 or less annually are reduced. In the event the PPP loan, or any portion thereof, is forgiven pursuant to the PPP, the amount forgiven is applied to outstanding principal. In December 2020, we submitted for forgiveness to the SBA, and subject to the SBA’s approval, of 100% of the loan proceeds.
Economic Injury Disaster Loan
On May 22, 2020, we executed the standard loan documents required for securing a loan (the “EIDL Loan”) from the SBA under its Economic Injury Disaster Loan (“EIDL”) assistance program in light of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business. The principal amount of the EIDL Loan is up to $500, with proceeds to be used for working capital purposes. On June 12, 2020, we received these funds from the SBA. Interest accrues at the rate of 3.75% per annum. Installment payments, including principal and interest, are due monthly beginning March 26, 2021 (twelve months from the date of the promissory note) in the amount of $2. The balance of principal and interest is payable over the next thirty years from the date of the promissory note. There are no penalties for prepayment. Based upon guidance issued by the SBA on June 19, 2020, the EIDL Loan is not required to be refinanced by the PPP loan.
Sales and Marketing
As of December 31, 2020, our sales and marketing personnel consisted of 57 full-time employees, inclusive of a vice president of sales, a direct sales organization, as well as an in-house call center staffed with patient advocates and a reimbursement group that provides necessary insurance information to our physician partners and their patients.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in this Report are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses and disclosures at the date of the financial statements. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including, but not limited to, those related to revenue recognition, accounts receivable, deferred revenues, inventories, useful lives and impairment of property and equipment and of intangibles and goodwill, fair value of equity-based awards, sales and use tax, deferred taxes, financial instruments (derivative instruments and warrants) and accruals for warranty claims. We use authoritative pronouncements, historical experience and other assumptions as the basis for making estimates. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Management believes that the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
In the Dermatology Recurring Procedures Segment we have two types of arrangements for our phototherapy treatment equipment as follows: (i) we place our lasers in a physician’s office at no charge to the physician, and generally charge the physician a fee for an agreed upon number of treatments; or (ii) we place our lasers in a physician’s office and charge the physician a fixed fee for a specified period of time not to exceed an agreed upon number of treatments; if that number is exceeded additional fees will have to be paid.
For the purposes of U.S. GAAP only, these two types of arrangements are treated under the guidance of ASC 842, Leases. While these arrangements are not contractually operating leases, since we sell the physician access codes in order to operate the treatment equipment, these are similar to operating leases for accounting purposes since we provide the customers limited arrangement rights to use the treatment equipment and the treatment equipment resides in the physician’s office and we may exercise the right to remove the equipment upon notice, under certain circumstances, while the physician controls the utility and output of such equipment during the term of the arrangement as it pertains to the use of access codes to treat the patients. The terms of the domestic arrangements are generally 36 months with automatic one-year renewals and include a termination clause that can be affected at any time by either party with 30 to 60 day notice. Amounts paid are generally non-refundable. For the first type of arrangement, sales of access codes are considered variable treatment code payments and are recognized as revenue over the estimated usage period of the agreed upon number of treatments. For the second type of arrangement, customers purchase access codes and revenue is recognized ratably on a straight-line basis as the lasers are being used over the term period specified in the agreement. Variable treatment code payments that will be paid only if the customer exceeds the agreed upon number of treatments are recognized only when such treatments are being exceeded and used. Internationally, through our Korean, Japanese and, in 2021, Chinese distributors, we sell access codes for a fixed amount on a monthly basis to end user customers and the terms are generally 48 months, with termination in the event of the customers’ failure to remit payments timely, and includes a potential buy-out at the end of the term of the contract. Pre-paid amounts are recorded in deferred revenue and recognized as revenue over the lease term in the patterns described above. Under both methods, pricing is fixed with the customer.
With respect to lease and non-lease components, we adopted the practical expedient to account for the arrangement as a single lease component.
In the Dermatology Procedures Equipment segment we sell our products internationally through distributors and domestically, directly to a physician. For the product sales, we recognize revenues when control of the promised products is transferred to either our distributors or end-user customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those products (the transaction price). Control transfers to the customer at a point in time. To indicate the transfer of control, we must have a present right to payment and legal title must have passed to the customer. We ship most of our products FOB shipping point, and as such, we primarily transfer control and record revenue upon shipment. From time to time we will grant certain customers, for example governmental customers, FOB destination terms, and the transfer of control for revenue recognition occurs upon receipt. We have elected to recognize the cost of freight and shipping activities as fulfillment costs. Amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling are included as part of the transaction price and recognized as revenue when control of the underlying goods are transferred to the customer. The related shipping and freight charges incurred by the Company are included in cost of revenues.
Remaining performance obligations related to ASC 606 represent the aggregate transaction price allocated to performance obligations with an original contract term greater than one year, which are fully or partially unsatisfied at the end of the period. Remaining performance obligations include the potential obligation to perform under extended warranties but excludes any equipment accounted for as leases. Contract assets primarily relate to the Company’s rights to consideration for work completed in relation to its services performed but not billed at the reporting date. The contract assets are transferred to receivables when the rights become unconditional. Currently, the Company does not have any contract assets which have not transferred to a receivable. Contract liabilities primarily relate to extended warranties where the Company has received payments, but has not yet satisfied the related performance obligations. The allocations of the transaction price are based on the price of standalone warranty contracts sold in the ordinary course of business. The advance consideration received from customers for the warranty services is a contract liability that is recognized ratably over the warranty period.
With respect to contract acquisition costs, we applied the practical expedient and expense these costs immediately.
Inventory
We account for inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined to be the purchased cost for raw materials and the production cost (labor and indirect manufacturing cost) for work-in-process and finished goods. The cost is determined on the first-in, first-out method. Throughout the laser manufacturing process, the related production costs are recorded within inventory. Work-in-process is immaterial, given the typically short manufacturing cycle, and is therefore included in raw materials. We perform full physical inventory counts for XTRAC and cycle counts on the other inventory to maintain controls and obtain accurate data.
Our XTRAC laser is either (i) sold to distributors or physicians directly or (ii) placed in a physician's office and remains our property. The cost to build a laser, whether for sale or for placement, is accumulated in inventory. When a laser is placed in a physician’s office, the cost is transferred from inventory to “lasers in service” within property and equipment. At times, units are shipped to distributors but revenue is not recognized until all of the revenue recognition criteria has been met and, until that time, the unit is included in inventory.
Reserves for slow-moving, excess and obsolete inventories, reduce the historical carrying value of our inventories, and are provided based on historical experience and product demand. Management evaluates the adequacy of these reserves periodically based on forecasted sales and market trends.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable are reduced by an allowance for amounts that may become uncollectible in the future. From time to time, our customers dispute the amounts due to us, and, in other cases, our customers experience financial difficulties and cannot pay on a timely basis. In certain instances, these factors ultimately result in uncollectible accounts. The determination of the appropriate reserve needed for uncollectible accounts involves significant judgment. Such factors include changes in the financial condition of our customers as a result of industry, economic or customer-specific factors. A change in the factors used to evaluate collectability could result in a significant change in the allowance needed. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, allowance for doubtful accounts was $274 and $184, respectively.
Property and Equipment
As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we had net property and equipment of $5,529 and $5,369, respectively. The most significant component relates to the XTRAC lasers placed by us in physicians’ offices. We own the equipment and charge the physician for access codes for an agreed upon number of treatments. The recoverability of the net carrying value of the lasers is predicated on continuing revenues from the recurring revenue business model. If the physician does not generate sufficient treatments, then we may remove the laser from the physician’s office and redeploy it elsewhere. XTRAC lasers placed in service are depreciated on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of five-years. For other property and equipment, depreciation is calculated on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets, primarily three to seven years for computer hardware and software, furniture and fixtures, and machinery and equipment. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the lesser of the useful lives or lease terms. Useful lives are determined based upon an estimate of either physical or economic obsolescence, or both.
Goodwill
Our balance sheet includes goodwill which is subject to an annual assessment for impairment under FASB ASC Topic 350, “Goodwill and Other Intangibles” and is not amortizable. Management’s judgments regarding the existence of impairment indicators, on an interim or annual basis, are based on various factors, including market conditions and operational performance of our business. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we had $8,803 of goodwill accounting for 18.8% and 18.6% of our total assets, respectively. The acquisition of the XTRAC and VTRAC businesses that gave rise to the recorded goodwill closed on June 22, 2015. The determination of the fair value of the reporting units to which the goodwill relates requires management to make estimates and assumptions. We test our goodwill for impairment at least annually. This test is conducted in December of each year in connection with the annual budgeting and forecast process. Also, on a quarterly basis, we evaluate whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred that would negatively impact the realizable value of our intangibles or goodwill.
We organized our business into two operating segments, which also serve as our goodwill reporting units and are defined as Dermatology Recurring Procedures and Dermatology Procedures Equipment. The balance of our goodwill for each of our segments as of December 31, 2020, is as follows: Dermatology Recurring Procedures $7,958 and Dermatology Procedures Equipment $845. We completed our annual goodwill impairment analysis as of December 31, 2020, for our reporting units. Our assessment concluded that there was no impairment of goodwill. Our analysis employed the use of both a market and income approach, with each method given equal weighting. Significant assumptions used in the income approach include growth and discount rates, profit margins and our weighted average cost of capital. We used historical performance and management estimates of future performance to determine profit margins and growth rates. Discount rates selected for each reporting unit varied. Our weighted average cost of capital included a review and assessment of market and capital structure assumptions. For both reporting units the fair value was in excess of its carrying value. Considerable management judgment is necessary to evaluate the impact of operating changes and to estimate future cash flows. Changes in our actual results and/or estimates or any of our other assumptions used in our analysis could result in a different conclusion.
Intangibles
All of our intangibles are definite lived assets, with amortization recorded over the estimated useful life on a straight-line basis. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we had $6,345 and $7,955 of intangible assets accounting for approximately 13.6% and 16.8% of our total assets, respectively. The definite lived assets are tested for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the asset group may not be recoverable. Our intangible assets are grouped into five categories: core technology, product technology, customer relationships, and trade names. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset group to the undiscounted cash flows attributable to the asset group. If the carrying amount of an asset group exceeds its undiscounted cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized in the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds its fair value of the asset group.
Considerable management judgment is necessary to assess recoverable amounts of intangible assets and measure fair value of the intangible assets that were impaired as such measurements involve estimation of future revenues, royalty rates, profit margins and other cash flows. Changes in our actual results and/or estimates or any of our other assumptions used in our analysis could result in a different conclusion.
Income taxes
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This process requires us to estimate our actual current tax exposure and make an assessment of temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items, for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included within our consolidated balance sheet. We must then assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and, to the extent we believe that recovery is not more likely than not, we establish a valuation allowance. To the extent we establish a valuation allowance or increase this allowance in a period, we must include an expense within the tax provision in the consolidated statement of operations. Significant management judgment is required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against our deferred tax assets. In the event that we generate taxable income in the jurisdictions in which we operate and in which we have net operating loss carry forwards, we may be required to adjust our valuation allowance.
ASC Topic 740-10 requires that we recognize in our financial statements the impact of a tax position, if that position will more likely than not be sustained upon examination, based on the technical merits of the position, without regard to the likelihood that the tax position may be challenged. If an uncertain tax position meets the “more-likely-than-not” threshold, the largest amount of tax benefit, that is greater than 50%, likely to be recognized upon ultimate settlement with the taxing authority is recorded. We do not have any uncertain tax positions or accrued penalties and interest. If such matters were to arise, we would recognize interest and penalties related to income tax matters in income tax expense.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation to employees in accordance with the “Share-Based Payment” accounting standard. The standard requires estimating the fair value of equity-based payment awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model. The value of the award is recognized as an expense over the requisite service periods in our consolidated statements of operations. For performance-based awards, we recognize the expense only if we deem it probable that the vesting condition will occur. There were no performance awards granted in 2020 or 2019.
The fair value of employee stock options is estimated using a Black-Scholes valuation model. Compensation costs are recognized over the requisite service period. Total stock-based compensation expense was $1,633 and $1,195 for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Fair Value Measurements
We measure fair value in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures (“ASC Topic 820”). ASC Topic 820 defines fair value, establishes a framework and gives guidance regarding the methods used for measuring fair value, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. Fair value is an exit price, representing the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. As such, fair value is a market-based measurement that should be determined based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or liability. As a basis for considering such assumptions there exists a three-tier fair-value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value.
Results of Operations
The following financial data, in this narrative, are expressed in thousands, except for the earnings per share and per treatment data.
Revenues
The following table presents revenues from our two segments for the periods indicated below:
Dermatology Recurring Procedures
Revenues from Dermatology Recurring Procedures for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $17,409 which approximates 249,000 treatments, with prices ranging from $65 to $95 per treatment. Revenues from Dermatology Recurring Procedures for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $23,713 which approximates 337,000 treatments, with prices ranging from $65 to $95 per treatment.
Increases in procedures are dependent upon building market acceptance through marketing programs with our physician partners and their patients to show that the XTRAC procedures will be of clinical benefit and will be generally reimbursed by insurers. We believe that several factors had an impact on the prescribed use of XTRAC treatments for psoriasis and vitiligo patients. Specifically, we believe that there is a lack of awareness of the positive effects of XTRAC treatments among both sufferers and providers; and the treatment regimen which can sometimes require up to 12 or more treatments has limited XTRAC use to certain patient populations. Therefore, we use a direct to patient awareness program for XTRAC advertising in the United States, targeting psoriasis and vitiligo patients through a variety of media including television and radio; and through our use of social media such as Facebook and Twitter. We monitor the results of our advertising expenditures in this area to reach the more than 10 million patients in the United States afflicted with these diseases. We have and expect to continue to increase spending in
the direct to patient programs to drive patients to our partner clinics to increase recurring revenue. The increase in these programs precedes any increase in the recurring revenue as there is a lag between advertising and patients then receiving treatment, which we estimated to be three to nine months.
During 2020, our recurring procedures revenue was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic led to the suspension of elective procedures, such as XTRAC procedures and to the temporary closure of many physician practices which are our primary customers. We do not know the full extent of the impact on our customers including the potential of permanent closure.
Revenues from Dermatology Recurring Procedures are recognized over the estimated usage period of the agreed upon number of treatments, as the treatments are being used. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we deferred net revenues of $1,765 and $2,286, respectively, which will be recognized as revenue over the remaining usage period.
Dermatology Procedures Equipment
For the year ended December 31, 2020, dermatology equipment revenues were $5,681. Internationally, we sold 36 systems for the year ended December 31, 2020, 22 of which were VTRAC systems. Domestically, we sold 2 systems for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, dermatology equipment revenues were $7,873. Internationally, we sold 74 systems for the year ended December 31, 2019, 7 of which were VTRAC systems. Domestically, we sold 6 systems for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Additionally, included in the year ended December 31, 2019, was $185 in revenues for 5 Nordlys units (and accessories).
Cost of Revenues
The following table illustrates cost of revenues from our two business segments for the periods listed below:
Gross Profit Analysis
Gross profit decreased to $14,134 for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $20,270 during the same period in 2019. As a percentage of revenues, the gross margin was 61.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020, versus 64.2% during the same period in 2019. The following tables analyze changes in our gross margin, by segment, for the periods presented below:
The primary reasons for the decrease in gross profit were the result of lower revenues as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and unapplied costs partially offset by lower depreciation expense on lasers placed in the field. Decreases in utilization of lasers placed in the field will result in lower margins as we have certain fixed costs in the business.
The primary reason for the decrease in gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily the result of lower sales and unapplied costs.
Engineering and Product Development
Engineering and product development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased to $1,274 from $1,002 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to higher consulting costs associated with certain engineering projects.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, selling and marketing expenses decreased to $9,038 from $12,003 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the downturn in business as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We managed our costs with lower tradeshow costs, travel costs, direct to consumer advertising and compensation.
General and Administrative Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative expenses decreased to $7,898 from $10,275 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily the result of approximately $2.0 million in accounting and legal costs associated with our restatement of our financial statements as disclosed in our Annual Report on Form 10-K in 2019. We did not incur these costs in 2020.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $61 compared to $515 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to higher interest income on the higher cash equivalent balance in 2020 and lower interest expense, in connection with our refinancing.
Other (Expense) Income, net
In connection with our pay-off of the MidCap debt in December 2019, we incurred a loss on debt extinguishment of $414.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $275 compared to a benefit of $149 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The activity was the result of the change in the Tax Cut and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”) in the accounting for the net operating losses.
Net Loss
The factors described above resulted in net loss of $4,412 during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to a net loss of $3,790 during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA
We have determined to supplement our consolidated financial statements, prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, presented elsewhere within this Report, with certain non-GAAP measures of financial performance. These non-GAAP measures include non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA.
This non-GAAP disclosure has limitations as an analytical tool, should not be viewed as a substitute for Net Earnings (Loss) determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of the Company's results as reported under U.S. GAAP, nor is it necessarily comparable to non-GAAP performance measures that may be presented by other companies. We consider these non-GAAP measures in addition to our results prepared under current accounting standards, but they are not a substitute for, nor superior to, U.S. GAAP measures. These non-GAAP measures are provided to enhance readers’ overall understanding of our current financial performance and to provide further information for comparative purposes. This supplemental presentation should not be construed as an inference that the Company's future results will be unaffected by similar adjustments to Net Earnings (Loss) determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Specifically, we believe the non-GAAP measures provide useful information to management and investors by isolating certain expenses, gains and losses that may not be indicative of our core operating results and business outlook. In addition, we believe non-GAAP measures enhance the comparability of results against prior periods. Reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP measure of all non-GAAP measures included in this Report is as follows:
* Includes depreciation on lasers placed-in-service of $1,930 and $2,660 for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $5,993 of working capital compared to $6,121 as of December 31, 2019. Cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash were $18,112 as of December 31, 2020, as compared to $15,629, as of December 31, 2019. The increase to our cash was the result of the receipt of proceeds from the PPP and EIDL loans and management of payables. Delayed payment to vendors totaled $678 at December 31, 2020.
On December 30, 2019, the Company closed on a $7,275 loan with a commercial bank pursuant to a one-year Fixed Rate - Term Promissory Note (the “Note”), which was renewed effective December 30, 2020 primarily to extend the term of the Note one-year. The Company's obligations under the Note are secured by an Assignment and Pledge of Time Deposit (the “Agreement”), under which the Company has pledged the proceeds of a time deposit account in the amount of the loan to the commercial bank. The Company fully repaid (including payment of termination and exit fees) its existing long-term debt credit facility with Midcap Financial Trust. The transaction was accounted for as a debt extinguishment and the Company recorded a loss of $414. The Note was renewed for another year through December 30, 2021.
We have been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, have historically experienced recurring losses and have been dependent on raising capital from the sale of securities in order to continue to operate and meet our obligations in the ordinary course of business. Since the equity financing in May 2018 and a change in management, and prior to COVID, we had improved revenues, gross profit, generated positive cash flow from operations, refinanced our debt at a lower interest rate and received cash proceeds from the PPP loan and the EIDL loan. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents, combined with the anticipated revenues from the sale or use of our products and the proceeds from the PPP loan and the EIDL loan, will be sufficient to satisfy our working capital needs, capital asset purchases, outstanding commitments and other liquidity requirements associated with our existing operations through the next 12 months following the date of the issuance of these consolidated financial statements. However, the negative impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on the financial markets could interfere with our ability to access financing and to access it on favorable terms, if at all.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $2,096 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to cash provided by operating activities of $2,229 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The cash flows provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, were unfavorably impacted by lower accrued expenses, lower deferred revenue and net loss, lower depreciation and higher inventory partially offset by collection of accounts receivable, higher accounts payables as we are managing our payments to vendors and the non-cash impact of higher stock-based compensation.
Net cash used in investing activities was $2,159 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to cash used in investing activities of $2,791 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary reason for the decrease in cash used was our investment in lasers placed in service in the dermatology recurring procedures business segment due to the impact of COVID-19.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $2,546 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to cash used in financing activities of $296 for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the receipt of the proceeds from the PPP and EIDL loans in 2020 and the payoff of the MidCap debt in 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Impact of Inflation
We have not operated in a highly inflationary period, and we do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our revenues or expenses. If we enter an inflationary period, it could have a material impact on our expenses.