ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
Business. We are a leading provider of mission-critical, sophisticated software-enabled services that allow financial services providers to automate complex business processes. Our portfolio of software products and rapidly deployable software-enabled services allows our clients to automate and integrate front-office functions such as trading and modeling, middle-office functions such as portfolio management and reporting, and back-office functions such as accounting, transfer agency, compliance, regulatory services, performance measurement, reconciliation, reporting, processing and clearing. We provide our solutions globally to thousands of clients, principally within the institutional asset and wealth management, alternative investment management, brokerage, retirement, financial advisory and financial institutions vertical markets. In addition, we provide solutions to the healthcare industry including pharmacy, healthcare administration and health outcomes optimization solutions to satisfy their information processing, quality of care, cost management and payment integrity needs. Our healthcare solutions include claims adjudication, benefit management, care management and business intelligence services.
Acquisitions. To supplement our growth, we evaluate and execute acquisitions that provide complementary products or services, add proven technology and an established client base and expand our intellectual property portfolio or address a highly specialized problem or a market niche. Since the beginning of 2018, we have spent approximately $8.6 billion on our seven most significant acquisitions, using a combination of cash on hand, equity and debt financing (as discussed in Notes 8, 10 and 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements).
The following table lists the significant businesses we have acquired since January 1, 2018:
The discussion in this Part II, Item 7 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K includes the operations of the businesses listed in the table above for the respective time periods each was owned by SS&C.
Revenues. As we have expanded our business, we have focused on increasing our software-enabled services. Since 2018, we have seen increased demand in the financial services industry for these services from existing and new customers. We have taken a number of steps to support that demand, such as automating our software-enabled services delivery methods, expanding our service offerings and providing our employees with sales incentives. We have also acquired businesses that offer software-enabled services or have a large base of term license or maintenance clients. Our software-enabled services revenues increased from $2,798.9 million and 82% of total revenues in 2018 to $3,891.3 million and 83% of revenues in 2020. We believe that our high level of these contractually recurring revenues provides us with the ability to better manage our costs and capital investments. To support the growth in our software-enabled services revenues and maintain our level of customer service, we have added personnel, expanded our facilities and invested in information technology.
Liquidity. In connection with the acquisition of DST in the second quarter of 2018, we entered into a new credit agreement (“Credit Agreement”), which is described in Contractual Obligations, to fund a large portion of the purchase price, refinance amounts outstanding, including our previously issued Senior Notes and our prior credit facility (“Prior Facility”), and refinance all of DST’s existing indebtedness. We also raised cash through the sale and issuance of approximately 30.3 million shares of our common stock for total net proceeds of $1.4 billion. In the fourth quarter of 2018, we funded our acquisitions of Eze and Intralinks with a combination of cash on hand and $1,875.0 million in incremental term loan debt and the issuance of 9.9 million shares of our common stock. In March of 2019, we issued $2.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 5.5% Senior Notes due 2027 (“Senior Notes”), the
proceeds of which were used to repay a portion of the outstanding Term B-3 Loan under our existing senior secured credit facilities. In January 2020, we entered into an amendment to our senior secured credit agreement, whereby the interest rate margin applicable to the term loans was reduced from LIBOR plus 2.25% to LIBOR plus 1.75%. No changes were made to the financial covenants, outstanding principal amounts or the scheduled amortization.
We generated $1,184.7 million in cash from operating activities in 2020, compared to $1,328.3 million and $640.1 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively. In 2020, we used our operating cash flow, $189.7 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and existing cash to repay $738.2 million of net debt, pay $136.1 million in dividends, fund business acquisitions of $116.0 million, purchase $227.7 million of common stock for treasury and invest in capital expenditures in our business.
The impacts of COVID-19 and related economic conditions on our results are uncertain and, in many respects, outside our control. While we have experienced some client delays in committing to services and products, to date we have experienced no direct material negative effects on our business and results of operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The situation remains dynamic and subject to rapid and possibly material change, which ultimately could result in material negative effects on our business and results of operations. In addition, because COVID-19 did not begin to affect our financial results until late in the first quarter of 2020, its impact on our results through 2020 may not be indicative of its impact on our results into 2021. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the potential impacts to our business, consolidated results of operations, liquidity and capital resources. As described below, our organic revenues decreased during 2020. A portion of that decrease was driven by weakness in certain of our businesses due to the current COVID-19 pandemic and economic environment. There have also been impacts on our expenses during 2020. While certain communications and technology costs have increased to support a primarily remote working environment, overall our organic expenses decreased due to travel restrictions and other related savings associated with the current environment.
Results of Operations
Revenues
We derive our revenues from two sources: software-enabled services revenues and license, maintenance and related revenues. As a general matter, fluctuations in our software-enabled services revenues are attributable to the number of new software-enabled services clients as well as total assets under management in our clients’ portfolios and the number of outsourced transactions provided to our existing clients. Software-enabled services revenues also fluctuate as a result of reimbursements received for “out-of-pocket” expenses, such as postage and telecommunications charges, which are recorded as revenues on an accrual basis. Because these additional revenues are offset by the reimbursable expenses incurred, there is no impact on gross profit, operating income and net income, however the reimbursements billed and expenses incurred can lead to fluctuations in revenues, cost of revenues and gross margin percentage each period. License, maintenance and related revenues consist primarily of term and perpetual license fees, maintenance fees and professional services. Maintenance revenues vary based on customer retention and on the annual increases in fees, which are generally tied to the consumer price index. License and professional services revenues tend to fluctuate based on the number of new licensing clients, the timing and terms of contract renewals and demand for consulting services.
Our results of operations below include the results of our recent acquisitions from the date which they were acquired, including Investrack in November 2019, Algorithmics in December 2019, Captricity in March 2020, Innovest in May 2020 and Millennium in December 2020.
The following table sets forth the percentage of our total revenues represented by each of the following sources of revenues for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth revenues (dollars in millions) and percent change in revenues for the periods indicated:
Fiscal 2020 versus Fiscal 2019. Our revenues increased $35.0 million, or 0.8%, primarily due to our acquisitions, which, combined, contributed $100.4 million to the increase in revenues. This increase was partially offset by a decrease of $65.3 million in organic revenues. The unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation reduced revenues by $0.1 million. Software-enabled services revenues increased $22.1 million, or 0.6%, primarily due to our acquisitions, which contributed $40.4 million to the increase in revenues, as well as from the favorable impact from foreign currency translation of $0.7 million. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in organic revenues of $19.0 million. License, maintenance and related revenues increased $12.9 million, or 1.7%, primarily due to our acquisitions, which contributed $60.0 million to the increase in revenues. This increase was partially offset by a decrease of $46.3 million in organic revenues as well as the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of $0.8 million.
Fiscal 2019 versus Fiscal 2018. Our revenues increased $1,211.8 million, or 35.4%, primarily due to our acquisitions, which included DST and CACEIS in the second quarter of 2018 and Eze and Intralinks in the fourth quarter of 2018, along with our acquisitions of Investrack and Algorithmics in the fourth quarter of 2019, which, combined, contributed $1,140.5 million to the increase in revenues. Excluding the impact of acquisitions, revenues increased primarily due to an increase in revenues for institutional and investment management products and advisory and wealth management products. The unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation reduced revenues by $22.2 million. Software-enabled services revenues increased $1,070.3 million, or 38.2%, primarily due to the acquisitions, which contributed $1,095.5 million to the increase in revenues, as well as from a continued increase in demand for services for advisory and wealth managers. These increases were partially offset by the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of $17.0 million. License, maintenance and related revenues increased $141.5 million, or 22.7%, primarily due to increased license revenues for institutional and investment management products and advisory and wealth management products, as well as the acquisitions, which contributed $45.0 million to the increase in revenues. These increases were partially offset by the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of $5.2 million.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of software-enabled services revenues consists primarily of costs related to personnel utilized in servicing our software-enabled services and amortization of intangible assets. Cost of license, maintenance and other related revenues consists primarily of the costs related to personnel utilized in servicing our maintenance contracts and to provide implementation, conversion and training services to our software licensees, as well as system integration and custom programming consulting services and amortization of intangible assets.
The following tables set forth each of the following cost of revenues as a percentage of their respective revenue source for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth cost of revenues (dollars in millions) and percent change in cost of revenues for the periods indicated:
Fiscal 2020 versus Fiscal 2019. Our total cost of revenues decreased $37.6 million, or 1.4%, primarily due to a decrease in organic cost of revenues of $87.8 million and the favorable impact from foreign currency translation, which reduced costs by $3.9 million. Organic cost of revenues such as travel, entertainment, independent contractors, outside services, consulting, out-of-pocket expenses and depreciation and amortization declined. These decreases were partially offset by increases from our acquisitions, which added $54.1 million in costs. Cost of software-enabled services revenues decreased $48.4 million, or 2.1%, primarily due to a decrease in organic cost of software-enabled services revenues of $72.1 million and the favorable impact from foreign currency translation, which reduced costs by $3.4 million. These decreases were partially offset by increases from our acquisitions, which added $27.1 million in costs. Cost of license, maintenance and related revenues increased $10.8 million, or 3.5%, primarily due to our acquisitions, which added $27.0 million in costs, partially offset by the decrease in organic cost of license, maintenance and related revenues of $15.7 million as well as the favorable impact from foreign currency translation, which reduced costs by $0.5 million.
Fiscal 2019 versus Fiscal 2018. Our total cost of revenues increased $560.6 million, or 27.3%, primarily due to our acquisitions, which contributed $635.0 million to the increase in costs, partially offset by a decrease in cost of revenues as a result of the elimination of redundant positions and other cost saving measures enacted during 2018 and 2019. The favorable impact from foreign currency translation reduced costs by $16.9 million. Cost of software-enabled services revenues increased $552.7 million, or 31.5%, primarily due to our acquisitions, which contributed $615.4 million to the increase in costs, partially offset by a decrease in costs of software-enabled services revenues as a result of the elimination of redundant positions and other cost saving measures enacted during 2018 and 2019. The favorable impact from foreign currency translation reduced costs by $14.9 million. Costs of license, maintenance and related revenues increased $7.9 million or 2.7%, primarily due to our acquisitions, which contributed $19.6 million in costs, partially offset by decreases in amortization expense of intangible assets acquired. The favorable impact from foreign currency translation reduced costs by $2.0 million in costs.
Operating Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of the personnel costs associated with the selling and marketing of our products, including salaries, commissions, travel and entertainment. Such expenses also include amortization of intangible assets, the cost of branch sales offices, trade shows and marketing and promotional materials. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs attributable to the enhancement of existing products and the development of new software products. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs related to management, accounting and finance, information management, human resources and administration and associated overhead costs, as well as fees for professional services. Transaction expenses consist of certain costs associated with our acquisition of DST, including costs to enter into our Credit Agreement, investment banker advisory fees, legal and other professional fees.
The following table sets forth operating expenses as a percentage of our total revenues for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth operating expenses (dollars in millions) and percent change in operating expenses for the periods indicated:
Fiscal 2020 versus 2019. Operating expenses increased $1.2 million, or 0.1%, primarily due to our acquisitions, which added $56.3 million in expenses. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $52.4 million in organic operating expenses such as
travel, entertainment, consulting, independent contractors, legal settlements, marketing, depreciation as well as lower amortization of intangible assets. The favorable impact from foreign currency translation reduced costs by $2.7 million.
Fiscal 2019 versus 2018. Operating expenses increased $165.9 million, or 17.6%, primarily due to our acquisitions, which contributed $353.6 million to the increase in expenses, and increases in personnel-related and legal costs. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation expense, the absence of Transaction expenses in 2019 and a decrease in expenses as a result of the elimination of redundant positions and other cost saving measures enacted during 2018 and 2019. The favorable impact from foreign currency translation reduced costs by $5.8 million.
Comparison of Fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018 for Interest, Taxes and Other
Interest income. We had interest income of $4.0 million in 2020 compared to $4.7 million in 2019 and $9.1 million in 2018. The decrease in interest income in 2020 primarily resulted from lower average interest rates on our cash balances relative to the prior year. The decrease in interest income in 2019 primarily resulted from lower average cash balances relative to the prior year.
Interest expense. We had interest expense of $249.9 million in 2020 compared to $409.6 million in 2019 and $280.1 million in 2018. The decrease in interest expense in 2020 relates primarily to lower average interest rates as well as lower average debt balances. The increase in interest expense in 2019 reflects the full year effect of our borrowings under our Credit Agreement in connection with the acquisitions of DST, Eze and Intralinks during 2018 and, to a lesser extent, higher average interest rates associated with the issuance of our 5.5% Senior Notes. These facilities are discussed further in “Liquidity and Capital Resources”.
Other income, net. Other income, net for 2020 consisted primarily of foreign currency transaction gains and investment gains. Other income (expense), net for 2019 consisted primarily of investment gains, partially offset by foreign currency transaction losses.
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliates, net. We had equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliates, net of ($1.5) million for 2020, $3.6 million for 2019 and $2.1 million for 2018. Our equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliates was a loss in 2020 due to losses incurred by one of our affiliates that operates a hotel and had a significant impact to their operations due to Covid-19. The amount earned in 2019 and 2018 is primarily related to our proportionate share of IFDS L.P.’s net income, offset by amortization of basis differences.
Loss on extinguishment of debt, net. We recorded a $4.2 million loss on extinguishment of debt in 2020 primarily related to the amendment of our credit agreement and the write-off of capitalized financing fees and original issue discount associated with prepayments of our Term Loan facility. During 2020, we purchased $184.8 million principal amount of our Term Loans in privately negotiated transactions, which resulted in a net gain on extinguishment of debt of $0.8 million. We also made additional principal payments prior to their scheduled maturity, which resulted in a loss on extinguishment of debt of $2.2 million due to the write-off of a portion of unamortized capitalized financing fees and unamortized original issue discount. We recorded a $7.1 million loss on extinguishment of debt in 2019 in connection with the repayment of a portion of our Term Loans with the proceeds from the issuance of our Senior Notes. The loss on extinguishment of debt includes costs incurred by us which did not meet the criteria for capitalization. The Senior Notes are discussed further in “Liquidity and Capital Resources.” We recorded a $43.3 million loss on extinguishment of debt in 2018 related to the amendment and restatement of our credit agreement. The loss on extinguishment of debt includes the write-off of a portion of the unamortized capitalized financing fees and unamortized original issue discount related to the Prior Credit Agreement and Senior Notes for amounts accounted for as a debt extinguishment and a make-whole premium paid in connection with the redemption of the Senior Notes.
Provision for income taxes. The following table sets forth the provision for income taxes (dollars in millions) and effective tax rates for the periods indicated:
Our 2020, 2019 and 2018 effective tax rates differ from the statutory rate primarily due to the effect of our foreign operations, permanent book to tax differences and the effect of the Tax Act. Our effective tax rate for 2020 includes benefits related to stock-based awards, recognition of a state tax benefit related to a law change and releases of uncertain tax positions due to statute of limitation expirations and closed audits. Our effective tax rate for 2019 included benefits related to stock-based awards, the utilization of foreign net operating losses against which valuation allowances were previously recorded and releases of uncertain tax positions
due to closed audits and statute of limitation expirations. The increase in the effective tax rate from 2019 to 2020 was primarily related to the increase in valuation allowances and decreases in relative favorable impacts of stock based compensation and uncertain tax positions, partially offset by a decrease in state taxes due to a law change recorded during the year.
Our effective tax rate includes the effect of operations outside the U.S., which historically have been taxed at rates lower than the U.S. statutory rate. While we have income from multiple foreign sources, the majority of our non-U.S. operations are in India and the U.K., where the statutory rates were 29.1% and 19.0%, respectively, in 2020, 29.1% and 19.0%, respectively, in 2019, and 30.5% and 19.0%, respectively, in 2018. A future proportionate change in the composition of income before income taxes from foreign and domestic tax jurisdictions could impact our periodic effective tax rate.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal cash requirements are to finance the costs of our operations pending the billing and collection of client receivables, to fund payments with respect to our indebtedness, to invest in research and development, to acquire complementary businesses or assets, repurchase shares of our common stock and to pay dividends on our common stock. We expect our cash on hand, cash flows from operations, and cash available under our Credit Agreement to provide sufficient liquidity to fund our current obligations, projected working capital requirements and capital spending for at least the next twelve months.
In March 2020, we purchased Captricity for $15.1 million in cash, net of cash acquired, plus the costs of effecting the transaction and the assumption of certain liabilities. In May 2020, we purchased Innovest for approximately $99.1 million in cash, net of cash acquired and 0.4 million shares of our common stock, plus the costs of effecting the transaction and the assumption of certain liabilities.
In 2020, we paid quarterly cash dividends totaling $136.1 million.
Our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash and cash equivalents, including amounts held on behalf of clients, at December 31, 2020 were $1,337.9 million, a decrease of $451.5 million from $1,789.4 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease in cash was primarily due to the decrease in cash and cash equivalents associated with funds held on behalf of clients. See Notes 8, 10 and 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of acquisitions, debt and equity, respectively.
Client funds obligations include our transfer agency client balances invested overnight as well as our contractual obligations to remit funds to satisfy client pharmacy claim obligations and are recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet when incurred, generally after a claim has been processed by us. Our contractual obligations to remit funds to satisfy client obligations are primarily sourced by funds held on behalf of clients. We had $1,227.4 million and $1,729.9 million of client funds obligations at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, are summarized in the following table (in millions):
Operating activities: Cash provided by operating activities primarily resulted from net income of $625.2 million adjusted for non-cash items of $673.2 million, partially offset by changes in our working capital accounts (excluding the effect of acquisitions) totaling $113.7 million. The changes in our working capital accounts were driven by increases in prepaid expenses and other assets and decreases in deferred revenue, accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities, partially offset by changes in income taxes prepaid and payable and a decrease in accounts receivable. The increases in prepaid expenses and other assets was primarily due to an incentive payment made in connection with a client contract extension. The decrease in deferred revenue was primarily due to
the recognition of revenue associated with a multi-year license agreement where we received payment in 2019 as well as the revenue associated with annual maintenance fees. The decrease in accounts payable was primarily due to the timing of payments. The change in income taxes prepaid and payable is primarily driven by the timing of tax payments. The decrease in accounts receivable was primarily due to a decrease in days’ sales outstanding.
Investing activities: We used net cash of $210.5 million primarily related to cash paid for business acquisitions (net of cash acquired) of $116.0 million, $71.6 million in capitalized software development costs, $60.9 million in investments in securities and $34.8 million in capital expenditures, partially offset by proceeds from sales and maturities of investments of $60.3 million, receipts from the collection of other non-current receivables of $10.3 million and proceeds from the sale of property and equipment of $2.3 million.
Financing activities: Cash used in financing activities of $1,428.1 million primarily resulted from the net repayments of debt totaling $738.2 million, the net decrease in client funds obligations of $504.9 million, $227.7 million in treasury stock repurchases, $136.1 million in quarterly dividends paid and $10.9 million in withholding taxes paid related to equity award net share settlements. These payments were partially offset by $189.7 million in cash received from stock option exercises.
Fiscal 2019 versus 2018
Our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash and cash equivalents, including amounts held on behalf of clients, at December 31, 2019 were $1,789.4 million, an increase of $676.1 million from $1,113.3 million at December 31, 2018. The increase in cash was primarily due to the increase in cash and cash equivalents associated with funds held on behalf of clients. See Notes 8, 10 and 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of acquisitions, debt and equity, respectively. We also had $1,729.9 million and $1,014.7 million of client funds obligations at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Operating activities: Cash provided by operating activities primarily resulted from net income of $438.5 million adjusted for non-cash items of $761.5 million and by changes in our working capital accounts (excluding the effect of acquisitions) totaling $128.3 million. The changes in our working capital accounts were driven by increases in deferred revenue, decreases in prepaid expenses and other assets and decreases in accounts receivable, partially offset by increases in contract assets, decreases in accrued expenses and other liabilities and an increase in prepaid income taxes. The increase in deferred revenues is related to a multi-year $250.0 million license agreement signed in the third quarter of 2019 with an up-front payment, which we received in 2019. The license revenue is expected to be recognized over approximately four years. The decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets was primarily due to the timing of payments. The decrease in accounts receivable was primarily due to a decrease in days’ sales outstanding. The increase in contract assets was primarily due to new term license deals. The decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities was primarily due to lower professional fee accruals and lower compensation accruals offset by higher accrued interest on our Senior Notes as the interest is paid semi-annually.
Investing activities: We used net cash of $140.5 million primarily related to cash paid for business acquisitions (net of cash acquired) of $94.1 million, $67.4 million in capitalized software development costs and $63.0 million in capital expenditures, partially offset by proceeds from sales and maturities of investments of $65.1 million, receipts from the collection of other non-current receivables of $10.2 million, proceeds from the sale of property and equipment of $6.2 million and distributions received from our unconsolidated affiliates of $2.8 million.
Financing activities: Cash used in financing activities of $513.4 million primarily resulted from the net repayments of debt totaling $1,123.8 million, $107.7 million in quarterly dividends paid, $60.3 million in treasury stock repurchases, $22.8 million in withholding taxes paid related to equity award net share settlements and the payment of $6.1 million in fees related to debt extinguishment and refinancing activities. These payments were partially offset by the net increase in client funds obligations of $681.6 million and $125.7 million in cash received from stock option exercises.
We have made a permanent reinvestment determination in certain non-U.S. operations that have historically generated positive operating cash flows. At December 31, 2020, we held approximately $115.6 million in cash and cash equivalents at non-U.S. subsidiaries where we have made such a determination and in turn no provision for income taxes had been made. At December 31, 2020, we held approximately $88.5 million in cash that was available to our foreign borrowers under our senior secured credit facility and will be used to facilitate debt servicing of those entities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 that require us to make future cash payments (in millions):
(1)
Reflects interest payments on our Credit Agreement at an assumed interest rate of one-month LIBOR of 0.15% plus 1.75% for U.S. dollar loans on our Term B-3, B-4 and B-5 facilities and 5.5% on our Senior Notes.
(2)
We are obligated under noncancelable operating leases for office space and office equipment.
(3)
Represents our obligation under the Tax Act to pay the deemed repatriation tax on certain non-US earnings over eight years.
(4)
Purchase obligations include the minimum amounts committed under contracts for goods and services.
As of December 31, 2020, our liability for uncertain tax positions and related interest and penalties payable was $114.7 million and $29.9 million, respectively. We are unable to reasonably estimate the timing of such liability and interest payments in individual years beyond 12 months due to uncertainties in the timing of the effective settlement of tax positions. As a result, these amounts are not included in the above contractual obligations table.
Senior Secured Credit Facilities
On April 16, 2018, in connection with our acquisition of DST, we entered into an amended and restated credit agreement with SS&C Technologies, Inc. (“SS&C”), SS&C European Holdings SARL, an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of SS&C (“SS&C SARL”) and SS&C Technologies Holdings Europe SARL, an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of SS&C (“SS&C Tech SARL”) as the borrowers (“Credit Agreement”).
The Credit Agreement includes four tranches of term loans (together the “Initial Term Loans”): (i) a $518.6 million term B-1 facility for SS&C (“Term B-1 Loan”), which was repaid in full in 2019; (ii) a $5.9 million term B-2 facility for SS&C SARL (“Term B-2 Loan”), which was repaid in full in 2018; (iii) a $5.046 billion term B-3 facility, which matures on April 16, 2025 for SS&C (the “Term B-3 Loan”); and (iv) a $1.8 billion term B-4 facility, which matures on April 16, 2025 for SS&C SARL (the “Term B-4 Loan”). In addition, the Credit Agreement has a revolving credit facility with a five-year term available for borrowings by SS&C with $250 million in available commitments (“Revolving Credit Facility”), of which $246.1 million was available as of December 31, 2020. The Revolving Credit Facility also contains a $25 million letter of credit sub-facility, of which $3.9 million was utilized as of December 31, 2020.
The majority of the initial proceeds from the Initial Term Loans was used to fund the acquisition of DST, repay certain amounts outstanding under our then-existing credit agreement (“Prior Credit Agreement”), repay all of the outstanding principal amount of our 5.875% Senior Notes due 2023 (“Prior Senior Notes”) and repay acquired debt associated with DST.
The refinancing of the Prior Credit Agreement was evaluated in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 470-50, Debt-Modifications and Extinguishments, for modification and extinguishment accounting. We accounted for the refinancing as a debt modification with respect to amounts that remained obligations of the same lender in the syndicate with minor changes in cash flows and as a debt extinguishment with respect to amounts that were obligations of lenders that exited the syndicate or remained in the syndicate but experienced a change in cash flows of greater than 10%. See Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of debt.
On October 1, 2018, in connection with our acquisition of Eze, we entered into an amendment (the “Commitment Increase Amendment”) to the Credit Agreement. Pursuant to the Commitment Increase Amendment, a new $875.0 million senior secured term B-5 facility (“Term B-5 Loan”, and together with the Initial Term Loans, the “Term Loans”) was made available to us, the proceeds of which were used to finance, in part, the Eze acquisition.
On November 16, 2018, in connection with our acquisition of Intralinks, we entered into an amendment (the “Incremental Term Loan Amendment”) to the Credit Agreement. Pursuant to the Incremental Term Loan Amendment, an additional $1.0 billion senior secured term B-5 facility (“Term B-5 Loan”, and together with the Initial Term Loans, the “Term Loans”) was made available to us, the proceeds of which were used to finance, in part, the Intralinks acquisition.
On January 31, 2020, we entered into an amendment (the “Pricing Amendment”) to our Credit Agreement dated April 16, 2018. Pursuant to the Pricing Amendment, the interest rate margin applicable to Term Loan B was reduced from LIBOR plus 2.25% to LIBOR plus 1.75%. No changes were made to the financial covenants, outstanding principal amounts or the scheduled amortization.
The Pricing Amendment was evaluated in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification 470-50, Debt-Modifications and Extinguishments, for debt modification and extinguishment accounting. We accounted for the debt re-pricing as a debt modification with respect to amounts that remained obligations of the same lender in the syndicate with minor changes in cash flows and as a debt extinguishment with respect to amounts that were obligations of lenders that exited the syndicate or remained in the syndicate but experienced a change in cash flows of greater than 10%.
The Term Loans and Revolving Credit Facility bear interest, at the election of the borrowers, at the base rate (as defined in the Credit Agreement) or LIBOR, plus the applicable interest rate margin for the credit facility. Amounts drawn on the Revolving Credit Facility initially bear interest at either LIBOR plus 2.25% or at the base rate plus 1.25%, and is subject to a step-down at any time our consolidated net secured leverage ratio is less than 4.75 times, to 2.0% in the case of the LIBOR margin and 1.0% in the case of the base rate margin. The Term B-3 Loan, Term B-4 Loan and Term B-5 Loan initially incurred interest at either LIBOR plus 2.50% or at the base rate plus 1.50%, and were subject to a step-down at any time our consolidated net secured leverage ratio was less than 4.75 times, to 2.25% in the case of the LIBOR margin and 1.25% in the case of the base rate margin. In January 2020, we entered into the Pricing Amendment, whereby the interest rate margin applicable to the term loans was reduced from LIBOR plus 2.25% to LIBOR plus 1.75%.
As of December 31, 2020, there was $1,537.0 million in principal amount outstanding under the Term B-3 Loan, $1,189.3 million in principal amount outstanding under the Term B-4 Loan and $1,759.6 million in principal amount outstanding under the Term B-5 Loan. There were no principal amounts outstanding under the Term B-1 Loan and Term B-2 Loan.
SS&C and SS&C SARL are required to make scheduled quarterly payments of 0.25% of the original principal amount of the Term B-3 Loan, Term B-4 Loan and Term B-5 Loan, with the balance due and payable on April 16, 2025. No amortization is required under the Revolving Credit Facility.
SS&C’s and SS&C SARL’s obligations under the Term Loans are guaranteed by (i) our existing and future U.S. wholly-owned restricted subsidiaries, in the case of the Term B-3 Loan, Term B-5 Loan and the Revolving Credit Facility and (ii) our existing and future wholly-owned restricted subsidiaries, in the case of the Term B-4 Loan.
The obligations of the U.S. loan parties under the Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of the assets of such persons (subject to customary exceptions and limitations), including a pledge of all of the capital stock of substantially all of the U.S. wholly-owned restricted subsidiaries of such persons (with customary exceptions and limitations) and 65% of the capital stock of certain foreign restricted subsidiaries of such persons (with customary exceptions and limitations). All obligations of the non-U.S. loan parties under the Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of our and the other guarantors’ assets (subject to customary exceptions and limitations), including a pledge of all of the capital stock of substantially all of our wholly-owned restricted subsidiaries (with customary exceptions and limitations).
The Credit Agreement includes negative covenants that, among other things and subject to certain thresholds and exceptions, limit our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to incur debt or liens, make investments (including in the form of loans and acquisitions), merge, liquidate or dissolve, sell property and assets, including capital stock of our subsidiaries, pay dividends on our capital stock or redeem, repurchase or retire our capital stock, alter the business we conduct, amend, prepay, redeem or purchase subordinated debt, or engage in transactions with our affiliates. The Credit Agreement also contains customary representations and warranties, affirmative covenants and events of default, subject to customary thresholds and exceptions. In addition, the Credit
Agreement contains a financial covenant for the benefit of the Revolving Credit Facility requiring us to maintain a minimum consolidated net secured leverage ratio. In addition, under the Credit Agreement, certain defaults under agreements governing other material indebtedness could result in an event of default under the Credit Agreement, in which case the lenders could elect to accelerate payments under the Credit Agreement and terminate any commitments they have to provide future borrowings.
Senior Notes
On March 28, 2019, we issued $2.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 5.5% Senior Notes due 2027 (“Senior Notes”), the proceeds of which were used to repay a portion of the outstanding Term B-3 Loan under our existing senior secured credit facilities. The Senior Notes are guaranteed, jointly and severally, by SS&C Holdings and all of its existing and future domestic restricted subsidiaries that guarantee our existing senior secured credit facilities or certain other indebtedness. The Senior Notes are unsecured senior obligations that are equal in right of payment to all of our existing and future senior unsecured indebtedness. Interest on the Senior Notes is payable on March 30 and September 30 of each year.
At any time prior to March 30, 2022, we may, at our option, redeem the Senior Notes, in whole or in part, at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Senior Notes, plus an applicable “make-whole” premium, plus accrued and unpaid interest to the redemption date. At any time on or after March 30, 2022, we may redeem some or all of the Senior Notes, in whole or in part, at the redemption prices set forth in the indenture governing the Senior Notes plus accrued and unpaid interest to the redemption date. In addition, at any time on or before March 30, 2022, we may to redeem up to 40% of the aggregate principal amount of the Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to 105.5% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest to the redemption date, with the net proceeds of one or more equity offerings. We may also, from time to time in our sole discretion, purchase, redeem, or retire our senior notes, through tender offers, in privately negotiated or open market transactions, or otherwise.
The indenture governing the Senior Notes contains a number of covenants that restrict, subject to certain thresholds and exceptions, our ability and the ability of our domestic restricted subsidiaries to incur debt or liens, make certain investments, pay dividends, dispose of certain assets, or enter into transactions with its affiliates. Any event of default under the Credit Agreement that leads to an acceleration of those amounts due also results in a default under the indenture governing the Senior Notes.
As of December 31, 2020, there was $2.0 billion in principal amount of Senior Notes outstanding.
On April 16, 2018, we redeemed all of the outstanding principal amount of our Prior Senior Notes utilizing a portion of the proceeds from the Initial Term Loans described above. The redemption of the Prior Senior Notes required the payment of a “make-whole” premium calculated pursuant to the indenture governing the Prior Senior Notes. See Loss on extinguishment of debt within Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. In addition, on May 1, 2018, we redeemed senior notes of DST that were acquired as a part of the acquisition of DST utilizing a portion of the proceeds of the Initial Term Loans described above. The redemption of DST’s senior notes totaled $600.4 million, which included a “make-whole” premium.
Covenant Compliance
Under the Revolving Credit Facility portion of the Credit Agreement, we are required to satisfy and maintain a specified financial ratio at the end of each fiscal quarter if the sum of (i) outstanding amount of all loans under the Revolving Credit Facility and (ii) all non-cash collateralized letters of credit issued under the Revolving Credit Facility in excess of $20 million is equal to or greater than 30% of the total commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility. Our ability to meet this financial ratio can be affected by events beyond our control, and we cannot assure you that we will meet this ratio. Any breach of this covenant could result in an event of default under the Credit Agreement. Upon the occurrence of any event of default under the Credit Agreement, the lenders could elect to declare all amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement to be immediately due and payable and terminate all commitments to extend further credit. Any default and subsequent acceleration of payments under the Credit Agreement would have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows. Additionally, under the Credit Agreement, our ability to engage in activities such as incurring additional indebtedness, making investments and paying dividends is also tied to baskets and ratios based on Consolidated EBITDA.
Consolidated EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure used in key financial covenants contained in the Credit Agreement, which is the material facility supporting our capital structure and providing liquidity to our business. Consolidated EBITDA is defined as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”), further adjusted to exclude unusual items and other adjustments permitted in calculating covenant compliance under the Credit Agreement. We believe that the inclusion of supplementary adjustments to EBITDA applied in presenting Consolidated EBITDA is appropriate to provide additional information
to investors to demonstrate compliance with the specified financial ratio and other financial condition tests contained in the Credit Agreement.
Management uses Consolidated EBITDA to gauge the costs of our capital structure on a day-to-day basis when full financial statements are unavailable. Management further believes that providing this information allows our investors greater transparency and a better understanding of our ability to meet our debt service obligations and make capital expenditures.
Consolidated EBITDA does not represent net income or cash flow from operations as those terms are defined by generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, and does not necessarily indicate whether cash flows will be sufficient to fund cash needs. Further, the Credit Agreement requires that Consolidated EBITDA be calculated for the most recent four fiscal quarters. As a result, the measure can be disproportionately affected by a particularly strong or weak quarter. Further, it may not be comparable to the measure for any subsequent four-quarter period or any complete fiscal year.
Consolidated EBITDA is not a recognized measurement under GAAP and investors should not consider Consolidated EBITDA as a substitute for measures of our financial performance and liquidity as determined in accordance with GAAP, such as net (loss) income, operating (loss) income or net cash provided by operating activities. Because other companies may calculate Consolidated EBITDA differently than we do, Consolidated EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Consolidated EBITDA has other limitations as an analytical tool, when compared to the use of net income, which is the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, including:
•
Consolidated EBITDA does not reflect the significant interest expense we incur as a result of our debt leverage;
•
Consolidated EBITDA does not reflect the provision (benefit) of income tax expense in our various jurisdictions;
•
Consolidated EBITDA does not reflect any attribution of costs to our operations related to our investments and capital expenditures through depreciation and amortization charges;
•
Consolidated EBITDA does not reflect the cost of compensation we provide to our employees in the form of stock-based awards;
•
Consolidated EBITDA does not reflect the equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliates; and
•
Consolidated EBITDA excludes expenses and income that are permitted to be excluded per the terms of our Credit Agreement, but which others may believe are normal expenses for the operation of a business.
The following is a reconciliation of net income to Consolidated EBITDA as defined in our Credit Agreement.
(1)
Acquired EBITDA reflects the EBITDA impact of significant businesses that were acquired during the period as if the acquisition occurred at the beginning of the period, as well as cost savings enacted in connection with acquisitions.
(2)
Purchase accounting adjustments include (a) an adjustment to increase revenues by the amount that would have been recognized if deferred revenue were not adjusted to fair value at the date of acquisitions (b) an adjustment to increase personnel and
commissions expense by the amount that would have been recognized if prepaid commissions and deferred personnel costs were not adjusted to fair value at the date of the acquisitions, and (c) an adjustment to increase or decrease rent expense by the amount that would have been recognized if lease obligations were not adjusted to fair value at the date of acquisitions.
(3)
Other includes expenses and income that are permitted to be excluded per the terms of our Credit Agreement from Consolidated EBITDA, a financial measure used in calculating our covenant compliance. These include expenses and income related to foreign currency transactions, investment gains and losses, facilities and workforce restructuring, legal settlements, business combinations and other items.
Our covenant requirement for net senior secured leverage ratio and the actual ratio for the year ended December 31, 2020 are as follows:
(1)
Calculated as the ratio of consolidated net secured funded indebtedness, net of cash and cash equivalents, to Consolidated EBITDA, as defined by the Credit Agreement, for the period of four consecutive fiscal quarters ended on the measurement date. Consolidated net secured funded indebtedness is comprised of indebtedness for borrowed money, letters of credit, deferred purchase price obligations and capital lease obligations, all of which is secured by liens on our property.
Critical Accounting Policies
A number of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by our management, and such judgments are reflected in the amounts reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements. In applying these policies, our management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of estimates. Those estimates are based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, management’s observation of trends in the industry, information provided by our clients and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, goodwill and other intangible assets and other contingent liabilities. Actual results may differ significantly from the estimates contained in our Consolidated Financial Statements. Information about recently adopted accounting pronouncements and accounting pronouncements not yet effective is included in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. We believe that the following are our critical accounting policies.
Accounting for investments
We have five significant types of investments: 1) investments in unconsolidated affiliates; 2) partnership interests in private equity funds; 3) investments in marketable equity securities related to our deferred compensation agreements; 4) non-marketable equity securities; and 5) seed capital investments.
The equity method of accounting is used for investments in entities, partnerships and similar interests (including investments in private equity funds for which we are a limited partner and hold a greater than 5% partnership interest in the fund) in which we have significant influence but do not control. Under the equity method, we recognize income or losses from our pro-rata share of these unconsolidated affiliates’ net income or loss, which changes the carrying value of the investment of the unconsolidated affiliate.
Our investments in unconsolidated affiliates are accounted for under the equity method of accounting. The carrying value of our investments in unconsolidated affiliates exceeds the proportionate share of net assets of the unconsolidated affiliates, resulting in basis differences. We recognize our proportionate share of the results of the unconsolidated affiliates and amortization expense related to basis differences in equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliates, net on our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss).
Our partnership interests in private equity funds, marketable equity securities and seed capital investments, other than those accounted for under the equity method of accounting or those that result in consolidation of the investee, are recorded at fair value, with changes in the fair value recognized in other income (expense), net on our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss). Our marketable equity securities and seed capital investments have readily determinable fair values in the market. We use net asset value as a practical expedient for the fair value of partnership interests in private equity funds that are not accounted for under the equity method of accounting.
Investments in non-marketable equity securities that do not have readily determinable fair values and do not qualify for the practical expedient to measure the investment using a net asset value per share are recorded using the measurement alternative in Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-01. These investments are recorded at cost, less impairment, adjusted for observable price changes in orderly transactions for an identical or similar investment of the same issuer. At each reporting period, we assess if
these investments continue to qualify for this measurement alternative. Impairment is recorded when there is evidence that the expected fair value of the investment has declined to below the recorded cost. Future adverse changes in market conditions or poor operating results of underlying investments could result in losses or an inability to recover the carrying value of the investments that may not be reflected in an investment’s current carrying value, thereby possibly requiring an impairment charge in the future, which could have a material effect on our financial position.
Long-lived Assets, Intangible Assets and Goodwill
We must test goodwill annually for impairment (and in interim periods if certain events occur indicating that the carrying value of goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets may be impaired) by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value. Judgement is required in the determination of goodwill reporting units. On July 1, 2020, our reporting unit structure changed as a result of a change in our management structure. As of December 31, 2019 and through June 30, 2020, we had two reporting units, one which included the DST business, and one which includes the rest of our operations. As of July 1, 2020 and through December 31, 2020, we continue to have two reporting units, though one is our health business and the other includes the rest of our operations. To the extent that we do not achieve our revenue or operating cash flow plans or other measures of fair value decline, including external valuation assumptions, our current goodwill carrying value could be impaired. Our impairment analysis indicated that the fair values of our reporting units significantly exceeded their carrying values at December 31, 2020.
We assess the impairment of identifiable intangibles, long-lived assets and goodwill whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Factors we consider important which could trigger an impairment review include the following:
●
significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results;
●
significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business; and
●
significant negative industry or economic trends.
When we determine that the carrying value of intangibles and long-lived assets may not be recoverable based upon the existence of one or more of the above indicators of potential impairment, we assess whether an impairment has occurred based on whether net book value of the assets exceeds related projected undiscounted cash flows from these assets. We consider a number of factors, including past operating results, budgets, economic projections, market trends and product development cycles in estimating future cash flows. Differing estimates and assumptions as to any of the factors described above could result in a materially different impairment charge, if any, and thus materially different results of operations.
Software Capitalization
Significant management judgement is required in determining which projects and costs associated with software development will be capitalized and in assigning estimated economic lives to the completed projects. Management specifically evaluates software development projects, milestones achieved and the commitments to continue funding the projects. Significant changes in any of these items may result in discontinuing capitalization of development costs, as well as immediately expensing previously capitalized costs. We review, on a quarterly basis, our capitalized software for possible impairment.
Acquisition Accounting
In connection with our acquisitions, we allocate the purchase price to the assets and liabilities we acquire, such as net tangible assets, completed technology, customer relationships, other identifiable intangible assets, deferred revenue and goodwill. We apply significant judgments and estimates in determining the fair market value of the assets acquired and their useful lives. For example, we have determined the fair value of existing client contracts based on the discounted estimated net future cash flows from such client contracts existing at the date of acquisition and the fair value of the completed technology based on the relief-from-royalties method on estimated future revenues of such completed technology and assumed obsolescence factors. While actual results during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were consistent with our estimated cash flows and we did not incur any impairment charges during those years, different estimates and assumptions in valuing acquired assets could yield materially different results.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenues consist of software-enabled services and license, maintenance and related revenues.
Software-enabled services revenues, which are based on a monthly fee or are transaction-based, are recognized as the services are performed. Software-enabled services are generally provided under contracts with initial terms of one to five years that require
monthly or quarterly payments, and are subject to automatic annual renewal at the end of the initial term unless terminated by either party.
We recognize software-enabled services revenues on a monthly basis as the arrangement is a single performance obligation or a stand-ready performance obligation, which in either case is comprised of a series of distinct services that are substantially the same and have the same pattern of transfer to the customer (i.e. distinct days or months of service). We apply a measure of progress (typically time-based) to any fixed consideration and allocate variable consideration to the distinct periods of service based on usage or summarization of account information. These variable payments relate specifically to our efforts to perform the services in the period in which the fee applies. This variability is solely attributed to and resolved as a result of the transfer of these services; these fees are independent of the transfer of past or future goods or services. These fees meet the allocation objective of ASC 606 because they represent the amount of consideration we are entitled to for these services. Revenue is generally recognized over the period the services are provided, which results in revenue recognition that corresponds with the value to the client of the services transferred to date relative to the remaining services promised.
We generate revenues in the form of software license fees and related maintenance and services fees. License fees include perpetual license fees and term license fees that differ mainly in the duration over which the customer benefits from the software. Maintenance and services primarily consist of fees for maintenance services (including support and unspecified upgrades and enhancements when and if they are available) and, in some cases, professional services which focus on both deployment and training our customers to fully leverage the use of our products.
Software license revenues are recognized at the point of time when the software license has been delivered. Term license fees are typically due in annual installments at the beginning of each annual period and we record a contract asset for amounts recognized as revenue in excess of amounts billed. We recognize maintenance revenues ratably over the term of the underlying contract term because we transfer control evenly by providing a stand-ready service. The term of the maintenance contract on a perpetual license is usually one year and the duration of a term license contract is usually between one to five years. Renewals of maintenance contracts create new performance obligations that are satisfied over the term with the revenues recognized ratably over the term. Revenues from professional services consist mostly of services provided on a time and materials basis.
In contracts with multiple performance obligations, we account for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. We allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on our relative standalone selling price out of total consideration of the contract. Standalone selling price is determined utilizing observable prices to the extent available. If the standalone selling price for a performance obligation is not directly observable, we estimate it maximizing the use of observable inputs. For maintenance and support, we determine the standalone selling price based on the price at which we separately sell a renewal contract and the economic relationship between licenses and maintenance. We primarily determine the standalone selling price for sales of license arrangements using the residual approach. For professional services, we determine the standalone selling prices based on the price at which we separately sell those services.
We occasionally enter into license agreements requiring significant customization of our software that are not material to our results of operations. We account for the license and professional service fees under these agreements as a single performance obligation, recognized over time using an input method during the development of the license. This method requires estimates to be made for costs to complete the agreement utilizing an estimate of development man-hours remaining. Revenue is recognized each period based on the hours incurred to date compared to the total hours expected to complete the project. Due to uncertainties inherent in the estimation process, it is at least reasonably possible that completion costs will be revised. Such revisions are recognized in the period in which the revisions are determined. Provisions for estimated losses on uncompleted contracts are determined on a contract-by-contract basis, and are made in the period in which such losses are first estimated or determined.
Depreciation of Fixed Assets
For personal property, we generally prefer to own rather than lease the property when practicable. We believe this approach provides us with better flexibility for disposing or redeploying the asset as it nears the completion of its economic life. Management judgement is required in assigning economic lives to fixed assets. Management specifically analyzes fixed asset additions, remaining net book values and gain/loss upon disposition of fixed assets to determine the appropriateness of assigned economic lives. Significant changes in any of these items may result in changes in the economic life assigned and the resulting depreciation expense.
Stock-based Compensation
Using the fair value recognition provisions of relevant accounting literature, stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the value of the award and is recognized as expense over the appropriate service period. Determining the fair
value of stock-based awards requires considerable judgment, including estimating the expected term of stock options and the expected volatility of our stock price. A deferred income tax asset is recorded over the vesting period as stock compensation expense is recorded for non-qualified stock options. The realizability of the deferred tax asset is ultimately based on the actual value of the stock-based award upon exercise. If the actual value is lower than the fair value determined on the date of grant, then there would be an income tax expense for the portion of the deferred tax asset that is not realizable.
Income Taxes
The carrying value of our deferred tax assets assumes that we will be able to generate sufficient future taxable income in certain tax jurisdictions, based on estimates and assumptions. If these estimates and related assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record additional valuation allowances against our deferred tax assets resulting in additional income tax expense in our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss). On a quarterly basis, we evaluate whether deferred tax assets are realizable and assess whether there is a need for additional valuation allowances. The carrying value of our deferred tax assets and liabilities is recorded based on the statutory rates that we expect our deferred tax assets and liabilities to reverse into income. We estimate the state rate at which our deferred tax assets and liabilities will reverse based on estimates of state income apportionment for future years. Each of these estimates requires significant judgment on the part of our management. In addition, we evaluate the need to provide additional tax provisions for adjustments proposed by taxing authorities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $114.7 million in liabilities associated with unrecognized tax benefits. All of the unrecognized tax benefits, if recognized, would decrease our effective tax rate and increase our net income. Additionally, we recognize accrued interest and penalties relating to unrecognized tax benefits as a component of the income tax provision.