Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Trebia Acquisition Corp. (the "Company") is a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on February 11, 2020. The Company was formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the private placement of the Private Placement Warrants, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial Business Combination, shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
The registration statements for the Company’s Initial Public Offering became effective on June 16, 2020. On June 19, 2020, the Company consummated the Initial Public Offering of 51,750,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units sold, the “Public Shares”), which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 6,750,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $517,500,000. Each Unit consists of one share of our Class A common stock and one-third of one redeemable warrant. Each whole Public Warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of our Class A common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. The registration statements for the Company’s Initial Public Offering became effective on June 16, 2020. On June 19, 2020, the Company consummated the Initial Public Offering of 51,750,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units sold, the “Public Shares”), which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 6,750,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $517,500,000. The proceeds from the Private Placement Warrants were added to the net proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account.
Following our Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $517,500,000 was placed in the Trust Account. Transaction costs amounted to $29,241,089, consisting of $10,350,000 of underwriting fees, $18,112,500 of deferred underwriting fees and $778,589 of other offering costs.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial Business Combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our Initial Public Offering and identifying a target company for our initial Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective Business Combination candidates.
For the period from February 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $806,028, which consists of formation and operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company’s only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of Class B ordinary shares by our sponsor and loans from our sponsor.
For the period from February 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $402,768. Net loss of $806,028 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $403,260 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $517,500,000 held in the Trust Account. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes paid and deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. During the period ended December 31, 2020, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $843,643 outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete our initial Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with our initial Business Combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender.
In June 5, 2020, the Company entered into a forward purchase agreement with Cannae Holdings, a diversified holding company which is externally managed by Trasimene Capital Management, LLC but is not an affiliate of the Company or the Sponsors, pursuant to which Cannae Holdings will purchase Class A ordinary shares in an aggregate share amount equal to 7,500,000 Class A ordinary shares, plus an aggregate of 2,500,000 redeemable warrants to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share, for an aggregate purchase price of $75,000,000, or $10.00 per Class A ordinary share, in a private placement to occur concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination. The warrants to be issued as part of the forward purchase agreement will be identical to the warrants sold as part of the units in our offering. In connection with the forward purchase securities sold to Cannae Holdings, the Sponsors will receive (by way of an adjustment to their existing Class B ordinary shares) an aggregate number of additional Class B ordinary shares so that the initial shareholders, in the aggregate, on an as-converted basis, will hold 20% of the Company's Class A ordinary shares at the time of the closing of the Business Combination. The obligations under the forward purchase agreement do not depend on whether any Class A ordinary shares are redeemed by the public shareholders.
Under the forward purchase agreement, the Company will provide a right of first offer to Cannae Holdings, if the Company proposes to raise additional capital by issuing any equity, or securities convertible into, exchangeable or exercisable for equity securities, other than the units and certain excluded securities. In addition, if the Company seeks shareholder approval of a Business Combination, Cannae Holdings has agreed under the forward purchase agreement to vote any Class A ordinary shares owned by Cannae Holdings in favor of any proposed initial Business Combination.
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. Our officers, directors and sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The full impact of the COVID-19 outbreak continues to evolve. The impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, related advisories and restrictions, and the availability of a vaccine. These developments and the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on the financial markets and the overall economy are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. If the financial markets and/or the overall economy continue to be impacted for an extended period, our ability to complete our initial Business Combination may be materially adversely affected due to significant governmental measures being implemented to contain the COVID-19 outbreak or treat its impact, including travel restrictions, and the shutdown of businesses and quarantines, among others, which may limit our ability to have meetings with potential investors or affect the ability of a potential target company's personnel, vendors and service providers to negotiate and consummate our initial Business Combination in a timely manner.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements within the meaning of the applicable SEC rules as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our sponsors a monthly fee up to $10,000 for office space and administrative support services. We began incurring these fees on the closing of our offering and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $18,112,500 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
On June 5, 2020, the Company entered into a forward purchase agreement with Cannae Holdings, a diversified holding company which is externally managed by Trasimene Capital Management, LLC but is not an affiliate of the Company or the Sponsors, pursuant to which Cannae Holdings will purchase Class A ordinary shares in an aggregate share amount equal to 7,500,000 Class A ordinary shares, plus an aggregate of 2,500,000 redeemable warrants to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share, for an aggregate purchase price of $75,000,000, or $10.00 per Class A ordinary share, in a private placement to occur concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination. The warrants to be issued as part of the forward purchase agreement will be identical to the warrants sold as part of the units in our offering. In connection with the forward purchase securities sold to Cannae Holdings, the Sponsors will receive (by way of an adjustment to their existing Class B ordinary shares) an aggregate number of additional Class B ordinary shares so that the initial shareholders, in the aggregate, on an as-converted basis, will hold 20% of the Company's Class A ordinary shares at the time of the closing of the Business Combination. The obligations under the forward purchase agreement do not depend on whether any Class A ordinary shares are redeemed by the public shareholders.
Under the forward purchase agreement, the Company will provide a right of first offer to Cannae Holdings, if the Company proposes to raise additional capital by issuing any equity, or securities convertible into, exchangeable or exercisable for equity securities, other than the units and certain excluded securities. In addition, if the Company seeks shareholder approval of a Business Combination, Cannae Holdings has agreed under the forward purchase agreement to vote any Class A ordinary shares owned by Cannae Holdings in favor of any proposed initial Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net (Loss) per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A redeemable common stock outstanding for the period. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for and Class B non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net loss less income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of shares of Class B non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.