Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
OVERVIEW
We are an innovative biopharmaceutical company developing novel approaches to activate the immune system and address serious medical needs. Our proprietary platform of Toll-like immune receptor activators has applications in mitigation of radiation injury and radiation oncology. We combine our proven scientific expertise and our depth of knowledge about our products’ mechanisms of action into a passion for developing drugs to save lives. Our most advanced product candidate is entolimod, an immune-stimulatory agent, which we are developing as a radiation countermeasure and other indications in radiation oncology. We conduct business in the U.S. and Russia through two subsidiaries, one of which is wholly owned, BioLab 612, which was dissolved in November 2020; and one of which is owned in collaboration with a financial partner, Panacela. In addition, we conducted business with a former subsidiary, Incuron, which will pay us a 2% royalty on future commercialization, licensing, or sale of certain technology we sold to Incuron. We also partner in a joint venture, GPI, with Everon Biosciences, Inc. See Item 1, "Business" for more information on our product candidates and our strategic partnerships.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Merger with Cytocom, Inc.
As previously disclosed, on October 16, 2020, the Company, Merger Sub, and Cytocom entered into the Merger Agreement, pursuant to which, among other matters, and subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the conditions set forth in the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub will merge with and into Cytocom, with Cytocom continuing as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company and the surviving corporation of the merger. Subject to the terms and conditions of the Merger Agreement, at the effective time of the Merger, each outstanding share of Cytocom common stock, each outstanding share of Cytocom preferred stock that was not, by its terms, converted into shares of Cytocom common stock immediately prior to the effective time of the merger, and each vested restricted stock unit of Cytocom will be converted into the right to receive a number of shares of the Company’s common stock determined by the application of an exchange formula set forth in the Merger Agreement. The exchange formula provides that the total number of shares of the Company’s common stock to be issued as merger consideration for the Cytocom’s capital stock will, upon issuance, be equal to approximately 61% of the outstanding shares of the combined company’s common stock. Accordingly, under the exchange ratio formula in the Merger Agreement, as of immediately after the Merger, the former Cytocom stockholders are expected to own approximately 61% of the outstanding shares of the combined company’s common stock on a fully diluted basis and stockholders of the Company as of immediately prior to the Merger are expected to own approximately 39% of the outstanding shares of the combined company’s common stock on a fully diluted basis. Certain adjustments to this ratio will be made in respect of each party’s net cash at the time of the closing of the Merger, as determined in accordance with the Merger Agreement. Each unvested Cytocom restricted stock unit award will be converted into a restricted stock unit award of the Company. Immediately following the effective time of the Merger, the board of directors of the Company will consist of seven members, three of whom will be designated by the Company and four of whom will be designated by Cytocom. In addition, upon the closing of the Merger, Cytocom’s Chief Executive Officer, Michael Handley, will serve as Chief Executive Officer of the combined company. The closing of the Merger is subject to the satisfaction or waiver of certain conditions including, among other things, (i) the required approvals by the Company’s stockholders, (ii) the accuracy of the respective representations and warranties of each party, subject to certain materiality qualifications, (iii) compliance by the parties with their respective covenants, (iv) the absence of any law or order preventing the Merger and related transactions, (v) the shares of the Company’s common stock to be issued in the Merger being approved for listing (subject to official notice of issuance) on Nasdaq as of the closing and (vi) a registration statement on Form S-4 having become effective in accordance with the provisions of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and not being subject to any stop order or proceeding (or threatened proceeding by the SEC) seeking a stop order with respect to such registration statement that has not been withdrawn.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has continued to affect multiple countries, including the United States, where a national emergency was declared, and several European and Asian countries. The continued spread of COVID-19 in the United States and worldwide, as well as the government-ordered shutdown and shelter-in-place orders imposed to counter the pandemic, have led to severe disruptions to the global economy. In this connection, on March 20, 2020, the Governor of New York announced that 100% of the workforce of all businesses, excluding essential services, must stay home. During the effectiveness of this order, we implemented a work-from-home policy for all employees based in our Buffalo, New York headquarters. Under new applicable state orders, our offices may be occupied at 50% of their normal capacity if other safety precautions are taken, however, generally very few of our employees have returned to the office. We are continuing to monitor the situation and will take such further action as may be required by federal, state or local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees. COVID-19 and the governmental responses to it may cause us to experience disruptions that could severely impact our business, operations, preclinical studies and clinical trials. The global outbreak of COVID-19 continues to rapidly evolve and has begun to have indeterminable adverse effects on general commercial activity and the world economy. The extent to which COVID-19 may impact our business, research and development efforts, preclinical studies, clinical trials, prospects for regulatory approval of our drug candidates, and operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the ultimate geographic spread of the disease, the duration of the outbreak, the pace and effectiveness of vaccination efforts, the extent and duration of travel restrictions and social distancing in the United States and other countries, business closures or business disruptions and the effectiveness of actions taken in the United States and other countries to contain and treat the disease. In addition, a recession or market correction resulting from the spread of COVID-19 could materially affect our business prospects and the value of our common stock. Furthermore, if we or any of the third parties with whom we engage were to experience or re-experience shutdowns or other business disruptions, our ability to conduct our business in the manner and on the timelines presently planned could be materially and negatively impacted, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Registered Direct Offering
As previously disclosed, on February 19, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the "Purchase Agreement") with several healthcare-focused and institutional investors for the sale by the Company of 2,000,000 shares (the "Shares") of the Company’s common stock at a purchase price of $7.00 per share, in a registered direct offering. The closing of the sale of the Shares under the Purchase Agreement occurred on February 23, 2021. The gross proceeds to the Company from the transaction were approximately $14 million, before deducting the placement agent’s fees and other estimated offering expenses. The Shares were offered and sold by the Company under a prospectus supplement and accompanying prospectus filed with the SEC pursuant to an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3, which was filed with the SEC on May 21, 2020 and subsequently declared effective on May 29, 2020 (File No. 333-238578). Under the Company’s engagement letter (the "Engagement Letter") with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC ("Wainwright"), pursuant to which Wainwright agreed to serve as exclusive placement agent for the issuance and sale of the Shares and Warrants, the Company agreed to pay Wainwright an aggregate fee equal to 7.25% of the gross proceeds received by the Company from the sale of the securities in the transaction as well as a management fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds received by the Company from the sale of the securities in the transactions. Pursuant to the Engagement Letter, the Company also issued to designees of Wainwright warrants to purchase up to 7.5% of the aggregate number of shares of Common Stock sold in the transactions, or warrants to purchase up to 150,000 shares of Common Stock (the "Placement Agent Warrants"). Subject to certain ownership limitations, the Placement Agent Warrants are immediately exercisable at an exercise price of $8.75 per share of Common Stock, subject to customary adjustments as provided under the terms of the Placement Agent Warrants. The Warrants are exercisable for five years from the commencement of sales of the shares being offered.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. ("GAAP"). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses.
On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued expenses, income taxes, stock-based compensation, investments, and in-process R&D. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the fee is fixed and determinable, collectability is reasonably assured, contractual obligations have been satisfied and title and risk of loss have been transferred to the customer. We generate our revenue from two different types of contractual arrangements: (i) cost-reimbursement grants and contracts and (ii) fixed-price grants and contracts. Costs consist primarily of actual internal labor charges, subcontractor and material costs incurred, plus an allocation of fringe benefits, overhead and general and administrative expenses ("G&A"), and applicable fees, if any, based on the terms of the contract.
Revenues on cost-reimbursement grants and contracts are recognized in an amount equal to the costs incurred during the period, plus an estimate of the applicable fee earned. The estimate of the applicable fee earned is determined by reference to the contract; if the contract defines the fee in terms of risk-based milestones and specifies the fees to be earned upon the completion of each milestone, then the fee is recognized when the related milestones are earned. Otherwise, we compute fee income earned in a given period by using a proportional performance method based on costs incurred during the period as compared to total estimated project costs and application of the resulting fraction to the total project fee specified in the grant or contract.
Revenues on fixed-price grants and contracts are recognized using a percentage-of-completion method, which uses assumptions and estimates, as appropriate. These assumptions and estimates are developed in coordination with the principal investigator performing the work under the fixed-price grant or contract to determine levels of accomplishments throughout the life of the grant or contract.
Stock-Based Compensation
We expense all share-based awards to employees and consultants, including grants of stock options and shares, based on their estimated fair value at the date of grant. Costs of all share-based payments are recognized over the requisite service period that an employee or consultant must provide to earn the award (i.e., the vesting period) and allocated to the functional operating expense associated with that employee or consultant.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The carrying value of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, short-term investments, accounts payable and accrued expenses approximates fair value due to the relatively short maturity of these instruments. Certain common stock warrants, which are classified as liabilities, are recorded at their fair market value as of each reporting period.
The measurement of fair value requires the use of techniques based on observable and unobservable inputs. Observable inputs reflect market data obtained from independent sources, while unobservable inputs reflect our market assumptions. The inputs create the following fair value hierarchy:
•
Level 1 - Quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets.
•
Level 2 - Quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and model-derived valuations where inputs are observable or where significant value drivers are observable.
•
Level 3 - Instruments where significant value drivers are unobservable to third parties.
We use the Black-Scholes model to determine the fair value of certain common stock warrants on a recurring basis and classify such warrants in Level 3. The Black-Scholes model utilizes inputs consisting of: (i) the closing price of our common stock; (ii) the expected remaining life of the warrants; (iii) the expected volatility using historical volatilities of CBLI; and (iv) the risk-free market rate.
As of December 31, 2020, there was $0.00 million in accrued expenses relating to Level 3 securities for warrants to purchase common stock.
Income Taxes
Determining the consolidated provision for income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities and related valuation allowance, if any, involves judgment. On an on-going basis, we evaluate whether a valuation allowance is needed to reduce our deferred income tax assets to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized. The evaluation process includes assessing historical and current results in addition to future expected results. Upon determining that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets, an adjustment to the deferred tax valuation allowance would increase income in the period we make such determination.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development ("R&D") costs are expensed as incurred. Advance payments are deferred and expensed as performance occurs. R&D costs include the cost of our personnel (which consists of salaries and incentive and stock-based compensation), out-of-pocket preclinical and clinical trial costs usually associated with contract research organizations, drug product manufacturing and formulation, and a pro-rata share of facilities expense and other overhead items.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative ("G&A") functions include executive management, finance and administration, government affairs and regulations, corporate development, human resources, and legal and compliance. The specific costs include the cost of our personnel consisting of salaries, incentive and stock-based compensation, out-of-pocket costs usually associated with attorneys (both corporate and intellectual property), bankers, accountants and other advisors, and a pro-rata share of facilities expense and other overhead items.
Other Income and Expenses
Other recurring income and expenses primarily consists of interest income on our investments, changes in the market value of our derivative financial instruments, and foreign currency transaction gains or losses.
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 COMPARED TO YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019
Revenue
Revenue decreased from $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease of $0.8 million, or 76%, primarily due to a decrease in revenue from the JWMRP DoD contract and PRMRP DoD grant for preclinical studies, and the Incuron service contract for continued preclinical development. We do not anticipate any revenues from JWMRP or PRMRP in 2021 due to the completion of the contract and grant in 2020. Service revenue from Incuron is also expected to cease as our service contract was not extended.
Since these revenue sources are cost reimbursable in nature, variances in these activities, period to period, are directly aligned with variances in the underlying costs of service. Differences in our revenue sources, by program, between 2020 and 2019 are set forth in the following table:
The following table sets forth information regarding our recently completed grant contracts as of December 31, 2020:
Contract modifications with the DoD were entered into during the third quarter of 2020 that reduced the JWMRP and PRMRP funded awards from an aggregate of $15,800,447 to an aggregate of $3,773,463, as reflected in the table above.
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses decreased from $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease of $1.0 million, or 58%. Variances in individual development programs are noted in the table below. Significant reductions include the $0.6 million reduction of funds spent on entolimod for biodefense indication due to reduced preclinical development activity resulting from our previously disclosed vendor delays in the analytical analyses required to complete the biocomparability study and the FDA having not agreed with the Company's conclusions regarding the biocomparability study until earlier this year, which has prevented further development progress from occurring, and a decrease of $0.3 million related to Curaxins. We anticipate that R&D expenses associated with the development of our drug candidates will increase in 2021 as we plan to address some FDA questions concerning our pre-EUA submission. However, should the FDA have additional questions regarding the pre-EUA submission, we could conduct additional significant unplanned studies as necessary to respond to the FDA questions, within the confines of current funding limitations.
General and Administrative Expenses
G&A expenses increased from $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $0.4 million, or 19%. This increase consisted primarily of a $0.5 million increase in professional fees associated with activities related to the potential Cytocom merger and the filing of the Company's Form S-3 Registration Statement, a $0.15 million increase in other costs for cash awards to certain members of the Company's board of directors, and a $0.08 million increase in CBLI's property taxes compared 2019 when we received a property tax refund, partially offset by a $0.4 million decrease in personnel and consulting costs.
Other Income and Expenses
Other income and expense changed from $0.3 million of other expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.1 million of other income for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an income increase of $0.4 million, or 145%. This increase was related to a $0.9 million increase in other income resulting from the 2020 reversal of an approximate $0.5 million revenue loss contingency recorded in 2019, and $0.05 million in foreign exchange gains realized upon the dissolution of BioLab 612, offset by a $0.5 million decrease in other income resulting from changes in the market value of our warrant liability.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred net losses of approximately $169.1 million from our inception through December 31, 2020. Historically, we have not generated, and do not expect to generate in the immediate future, revenue from sales of product candidates. Since our founding in 2003, we have funded our operations through a variety of means:
•
From inception through December 31, 2020, we have raised $147.9 million of net equity capital, including amounts received from the exercise of options and warrants. We have also received $7.3 million in net proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt instruments;
•
DoD and the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA), within the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, have funded grants and contracts totaling $48.4 million for the development of entolimod for its biodefense indication;
•
The Russian Federation has funded a series of contracts totaling $17.3 million, based on the exchange rates in effect on the date of funding. These contracts included requirements for us to contribute matching funds, which we have satisfied with both the value of developed intellectual property at the time of award, incurred development expenses and future expenses;
•
We have been awarded $4.0 million in grants and contracts not described above, all of which has been recognized at December 31, 2020;
•
Incuron was formed to develop and commercialize the Curaxins product line, including its lead oncology drug candidate CBL0137. In 2015, we sold our ownership interest for approximately $4.0 million and retained a 2% royalty interest in the CBL0137 technology; and
•
Panacela was formed to develop and commercialize preclinical compounds, which were transferred to Panacela through assignment and lease agreements. Rusnano contributed $9.0 million to Panacela and CBLI contributed $3.0 million plus intellectual property to Panacela. As of the date of this filing, CBLI owns 67.57% of Panacela.
We have incurred cumulative net losses and expect to incur additional losses related to our R&D activities. We do not have commercial products and have limited capital resources. As of December 31, 2020, we had $2.3 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments which are expected to fund our projected operating requirements and allow us to fund our operating plan, in each case, into April 2022. Since December 31, 2020, we raised additional capital as a result of the registered direct offering we completed on February 23, 2021, resulting in net proceeds to us of approximately $12.7 million. However, until we are able to commercialize our product candidates at a level that covers our cash expenses, we will need to raise substantial additional capital, which we may be unable to raise in sufficient amounts, when needed and at acceptable terms. Additionally, the continued spread of COVID-19 and uncertain market conditions may limit the Company's ability to access capital. Our plans with regard to these matters may include seeking additional capital through debt or equity financing in public or private transactions, the sale or license of drug candidates, or obtaining additional research funding from the U.S. or Russian governments. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain future financing on acceptable terms, or at all, or that we can obtain additional government financing for our operations. If we are unable to raise adequate capital and/or achieve profitable operations, future operations might need to be scaled back or discontinued. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability of the carrying amount of recorded assets and liabilities that might result from the outcome of these uncertainties.
In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic may negatively impact our ability to complete our planned preclinical and clinical trials, our ability to obtain approval of any product candidates from FDA or other regulatory authorities and our workforce and therefore our research and development activities. This may ultimately have a material adverse effect on our liquidity, although we are unable to make any prediction with certainty given the rapidly changing nature of the pandemic and governmental and other responses to it.
Operating Activities
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operations decreased by $0.3 million to $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in operating activities for the period ending December 31, 2020 consisted of a reported net loss of $2.4 million, which was further increased by $0.1 million of net non-cash operating activities, and decreased by $0.1 million due to changes in operating assets and liabilities. The $0.1 million of net non-cash operating activities consisted principally of changes in the valuation of our warrant liability offset by the gain on extinguishment of a 2019 revenue loss contingency. The net $0.1 million change in operating assets and liabilities was due to a continued decrease in working capital relating to accounts receivable and accounts payable. Net cash used in operating activities for the period ending December 31, 2019 consisted of reported net loss of $2.7 million, which was further increased by $0.1 million of net non-cash operating activities and offset by a $0.1 million change in operating assets and liabilities. The net non-cash operating activities of $0.1 million consisted principally of changes in the valuation of our warrant liability. The net $0.1 million change in operating assets and liabilities consisted primarily of an increase in accrued expenses related to a revenue loss contingency.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities decreased by $0.1 million to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net cash provided by investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 consisted primarily of the net sales of short-term investments.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $3.2 million to $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $0.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of proceeds from issuance of common stock and the exercise of warrants.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2020.