ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Quarterly Report. This section includes a number of forward-looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that reflect our current views with respect to future events and financial performance. All statements that address expectations or projections about the future, including, but not limited to, statements about our plans, strategies, adequacy of resources and future financial results (such as revenue, gross profit, operating profit, cash flow), are forward-looking statements. Some of the forward-looking statements can be identified by words like “anticipates,” “believes,” “expects,” “may,” “will,” “can,” “could,” “should,” “intends,” “project,” “predict,” “plans,” “estimates,” “goal,” “target,” “possible,” “potential,” “would,” “seek,” and similar references to future periods. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve a number of risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict. Because these forward-looking statements are based on estimates and assumptions that are subject to significant business, economic and competitive uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control or are subject to change, actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what is expressed or forecasted in these forward-looking statements. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from these forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to: negative outcome of pending and future claims and litigation; our ability to access the capital markets by pursuing additional debt and equity financing to fund our business plan and expenses on terms acceptable to us or at all; and our ability to comply with our contractual covenants, including in respect of our debt; potential cost overruns and possible rejection of our business model and/or sales methods; weakness in general economic conditions and levels of capital spending by customers in the industries we serve; weakness or volatility in the financial and capital markets, which may result in the postponement or cancellation of our customers’ capital projects or the inability of our customers to pay our fees; delays or reductions in U.S. government spending; credit risks associated with our customers; competitive market pressures; the availability and cost of qualified labor; our level of success in attracting, training and retaining qualified management personnel and other staff employees; changes in tax laws and other government regulations, including the impact of health care reform laws and regulations; the possibility of incurring liability for our business activities, including, but not limited to, the activities of our temporary employees; our performance on customer contracts; and government policies, legislation or judicial decisions adverse to our businesses. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date hereof. We assume no obligation to update such statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. We recommend readers to carefully review the entirety of this Annual Report, including the “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report and the other reports and documents we file from time to time with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), particularly our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and our Current Reports on Form 8-K.
Overview
We are incorporated in the State of Delaware. As a rapidly growing public company in the international staffing sector, our high-growth business model is based on finding and acquiring suitable, mature, profitable, operating, U.S. and U.K. based staffing companies. Our targeted consolidation model is focused specifically on the Professional Business Stream and Commercial Business Stream disciplines.
Recent Developments
COVID-19
In December 2019, a strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China, and has spread globally, resulting in government-imposed quarantines, travel restrictions and other public health safety measures in affected countries. The COVID-19 pandemic is impacting worldwide economic activity, and activity in the United States and the United Kingdom where our operations are based. Much of the independent contractor work we provide to our clients is performed at the site of our clients. As a result, we are subject to the plans and approaches our clients have made to address the COVID-19 pandemic, such as whether they support remote working or if they have simply closed their facilities and furloughed employees. To the extent that our clients were to decide or are required to close their facilities, or not permit remote work when they close facilities, we would no longer generate revenue and profit from that client. In addition, in the event that our clients’ businesses suffer or close as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we may experience decline in our revenue or write-off of receivables from such clients. Moreover, developments such as social distancing and shelter-in-place directives have impacted our ability to deploy our staffing workforce effectively, thereby impacting contracts with customers in our commercial staffing and professional staffing business streams, where we have had declines in revenues during Q2 2020, Q3 2020 and Q4 2020 compared with the respective periods in 2019. While some government-imposed precautionary measures have been relaxed in certain countries or states, more strict measures have been or may be put in place again due to a resurgence in COVID-19 cases, as has occurred recently in the United Kingdom in response to the spread of a new strain of COVID-19. As a result of the newly imposed government restrictions in the United Kingdom, we had to close both of our offices in the United Kingdom, and our employees have been forced to operate remotely from their homes. Employees are returning to our offices in the United Kingdom on a voluntary basis on March 29, 2021. Therefore, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic may continue to affect our operation and to disrupt the marketplace in which we operate and may negatively impact our sales in fiscal year 2021 and our overall liquidity.
While the ultimate economic impact brought by, and the duration of, the COVID-19 pandemic may be difficult to assess or predict, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and the actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, among others, the pandemic has resulted in significant disruptions in general commercial activity and the global economy and caused financial market volatility and uncertainty in significant and unforeseen ways in the recent months. A continuation or worsening of the levels of market disruption and volatility seen in the recent past could have an adverse effect on our ability to access capital and on the market price of our common stock, and we may not be able to successfully raise needed capital. If we are unsuccessful in raising capital in the future, we may need to reduce activities, curtail or cease operations.
In addition, the continuation or worsening of the COVID-19 pandemic or an outbreak of other infectious diseases could result in a widespread health crisis that could adversely affect the economies and financial markets worldwide, resulting in an economic downturn that could impact our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Nasdaq Minimum Stockholders’ Equity Requirement
On June 3, 2020, we received a letter from the Listing Qualifications Department notifying us that we are no longer in compliance with the minimum stockholders’ equity requirement for continued listing on Nasdaq. Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(b)(1) requires listed companies to maintain stockholders’ equity of at least $2.5 million. Further, as of June 9, 2020, we did not meet the alternative compliance standards relating to the market value of listed securities or net income from continuing operations.
In accordance with the Nasdaq Listing Rules, we were afforded the opportunity to submit a plan to regain compliance with the minimum stockholders’ equity standard. Based on our submissions, the Listing Qualifications Department granted us an extension to regain compliance with Rule 5550(b)(1) until November 30, 2020.
On December 1, 2020, we received notice that because we had not met the terms of the extension, our common stock would be subject to delisting from Nasdaq, unless we timely requested a hearing before a Nasdaq Hearings Panel (the “Panel”.) We timely requested a hearing before the Panel, which automatically stayed any suspension or delisting action pending the issuance of a decision by the Panel following the hearing and the expiration of any additional extension period granted by the Panel. The hearing occurred on January 21, 2021. At the hearing, we provided the Panel with an update on our compliance plan and requested a further extension of time in which to regain compliance. On February 3, 2021, we received a letter from the Panel noting it has granted our request for an extension until February 28, 2021 to regain compliance with the minimum $2.5 million stockholders’ equity requirement, or the alternative compliance standards as set forth in Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(b)(1). On March 4, 2021 the Company received a letter extending the deadline for compliance to May 31, 2021.
Although we are taking actions intended to restore our compliance with the listing requirements, we can provide no assurance that any action taken by us will be successful. Should a delisting occur, an investor would likely find it significantly more difficult to dispose of, or to obtain accurate quotations as to the value of our common stock, and our ability to raise future capital through the sale of our common stock could be severely limited. In addition, delisting could harm our ability to raise capital through alternative financing sources on terms acceptable to us, or at all, and may result in the potential loss of confidence by investors, suppliers, customers and employees and fewer business development opportunities.
December 2020 Public Offering
On December 29, 2020, we closed the sale of an aggregate of 4,816,665 shares of common stock in an underwritten public offering (the “December 2020 Public Offering”), at an offering price to the public of $0.60 per share. We received net proceeds from the December 2020 Public Offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other estimated offering expenses payable by us, of approximately $2.4 million. We used 75% of the net proceeds from such underwritten offering to redeem a portion of our outstanding Jackson Note due September 30, 2022, and 25% of the net proceeds from such underwritten offering to redeem a portion of our Series E Preferred Stock.
December 2020 Registered Direct Offering
On December 31, 2020, we closed the sale of an aggregate of 2,662,596 shares of common stock in a registered direct offering (the “December 2020 Registered Direct Offering”), at an offering price of $0.66 per share. We received net proceeds from the December 2020 Registered Direct Offering, after deducting placement agent fees and other estimated offering expenses payable by us, of approximately $1.5 million. We used 75% of the net proceeds from such registered direct offering to redeem a portion of our outstanding Jackson Note, and 25% of the net proceeds from such registered direct offering to redeem a portion of our Base Series E Preferred Stock.
February 2021 Public Offering
On February 9, 2021, we announced the pricing of a public offering of an aggregate of 21,855,280 shares of its common stock at a public offering price of $0.90 per share (the “Offering”.) The Offering was made pursuant to the Company’s registration statement on Form S-1 initially filed on January 13, 2021, as subsequently amended and declared effective on February 9, 2021. The Offering was made only by means of a prospectus forming a part of the effective registration statement.
The Offering closed on February 12, 2021. In the Offering, the Company issued 20,851,199 shares of common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase up to 1,004,081 shares of common stock, at an exercise price of $0.0001 per share (the “Pre-funded Warrants”.) The Pre-funded Warrants were sold at $0.8999 per Pre-Funded Warrant. The Pre-funded Warrants were immediately exercisable and could be exercised at any time after their original issuance until such Pre-funded Warrants were exercised in full. The Pre-funded Warrants were exercised immediately upon issuance, and 1,004,081 shares of common stock were issued on February 12, 2021.
The net proceeds to the Company from the Offering were approximately $18.1 million, after deducting placement agent fees and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company. While the Company’s Series E Preferred Stock is outstanding, the Company is required to use the proceeds of any sales of equity securities, including the securities offered in the Offering, exclusively to redeem any outstanding shares of the Company’s Series E Preferred Stock, subject to certain limitations. On February 12, 2021, the Company used approximately 75% of the net proceeds from the Offering to redeem a portion of the outstanding Jackson Note, which had an outstanding principal amount and accrued interest of $32,710 as of February 9, 2021, and 25% of the net proceeds from the Offering to redeem a portion of the Company’s Series E Preferred Stock. Pursuant to the Limited Consent (as defined below), upon closing of the Offering, the Company redeemed a portion of the 2020 Jackson Note with an outstanding principal amount of $13,556 and interest accrued thereon and redeemed 4,518 shares of the Base Series E Preferred Stock. Following the redemption of the Base Series E Preferred Stock, the Company has 6,172 shares of Base Series E Preferred Stock outstanding with an aggregate stated value of $6,172.
Jackson Waivers
On February 5, 2021, we entered into a Limited Consent and Waiver (the “Limited Consent”) with Jackson Investment Group, LLC (“Jackson”) whereby, among other things, Jackson agreed that we may use 75% of the proceeds from the Offering to redeem a portion of the 2020 Jackson Note, which at the time had an outstanding principal amount and accrued interest of $32,710, and 25% of the net proceeds from the Offering to redeem a portion of our Base Series E Preferred Stock, notwithstanding certain provisions of the Series E Certificate of Designation that would have required us to use all the proceeds from the Offering to redeem the Base Series E Preferred Stock. In addition, we also agreed in the Limited Consent to additional limits on our ability to incur other indebtedness, including limits on advances under our revolving loan facility with MidCap Funding [X] Trust. We also agreed that to the extent that any of our PPP Loans are forgiven after the Offering, Jackson may convert the Base Series E Preferred Stock and Series E-1 Preferred Stock that remains outstanding into a secured note that is substantially similar to the 2020 Jackson Note. On April 8, 2021, the limited waiver was extended to June 17 ,2021.
Jackson also entered into a Limited Waiver and Agreement with us on February 5, 2021, whereby Jackson agreed that it would not convert any shares of the Base Series E Preferred Stock or Series E-1 Preferred Stock into shares of our common stock or exercise any warrants to purchase shares to the extent that doing so would cause the number of our authorized shares of common stock to be less than the number of shares being offered in the Offering. Jackson also waived any event of default under the Series E Certificate of Designation and the 2020 Jackson Note that would have resulted from the Company having an insufficient number of authorized shares of common stock to honor conversions of the Base Series E Preferred Stock and the exercise of Jackson’s warrants. On April 8, 2021, the limited waiver was extended to June 17 ,2021.
Business Model, Operating History and Acquisitions
We are a high-growth international staffing company engaged in the acquisition of U.S. and U.K. based staffing companies. As part of our consolidation model, we pursue a broad spectrum of staffing companies supporting primarily the Professional and Commercial Business Streams. Our typical acquisition model is based on paying consideration in the form of cash, stock, earn-outs and/or promissory notes. In furthering our business model, the Company is regularly in discussions and negotiations with various suitable, mature acquisition targets. Since November 2013, the Company has completed ten acquisitions.
Clement May Acquisition
On June 28, 2018, the Company and Staffing 360 Solutions Limited (formerly known as Longbridge Recruitment 360 Limited), a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, entered into share purchase agreements (“Share Purchase Agreements”) of the share capital of Clement May Limited (“CML”.) Consideration for the acquisition of all the shares was (i) an aggregate cash payment of £1,550 ($2,047), (ii) 15,000 shares of the Company’s common stock, (iii) the assignment of certain outstanding debt owed to the CML Majority Holder to the Principal as set forth in that Share Purchase Agreement, (iv) an earn-out payment of up to £500, the amount to be calculated and paid on or around December 28, 2019 pursuant to the Share Purchase Agreement, and (v) deferred consideration of £350, to be paid on or around June 28, 2019, depending on the satisfaction of certain conditions set forth in that Share Purchase Agreement. To finance the above transaction, the Company entered into a term loan with HSBC Bank plc.
Key Resources Inc. Acquisition
On August 27, 2018, the Company and Monroe Staffing Services, LLC (“Monroe Staffing”), an indirect subsidiary of the Company, entered into a share purchase agreement with Pamela D. Whitaker (for purposes of this paragraph, the “Seller”), pursuant to which the Seller sold 100% of the common shares of Key Resources Inc. (“KRI”) to Monroe Staffing (the “KRI Transaction”.) The KRI Transaction closed simultaneously with the signing of the share purchase agreement. The purchase price in connection with the KRI Transaction was approximately $12,163, of which (a) approximately $8,109 was paid to the Seller at closing, (b) up to approximately $2,027 is payable as earnout consideration to the Seller on August 27, 2019 and (c) up to $2,027 is payable as earnout consideration to the Seller on August 27, 2020. While the Company had recognized the liability for the earnout consideration due the seller of KRI, Pamela D. Whitaker (“Whitaker”), within current liabilities as of December 28, 2019, in February 2020 the Company filed an action against Whitaker for breach of contract, which more than offsets the earnout consideration recognized. The Company paid interest of $30 in Fiscal 2019 and $40 in Fiscal 2020. Refer to legal proceedings below for action filed against Whitaker, the former owner of KRI.
To finance the above transaction, the Company entered into an agreement with Jackson on August 27, 2018, pursuant to which the note purchase agreement dated as of September 15, 2017 was amended to add an additional senior debt investment of approximately $8,428 in the Company.
firstPRO Transaction
On September 24, 2020, we and Staffing 360 Georgia, LLC d/b/a firstPRO, our wholly-owned subsidiary (for purposes of this paragraph and the succeeding two paragraphs, the “Seller”), entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with firstPRO Recruitment, LLC (for purposes of this paragraph, the “Buyer”), pursuant to which the Seller sold to the Buyer substantially all of the Seller’s assets used in or related to the operation or conduct of its professional staffing and recruiting business in Georgia (the “Assets,” and such sale, the “firstPRO Transaction”). In addition, the Buyer agreed to assume certain liabilities related to the Assets. The purchase price in connection with the firstPRO Transaction was $3,300, of which (a) $1,220 was paid at closing (the “Initial Payment”) and (b) $2,080 was held in a separate escrow account (the “Escrow Funds”), which will be released upon receipt of the forgiveness of the Seller’s Paycheck Protection Program loan by the SBA. In the event that all or any portion of the PPP Loan is not forgiven by the SBA, all or portion of the certain funds being held in escrow will be used to repay any unforgiven portion of the PPP Loan in full. The firstPRO Transaction closed on September 24, 2020. In September, we submitted the PPP Loan forgiveness applications to the SBA. As of the date of this filing, the PPP Loan has not been approved for forgiveness, and there is no guarantee that all or portion of the PPP Loan will be forgiven.
In connection with execution of the Asset Purchase Agreement, we and certain of our subsidiaries entered into a Consent Agreement with Jackson (the “Consent”), a noteholder pursuant to that certain Amended and Restated Note Purchase Agreement, dated as of September 15, 2017, as amended (the “Existing Note Purchase Agreement”). Under the terms of the Consent and the Series E Certificate of Designation, in consideration for Jackson’s consent to the firstPRO Transaction, the Initial Payment was used to redeem a portion of the Series E Preferred Stock, and the Escrow Funds, subject to the forgiveness of PPP Loan discussed above, will be used to redeem a portion of the Series E Preferred Stock. As this provision results in a contingent redemption feature, approximately $2.1 million of the Series E Preferred Stock was reclassified to mezzanine equity during the year ended January 2, 2021.
To induce the Buyer to enter into the Asset Purchase Agreement, the Seller also entered into a Transition Services Agreement with the Buyer, pursuant to which each party will provide certain transition services to minimize any disruption to the businesses of the Seller and the Buyer arising from the firstPRO Transaction.
For Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019
Revenue
Fiscal 2020 revenue decreased by 26.6% to $204,527 as compared with $278,478 for Fiscal 2019. Of that decline, $74,386 was attributable to organic revenue decline, slightly offset by $435 of favorable foreign currency translation. Within organic revenue, temporary contractor revenue declined $69,321 and permanent placement declined $5,065. The revenue decline in 2020 as compared to 2019 is the result of the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic. In addition, the sale of firstPRO in September 2020 resulted in 9 months of revenue for fiscal 2020 versus 12 months in fiscal 2019.
Revenue in Fiscal 2020 was comprised of $198,066 of temporary contractor revenue and $6,461 of permanent placement revenue, compared with $266,974 and $11,504 for Fiscal 2019, respectively.
Cost of revenue, Gross profit and gross margin
Cost of revenue includes the variable cost of labor and various non-variable costs (e.g., workers’ compensation insurance) relating to employees (temporary and permanent) as well as sub-contractors and consultants. For Fiscal 2020, cost of revenue was $169,714, a decrease of 26.3% from $230,169 in Fiscal 2019, compared with revenue decline of 26.6%.
Gross profit for Fiscal 2020 was $34,813, a decrease of 27.9% from $48,309 for Fiscal 2019, representing gross margin of 17.0% and 17.3% for each period, respectively. The decline was driven by $13,557 of organic decline and only nine months of activity for firstPRO, slightly offset by $61 of favorable foreign currency translation.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses for Fiscal 2020 were $43,593, a decrease of 8.6% from $47,686 for Fiscal 2019. The decrease in operating expenses was driven by headcount reductions, only nine months of activity for firstPRO, goodwill impairment of firstPRO, lower variable costs and savings attributable to synergies within the subsidiaries, and cost savings initiatives.
Other Expenses
Other expenses for Fiscal 2020 were $6,962, an increase of 19.0% from $5,852 in Fiscal 2019. The increase was driven by the following: $41 interest income restructuring charge in Fiscal 2020 versus $0 in Fiscal 2019; a $124 gain on sales of firstPRO in Fiscal 2020 versus a gain of $1,077 on CBS Butler earnout settlement in Fiscal 2019 and $847 gain on settlement of firstPRO deferred consideration in Fiscal 2019. These were partially offset by $584 gain in remeasuring the intercompany note in Fiscal 2020 compared with a gain of $383 in Fiscal 2019; other income of $125 in Fiscal 2020 versus $326 in Fiscal 2019; $433 lower interest expense recorded in Fiscal 2020 versus Fiscal 2019 due to the restructuring of $35 million debt in Fiscal 2020; and $298 of lower net amortization of debt discount and deferred financing costs.
Non-GAAP Measures
To supplement our consolidated financial statements presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), we also use non-GAAP financial measures and Key Performance Indicators (“KPIs”) in addition to our GAAP results. We believe non-GAAP financial measures and KPIs may provide useful information for evaluating our cash operating performance, ability to service debt, compliance with debt covenants and measurement against competitors. This information should be considered as supplemental in nature and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. In addition, these non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly entitled measures reported by other companies.
We present the following non-GAAP financial measure and KPIs in this report:
Revenue and Gross Profit by Business Streams We use this KPI to measure the Company’s mix of Revenue and respective profitability between its two main lines of business due to their differing margins. For clarity, these lines of business are not the Company’s operating segments, as this information is not currently regularly reviewed by the chief operating decision maker to allocate capital and resources. Rather, we use this KPI to benchmark the Company against the industry.
The following table details Revenue and Gross Profit by Business Streams:
Adjusted EBITDA This measure is defined as net loss attributable to common stock before: interest expense, benefit from (provision for) income taxes; income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax; other (income) expense, net, in operating income (loss); amortization and impairment of intangible assets; impairment of goodwill; depreciation; operational restructuring and other charges; other income (expense), net, below operating income (loss); non-cash expenses associated with stock compensation; and charges the Company considers to be non-recurring in nature such as legal expenses associated with litigation, professional fees associated potential and completed acquisitions. We use this measure because we believe it provides a more meaningful understanding of the profit and cash flow generation of the Company.
(1) Acquisition, capital raising and other non-recurring expenses primarily relate to capital raising expenses, acquisition and integration expenses and legal expenses incurred in relation to matters outside the ordinary course of business. In addition, the Company included non-recurring expenses related to salaries, rent and bad debts which were a direct result of the Covid-19 pandemic. Due to government mandated restrictions, the Company had to temporarily close all of its offices and, due to social distancing restrictions, could not make full use of these facilities for significant periods of time during the year, both in the US and UK. These restrictions are still ongoing in 2021. The Company calculated an adjustment of $1.4 million for the time these offices were closed or partially not used due to Covid-19 related restrictions. In addition, the Company reduced headcounts throughout the Company. The reduction in 2019 related to performance and in 2020 related to Covid-19 staff reductions. These positions are no longer included in the current cost structure. The Company had internal staff of 291 just before the onset of the pandemic and 196 by the end of the Fiscal 2020. Salary adjustments are standard treatment for adjustment to EBITDA for management reporting purposes.
(2) Other non-cash charges primarily relate to staff option and share compensation expense, expense for shares issued to directors for board services, and consideration paid for consulting services.
(3) Adjusted EBITDA of Divested Business for the period prior to the divestment date.
(4) Pro Forma Adjusted EBITDA excludes the Adjusted EBITDA of Divested Business for the period prior to the divestment date.
(5) Adjusted Gross Profit excludes gross profit of business divested in September 2020, for the period prior to divestment date.
Operating Leverage This measure is calculated by dividing the growth in Adjusted EBITDA by the growth in Gross Profit, on a trailing 12-month basis. We use this KPI because we believe it provides a measure of the Company’s efficiency for converting incremental gross profit into Adjusted EBITDA.
Leverage Ratio Calculated as Total Debt, Net, gross of any Original Issue Discount, divided by Pro Forma Adjusted EBITDA for the trailing 12-months. We use this KPI as an indicator of the Company’s ability to service its debt prospectively.
Operating Cash Flow Including Proceeds from Accounts Receivable Financing calculated as net cash (used in) provided by operating activities plus net proceeds from accounts receivable financing. Because much of the Company’s temporary payroll expense is paid weekly and in advance of clients remitting payment for invoices, operating cash flow is often weaker in staffing companies where revenue and accounts receivable are growing. Accounts receivable financing is essentially an advance on client remittances and is primarily used to fund temporary payroll. As such, we believe this measure is helpful to investors as an indicator of the Company’s underlying operating cash flow.
The Leverage Ratio and Operating Cash Flow Including Proceeds from Accounts Receivable Financing should be considered together with the information in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section, immediately below.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate funds to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations, and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. Historically, we have funded our operations through term loans, promissory notes, bonds, convertible notes, private placement offerings and sales of equity.
Our primary uses of cash have been for professional fees related to our operations and financial reporting requirements and for the payment of compensation, benefits and consulting fees. The following trends may occur as the Company continues to execute on its strategy:
● An increase in working capital requirements to finance organic growth,
● Addition of administrative and sales personnel as the business grows,
● Increases in advertising, public relations and sales promotions for existing and new brands as we expand within existing markets or enter new markets,
● A continuation of the costs associated with being a public company, and
● Capital expenditures to add technologies.
Our liquidity may be negatively impacted by the significant costs associated with our public company reporting requirements, costs associated with newly applicable corporate governance requirements, including requirements under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and other rules implemented by the Securities and Exchange Commission. We expect all of these applicable rules and regulations could significantly increase our legal and financial compliance costs and increase the use of resources.
For Fiscal 2020 the Company had a working capital deficiency of $20,793, an accumulated deficit of $92,179, and a net loss of $15,642.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), which contemplate continuation of the Company as a going concern. The Company has unsecured payment due in the next 12 months associated with a historical acquisition and secured current debt arrangements which are in excess of cash and cash equivalents on hand, in addition to funding operational growth requirements. Historically, the Company has funded such payments either through cash flow from operations or the raising of capital through additional debt or equity. If the Company is unable to obtain additional capital, such payments may not be made on time. Additionally, with the onset of COVID-19 pandemic, there is further uncertainty related to our future revenues, gross profit and cash flows. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments or classifications that may result from the possible inability of the Company to continue as a going concern.
Operating activities
For Fiscal 2020, net cash used in operations of $14,256 was primarily attributable to changes in operating assets and liabilities totalling $7,800 and a net loss of $15,642, offset by non-cash adjustments of $9,186. Changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily relates to a decrease in accounts receivable of $7,314, decrease in other assets of $941, increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $1,659, decrease in other current liabilities of $2,058, and decrease in other long-term liabilities of $1,657, offset by increase in accounts payable - related party of $1,598, increase in prepaid expenses of $427, and increase in other of $424. Non-cash add backs of $9,186 primarily relates to amortization of intangible assets and depreciation of $3,275, right of use assets amortization of $1,521, amortization of debt discount and deferred financing of $559, stock-based compensation of $637, bad debt expense of $933, and write-off of goodwill of $2,969, offset by remeasurement gain on intercompany note of $584 and gain on sale of subsidiary of $124.
For Fiscal 2019, net cash used in operations of $10,840 was primarily attributable to changes in operating assets and liabilities totalling $10,230 and a net loss of $4,894, offset by non-cash adjustments of $4,284. Changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily relates to an increase in accounts receivable of $7,574, increase in other assets of $2,123, decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $1,893, decrease in other current liabilities of $94, and decrease in other long-term liabilities of $85, offset by increase in accounts payable - related party of $1,114, decrease in prepaid expenses of $367, and increase in other of $58. Non-cash add backs of $4,284 primarily relates to amortization of intangible assets and depreciation of $3,369, right of use assets amortization of $1,533, amortization of debt discount and deferred financing of $857, and stock-based compensation of $832, offset by remeasurement gain on intercompany note of $383 and gain on settlement of deferred consideration of $1,924.
Investing activities
For Fiscal 2020, net cash flows provided by investing activities was $11,697, of which $8,654 was from the collection of UK factoring facility deferred purchase price and $3,300 was attributable to proceeds from the sale of a subsidiary, partially offset by purchase of property and equipment of $257.
For Fiscal 2019, net cash flows provided by investing activities was $13,460, of which $13,970 was related to the collection of the UK factoring facility deferred purchase price, partially offset by purchase of property and equipment of $510.
Financing activities
For Fiscal 2020, net cash flows provided by financing activities totalled $11,553, of which $2,426 relates to repayments on accounts receivable financing, net, payment of third-party financing costs of $795, dividends paid to related parties of $3,333, redemption of Series E Preferred Stock of $1,920, repayment of term loans of $4,734; and financing costs - related party of $488; offset by proceeds from equity raise of $4,634, proceeds from PPP loans of $19,395 and proceeds from term loans of $1,220.
For Fiscal 2019, net cash flows used in financing activities totalled $4,389, of which $2,708 relates to repayments on accounts receivable financing, net, payment on deferred consideration for $6,230, payment of third-party financing costs of $1,154, dividends paid to related parties of $1,175, dividends paid to shareholders of $337, and repayment on HSBC loan of $650; financing costs - related party of $188; offset by proceeds from equity raise of $5,515 and proceeds from related party term loan of $2,538.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
See Note 2 in the accompanying financial statements.