Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements reflect the Company’s current views with respect to, among other things, future events and the Company’s financial performance. These statements are often, but not always, made through the use of words or phrases such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “predict,” “potential,” “believe,” “will likely result,” “expect,” “continue,” “will,” “anticipate,” “seek,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan,” “projection,” “would” and “outlook,” or the negative version of those words or other comparable words or phrases of a future or forward-looking nature. These forward-looking statements are not historical facts, and are based on current expectations, estimates and projections about the Company’s industry, management’s beliefs and certain assumptions made by management, many of which, by their nature, are inherently uncertain and beyond the Company’s control. Accordingly, the Company cautions that any such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks, assumptions and uncertainties that are difficult to predict. Although the Company believes that the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are reasonable as of the date made, actual results may prove to be materially different from the results expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements.
There are or will be important factors that could cause the Company’s actual results to differ materially from those indicated in these forward-looking statements, including, but not limited to, the risks described in “Part I-Item 1A. -Risk Factors” and the following:
● natural disasters and adverse weather (including the effects of recent hurricanes, tropical storms, tropical depressions and winter storms on the Company’s market area), acts of terrorism, pandemics, an outbreak of hostilities or other international or domestic calamities and other matters beyond the Company’s control;
● the Company’s ability to manage the economic risks related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the sustained instability in the oil and gas industry (including risks related to its customers’ credit quality, deferrals and modifications to loans, the Company’s ability to borrow, and the impact of a resultant recession generally);
● the geographic concentration of the Company’s markets in Houston and Beaumont, Texas;
● the Company’s ability to manage changes and the continued health or availability of management personnel;
● the amount of nonperforming and classified assets that the Company holds and the time and effort necessary to resolve nonperforming assets;
● deterioration of asset quality;
● interest rate risk associated with the Company’s business;
● national business and economic conditions in general and in the financial services industry and within the Company’s primary markets;
● volatility and direction of oil prices, including risks related to the collapse and instability in oil prices, and the strength of the energy industry, generally and within Texas;
● the composition of the Company’s loan portfolio, including the identity of the Company’s borrowers and the concentration of loans in specialized industries, including the creditworthiness of energy company borrowers;
● changes in the value of collateral securing the Company’s loans;
● the Company’s ability to maintain important deposit customer relationships and its reputation;
● the Company’s ability to maintain effective internal control over financial reporting;
● the Company’s ability to pursue available remedies in the event of a loan default for PPP loans and the risk of holding such loans at unfavorable interest rates and on terms that are less favorable than those with customers to whom the Company would have otherwise lent;
● volatility and direction of market interest rates;
● liquidity risks associated with the Company’s business;
● systems failures, interruptions or breaches involving the Company’s information technology and telecommunications systems or third-party servicers;
● the failure of certain third-party vendors to perform;
Table
● the institution and outcome of litigation and other legal proceedings against the Company or to which it may become subject;
● the operational risks associated with the Company’s business;
● the costs, effects and results of regulatory examinations, investigations, including the ongoing investigation by the FinCEN, or reviews or the ability to obtain required regulatory approvals;
● the Company’s ability to meet the requirements of the Agreement with the OCC, and the risk that such Agreement may have a negative impact on the Company’s financial performance and results of operations;
● changes in the laws, rules, regulations, interpretations or policies relating to financial institution, accounting, tax, trade, monetary and fiscal matters;
● governmental or regulatory responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and newly enacted fiscal stimulus that impact the Company’s loan portfolio and forbearance practice;
● further government intervention in the U.S. financial system that may impact how the Company achieves its performance goals; and
● other risks, uncertainties, and factors that are discussed from time to time in reports and documents filed with the SEC.
The foregoing factors should not be construed as exhaustive and should be read together with the other cautionary statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. If one or more events related to these or other risks or uncertainties materialize, or if the Company’s underlying assumptions prove to be incorrect, actual results may differ materially from what is anticipated. Additionally, many of these risks and uncertainties are currently elevated by and may or will continue to be elevated by the COVID-19 pandemic and the sustained instability of the oil and gas industry. Undue reliance should not be placed on any such forward-looking statements. Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date made, and the Company does not undertake any obligation to publicly update or review any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise. New factors emerge from time to time, and it is not possible to predict which will arise. In addition, the Company cannot assess the impact of each factor on its business or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “Part II-Item 6.-Selected Financial Data” and the consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis includes forward-looking statements that are subject to certain risks and uncertainties and are based on certain assumptions that the Company believes are reasonable but may prove to be inaccurate. Certain risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those set forth in “Part I-Item 1A.-Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, may cause actual results to differ materially from those projected results discussed in the forward-looking statements appearing in this discussion and analysis. The Company assumes no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Overview
The Company operates through one segment, community banking. The Company’s primary source of funds is deposits and its primary use of funds is loans. Most of the Company’s revenue is generated from interest on loans and investments. The Company incurs interest expense on deposits and other borrowed funds as well as noninterest expense, such as salaries and employee benefits and occupancy expenses.
The Company’s operating results depend primarily on net interest income, calculated as the difference between interest income on interest-earning assets, such as loans and securities, and interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings. Changes in market interest rates and the interest rates earned on interest-earning assets or paid on interest-bearing liabilities, as well as in the volume and types of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, are usually the largest drivers of periodic changes in net interest spread, net interest margin and net interest income. Fluctuations in market interest rates are driven by many factors, including governmental monetary policies, inflation, deflation, macroeconomic developments, changes in unemployment, the money supply, political and international conditions and conditions in domestic and foreign financial markets.
Periodic changes in the volume and types of loans in the Company’s loan portfolio are affected by, among other factors, economic and competitive conditions in Texas, as well as developments affecting the real estate, technology,
Table
financial services, insurance, transportation, manufacturing and energy sectors within the Company’s target markets and throughout the state of Texas. The Company maintains diversity in its loan portfolio as a means of managing risk associated with fluctuations in economic conditions. The Company’s focus on lending to small to medium-sized businesses and professionals in its market areas has resulted in a diverse loan portfolio comprised primarily of core relationships. The Company carefully monitors exposure to certain asset classes to minimize the impact of a downturn in the value of such assets.
The Company seeks to remain competitive with respect to interest rates on loans and deposits, as well as prices on fee-based services, which are typically significant competitive factors within the banking and financial services industry. Many of the Company’s competitors are much larger financial institutions that have greater financial resources and compete aggressively for market share. Through the Company’s relationship-driven, community banking strategy, a significant portion of its growth has been through referral business from its existing customers and professionals in the Company’s markets including attorneys, accountants and other professional service providers.
The Bank is the subject of an investigation by FinCEN regarding the Bank’s compliance with the BSA/AML. The Bank is cooperating with this investigation. The costs to respond to and cooperate with FinCEN’s investigation have been material over the course of the period of the investigation, and the Bank may continue to incur material fees and expenses regarding this matter at least through the completion of FinCEN’s investigation.
On June 18, 2020, the Bank and the OCC entered into an Agreement, with regard to BSA/AML compliance matters. The Agreement generally requires that the Bank enhance its policies and procedures to comply with BSA/AML laws and regulations. Specifically, the Agreement requires the Bank to take certain actions, including, but not limited to: (i) establishing a Compliance Committee to oversee the Bank’s compliance with the Agreement; (ii) ensuring that the BSA/AML staff has sufficient authority and resources to fulfill its responsibilities; (iii) developing, implementing, and adhering to a written program of policies and procedures to provide for compliance with the BSA, including with respect to model risk management for automated monitoring systems; (iv) establishing policies and procedures for performing customer due diligence/enhanced due diligence and customer risk identification processes; (v) adopting and adhering to an independent BSA/AML audit program; (vi) developing, implementing, and adhering to a comprehensive training program for all appropriate Bank employees to ensure their awareness of their responsibility for compliance with the requirements of the BSA, the Bank’s relevant policies, procedures, and processes, and of relevant examples of red flags for money laundering, terrorist financing, and suspicious activity; and (vii) performing a review of account and transaction activity for certain time periods.
The Bank’s Board of Directors and management are committed to taking the necessary actions to fully address the provisions of the Agreement within the timeframes identified in the Agreement. Numerous actions have already been taken or commenced by the Bank to strengthen its BSA/AML compliance practices, policies, procedures and controls. However, a finding by the OCC that the Bank failed to comply with the Agreement could result in additional regulatory scrutiny, further constraints on the Bank’s business, or a further enforcement action, including civil money penalties. Any of those events could have a material adverse impact on the Company’s future operations, financial condition, growth or other aspects of its business. Further, the Bank has hired and expects to continue to hire third-party consultants and advisors to assist in complying with the Agreement, which will increase non-interest expense and reduce earnings.
Information Regarding COVID-19 Impact and Uncertain Economic Outlook
Since the latter half of the first quarter of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken in response to it, combined with the sustained instability in the oil and gas industry, have negatively impacted the global economy and financial markets. The Company’s markets, including its primary markets in Houston and Beaumont are particularly subject to the financial impact of the sustained instability in the oil and gas industry. As a result of these factors and the impact on the loan portfolio, the Company increased the ACL and provision for credit losses during the year ended December 31, 2020, which negatively impacted the Company’s net income. The COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing, and the future impact cannot be determined at this point, but it could materially affect the Company’s future financial and operational results. See “Part I-Item 1A.-Risk Factors.”
Table
Loans with a risk grade of substandard, past due loans, loans individually evaluated for credit losses and nonperforming assets increased during 2020, primarily as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and sustained instability in the oil and gas industry on the Company’s borrowers. The risk gradings of the Company’s loan portfolio, past due loans, loans individually evaluated and nonperforming loans as of the dates indicated below were as follows:
In support of customers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company offered relief through payment deferrals during 2020. The deferral periods ranged from one to six-months, with the majority of the deferrals involving three-month arrangements. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had 21 loans subject to such deferral arrangements with total outstanding principal of $38.4 million, down from 41 loans subject to deferral arrangement with total outstanding principal of $82.4 million as of September 30, 2020 and down from 689 loans subject to deferral arrangement with total outstanding principal of $545.0 million at June 30, 2020. Of the 21 loans subject to deferral arrangements at December 31, 2020, 18 loans totaling $35.1 million were scheduled to revert to their original payment schedules in the first quarter of 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company participated in PPP financing under the CARES Act. See “Part II-Item 7.-Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Financial Condition-Loan Portfolio” and “Part I-Item 1A.-Risk Factors.”
Table
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 vs Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net income was $26.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $50.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $24.1 million was primarily due to an increase of $16.5 million in the provision for credit losses during 2020 and a $7.4 million decrease in net interest income. See further analysis of these changes in the related discussions that follow.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income was $128.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $136.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net interest income decreased $7.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to higher average interest-bearing deposits, lower rates on loans, securities and other interest-earning assets, partially offset by the impact of lower rates on deposits and increased average loans and other interest-earning assets.
The yield on interest-earning assets was 3.98% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 4.95% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The cost of interest-bearing liabilities was 0.57% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 1.07% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company’s net interest margin on a tax equivalent basis was 3.73% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 4.42% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Yields on interest-earning assets decreased and the costs of interest-bearing liabilities did not decrease to the same extent, which caused compression of the Company’s net interest margin on a tax equivalent basis during 2020.
The yield on loans for the year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by the Company’s participation in PPP financing as PPP loans are at unfavorable interest rates relative to other loans the Company originates. The Company recognized a net yield of 2.79% on PPP loans during the year ended December 31, 2020. Without PPP loans, the Company’s average yield on loans would have been 4.75% instead of 4.60%.
Interest earned on PPP loans for the year ended December 31, 2020 included the recognition of $4.0 million of origination fee income, net of associated costs, related to PPP loans. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $4.2 million of deferred loan fees and costs related to PPP loans outstanding.
On January 19, 2021, the Company began participating in the second round of PPP financing, which may negatively impact the average yield on loans in 2021 depending on the number of loans the Company originates under the PPP.
Table
The following table presents for the periods indicated, average outstanding balances for each major category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, the interest income or interest expense and the average yield or rate for the periods indicated.
(1) Includes average outstanding balances related to loans held for sale.
(2) Net interest spread is the average yield on interest-earning assets minus the average rate on interest-bearing liabilities.
(3) Net interest margin is equal to net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets.
(4) Tax equivalent adjustments of $1.1 million and $1.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, were computed using a federal income tax rate of 21%.
Table
The following table presents information regarding changes in interest income and interest expense for the periods indicated for each major component of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and distinguishes between the changes attributable to changes in volume and changes attributable to changes in interest rates. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume that cannot be segregated have been allocated to rate.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses is an income adjustment used to maintain the ACL at a level deemed appropriate by management to absorb inherent losses on existing loans. The provision for credit losses was $18.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $16.5 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the sustained instability of the oil and gas industry, an increase in adversely graded loans and an increase in charge-offs.
Noninterest Income
The following table presents components of noninterest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and the period-over-period changes in the categories of noninterest income:
Noninterest income was $14.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $18.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in noninterest income during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to earnings on bank-owned life insurance. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company received nontaxable death proceeds of $2.0 million under the bank-owned life insurance policies and recorded a gain of $769,000 over the carrying value recorded. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company received nontaxable death benefit proceeds of $4.7 million under bank-owned life insurance policies and a gain of $3.3 million over the carrying value recorded. In addition, deposit account service charges decreased due to a reduction in the amount of insufficient funds and overdraft fees charged on deposit accounts and lower transactional volumes.
Table
Noninterest Expense
Generally, noninterest expense is composed of employee expenses and costs associated with operating facilities, obtaining and retaining customer relationships and providing bank services. See further analysis of these changes in the related discussions that follow.
Noninterest expense was $92.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $90.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in noninterest expense of $2.0 million between the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was primarily due to a $1.3 million increase in professional and director fees, a $934,000 increase in data processing and software costs, a $660,000 increase in regulatory fees, partially offset by an $807,000 decrease in salaries and employee benefits. The increase in professional and director fees during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to $3.9 million in consulting related fees associated with BSA/AML compliance matters, compared to $18,000 during the year ended December 31, 2019, partially offset by lower legal fees of $721,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense was $6.0 million and $11.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The amount of income tax expense for each year was impacted by the amounts of pre-tax income, tax-exempt income and other nondeductible expenses. Income tax expense and effective tax rates for the periods shown below were as follows:
The differences between the federal statutory rate of 21% and the effective tax rates presented in the table above were primarily related to tax-exempt interest and bank-owned life insurance. The decrease in the effective rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to tax-exempt gains related to the bank-owned life insurance.
Table
Year Ended December 31, 2019 vs Year Ended December 31, 2018
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased 6.8%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily due to increased net interest income and noninterest income, partially offset by a higher provision for credit losses and higher noninterest expense. See further analysis of these changes in the related discussions that follow.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $136.0 million, compared to $124.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $11.3 million, or 9.1%. Net interest income increased in 2019, compared to 2018, primarily due to increases in average loan yields and volume, partially offset by increased average rates on interest-bearing deposits and higher average Federal Home Loan Bank advances. Loan growth during 2019 was funded through increased interest-bearing deposits, noninterest-bearing deposits and Federal Home Loan Bank advances. During 2019, the costs of interest-bearing deposits trended upward due to competitive stress on rates but remain a low-cost source of funds, as compared to other sources of funds such as debt.
Table
The following table presents for the periods indicated, average outstanding balances for each major category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, the interest income or interest expense and the average yield or rate for the periods indicated.
(1) Includes average outstanding balances of loans held for sale.
(2) Net interest spread is the average yield on interest-earning assets minus the average rate on interest-bearing liabilities.
(3) Net interest margin is equal to net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets.
(4) Tax equivalent adjustments of $1.0 million and $1.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, were computed using a federal income tax rate of 21%.
Table
The following tables present information regarding changes in interest income and interest expense for the periods indicated for each major component of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and distinguishes between the changes attributable to changes in volume and changes attributable to changes in interest rates. For purposes of these tables, changes attributable to both rate and volume that cannot be segregated have been allocated to rate.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses is an income adjustment used to maintain the ACL at a level deemed appropriate by management to absorb inherent losses on existing loans. The provision for credit loss was $2.4 million for 2019, compared to a recapture of $1.8 million for 2018. The provision in 2019 resulted from increases in loans during that period. The recapture in 2018 resulted from strong credit quality, continuing low nonperforming and impaired loans, minimal charge-off history and an increase in recoveries during the year.
Noninterest Income
The following table presents components of noninterest income for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 and the period-over-period changes in the categories of noninterest income
During the year ended December 31, 2019, noninterest income increased $4.4 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to increased earnings on bank-owned life insurance and increased swap origination fees.
The Company has purchased life insurance policies on certain employees, that are carried at their cash surrender value on the consolidated balance sheet and changes in the cash surrender value of the policies are recorded in noninterest income. Earnings on bank-owned life insurance increased $3.2 million, during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, due to nontaxable death benefit proceeds of $4.7 million received under bank-owned life insurance policies. The Company recorded a gain of $3.3 million over the carrying value during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Table
Other interest income includes a variety of other income-producing activities, including partnership and investment fund income, other loan fees, swap origination charges, wire transfer fees, credit card program income and fee income. Other noninterest income increased during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to an increase of $832,000 in swap origination fee income.
Noninterest Expense
Generally, noninterest expense is composed of employee expenses and costs associated with operating facilities, obtaining and retaining customer relationships and providing bank services. For the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, noninterest expense increased $8.1 million, primarily due to increased salaries and employee benefits and professional and director fees, partially offset by decreased regulatory fees. See further analysis of these fluctuations in the related discussions that follow.
Salaries and benefits increased $4.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, as a result of annual salary increases in 2019, increased bonus expense and increased stock compensation expense due to restricted stock grants.
Regulatory fees decreased $915,000 during 2019, compared to 2018, primarily due to an FDIC deposit assessment credit received in 2019.
Professional and director fees include legal, audit, loan review and consulting fees. The increase in professional and director fees of $3.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, was primarily due to increased legal fees incurred in the Bank’s response and cooperation with an investigation by FinCEN regarding the Bank’s compliance with the BSA and AML laws and regulations. The Bank incurred legal fees related to this investigation of $3.7 million and $193,000 during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Income Tax Expense
The amount of income tax expense is impacted by the amounts of pre-tax income, tax-exempt income and other nondeductible expenses. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are reflected at current income tax rates in effect for the period in which the deferred tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. As changes in tax laws or rates are enacted, deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted through the provision for income taxes.
Table
Income tax expense and effective tax rates for the periods shown below were as follows:
For 2019, the difference between the federal statutory rate of 21% and the effective tax rates presented in the table above was largely attributable to the non-taxable gain related to bank-owned life insurance and the effective tax rates for both 2019 and 2018 were impacted by tax-exempt interest income.
Financial Condition
Total assets were $3.9 billion as of December 31, 2020, compared to $3.5 billion as of December 31, 2019, an increase of $470.7 million primarily due to an increase in loans excluding loans held for sale, of $285.0 million and a $165.9 million increase in cash and cash equivalents, partially offset by an increase in the ACL for loans of $15.4 million. Total liabilities were $3.4 billion as of December 31, 2020, compared to $2.9 billion as of December 31, 2019, an increase of $459.9 million primarily due to an increase in deposits of $449.4 million. See further analysis in the related discussions that follow.
Table
Loan Portfolio
The loan portfolio by loan class as of the dates indicated was as follows:
As of December 31, 2020, loans excluding loans held for sale, totaled $2.9 billion, an increase of $285.0 million, or 10.8%, compared to $2.6 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 was impacted by the Company’s participation in PPP financing. PPP loans were $275.4 million at December 31, 2020. On January 19, 2021, the Company began participating in the second round of PPP financing.
PPP loans are subject to the regulatory requirements that would require forbearance of loan payments for a specified time or that would limit the Company’s ability to pursue all available remedies in the event of a loan default. If the borrower under the PPP loan fails to qualify for loan forgiveness, the Company is at heightened risk of holding these loans that are at unfavorable interest rates and underwriting standards as compared to the loans to customers to whom the Company would have otherwise lent. For a more detailed risk discussion about PPP loans please see “Part II-Item 1A.-Risk Factors.”
The contractual maturity of loans in the loan portfolio and loans with fixed and variable interest rates in each maturity range as of date indicated were as follows:
Table
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets include nonaccrual loans, loans that are accruing over 90 days past due and foreclosed assets. Generally, loans are placed on nonaccrual status when they become more than 90 days past due and/or the collection of principal or interest is in doubt. The components of nonperforming assets as of the dates indicated were as follows:
Nonperforming assets remain low relative to total assets at $24.0 million, or 0.61% of total assets, at December 31, 2020, compared to $977,000, or 0.03% of total assets, at December 31, 2019. The increase in nonperforming assets during the year ended December 31, 2020 was largely the result of increases in adversely graded loans and increases in past due loans primarily associated with businesses impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company expects that number of nonperforming loans may continue to increase during 2021. Please see “Part II-Item 7.-Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Information Regarding COVID-19 and Uncertain Economic Outlook.”
Troubled Debt Restructurings
The Company has certain loans that have been restructured due to borrower’s financial difficulties. The troubled debt restructurings granted during the years ending December 31, 2020 and 2019 which remain outstanding at period end were as follows:
Table
The troubled debt restructurings for the year ended December 31, 2020 in the table above include 34 loans totaling $43.1 million that were provided a deferral arrangement during 2020 as the borrower was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 31, 2020, 10 of the COVID-19 related troubled debt restructurings with principal balances totaling $22.4 million were still subject to a deferral arrangement. The Company expects that the number of troubled debt restructurings may continue to increase during 2021. Please see “Part II-Item 7.-Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Information Regarding COVID-19 and Uncertain Economic Outlook.”
Risk Gradings
As part of the on-going monitoring of the credit quality of the Company’s loan portfolio and methodology for calculating the ACL, management assigns and tracks loan grades, as described below, that are used as credit quality. The risk grades are described in “Part II-Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 6.” The internal ratings of loans as of the dates indicated were as follows:
During the year ended December 31, 2020, loans rated pass increased $252.8 million, primarily due to new loans, including PPP loans, loans rated special mention decreased $20.7 million and loans with an internal rating of substandard increased $57.8 million primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The Company maintains an ACL for loans that represents management’s best estimate of the expected credit losses and risks inherent in the loan portfolio. The amount of the ACL for loans should not be interpreted as an indication that charge-offs in future periods will necessarily occur in those amounts. In determining the ACL for loans, the Company estimates expected losses on specific loans, or groups of loans, where the probable loss can be identified and reasonably determined. The balance of the ACL for loans is based on internally assigned risk classifications of loans, historical loan loss rates, changes in the loan portfolio, overall portfolio quality, industry concentrations, delinquency trends, current and forecasted economic factors and the estimated impact of current economic conditions on certain historical loan loss rates.
Table
The ACL by loan category as of the dates shown was as follows:
The ACL was $40.6 million, or 1.39% of loans excluding loans held for sale, at December 31, 2020, compared to $25.3 million, or 0.96% of loans excluding loans held for sale, at December 31, 2019. The increase in the ACL for loans of $15.3 million during 2020 was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the sustained instability of the oil and gas industry and increased adversely graded loans and charge-offs. Please see “Part II-Item 7.-Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Information Regarding COVID-19 and Uncertain Economic Outlook” and “Part I.-Item 1A.-Risk Factors.”
The increase during the year ended December 31, 2020 was also impacted by the adoption of Accounting Standards Update, or ASU, 2016-13 Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, or CECL, effective January 1, 2020, which resulted in an increase of $874,000 in the ACL for loans. Please refer to “Part II-Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 6.” for a description of the model, factors and the methodology used by the Company to determine the ACL. Also see “Part II.-Item 7.-Management’s Discussion and Analysis-Critical Accounting Policies-Allowance for Credit Losses.”
Table
Activity in the ACL for loans for the periods indicated was as follows:
Securities
As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of the Company’s securities totaled $237.3 million compared to $231.3 million as of December 31, 2019, an increase of $6.0 million, or 2.6%. During 2020, the amortized cost of the Company’s securities portfolio increased $437,000 due to an increase in the amortized cost of the state and municipal securities primarily due to purchases outpacing maturities and the amortized cost of the Company’s collateralized mortgage obligations and mortgage-backed securities decreased primarily due to repayments exceeding purchases. The net unrealized gain on the Company’s securities increased $5.6 million due to increases in the net unrealized gains related to the Company’s state and municipal securities and mortgage-backed securities. The fair value of the securities portfolio as of the dates indicated below was as follows:
Table
The Company’s mortgage-backed securities at December 31, 2020 and 2019, were agency securities. The Company does not hold any Federal National Mortgage Loan Association, or Fannie Mae, or Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, or Freddie Mac, preferred stock, corporate equity, collateralized debt obligations, collateralized loan obligations, structured investment vehicles, private label collateralized mortgage obligations, subprime, Alt-A or second lien elements in the securities portfolio.
Contractual maturities and weighted-average yields by security type based on estimated annual income divided by the average amortized cost of the Company’s available for sale securities portfolio as of the date indicated was as follows:
The contractual maturity of a collateralized mortgage obligation or mortgage-backed security is the date at which the last underlying mortgage matures and is not a reliable indicator of their expected life because borrowers have the right to prepay their obligations at any time. The weighted-average life of the securities portfolio was 3.9 years with an estimated modified duration of 3.6 years as of December 31, 2020. A portion of the securities have contractual maturities extending beyond 10 years, bear fixed rates of interest and are collateralized by residential mortgages. Repayment of principal on these bonds is primarily dependent on the cash flows received from payments on the underlying collateral to the bond issuer and therefore, the likelihood of prepayment is impacted by the economic environment. During a period of increasing interest rates, fixed rate mortgage-backed securities do not tend to experience heavy prepayments and as a result, the average lives of these securities are lengthened. If interest rates fall, prepayments tend to increase and as a result the lives of these securities are shortened.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, securities with a carrying amount of approximately $27.3 million and $50.8 million, respectively, were pledged to secure public deposits, repurchase agreements and for other purposes required or permitted by law.
Deposits
Total deposits as of December 31, 2020 were $3.3 billion, an increase of $449.4 million, or 15.8%, compared to December 31, 2019. Noninterest-bearing deposits as of December 31, 2020 were $1.5 billion, an increase of $291.6 million, or 24.6%, compared to December 31, 2019. Total interest-bearing account balances as of December 31, 2020 were $1.8 billion, an increase of $157.8 million, or 9.5%, from December 31, 2019, primarily due to increases in money market and savings accounts, partially offset by decreases in certificates and other time deposits.
Table
The components of deposits as of the dates shown below were as follows:
The scheduled maturities of uninsured certificates of deposits or other time deposits as of the date indicated below were as follows:
Securities pledged and the letter of credit issued under the Company’s Federal Home Loan blanket lien arrangement which secure public deposits were not considered in determining the amount of uninsured time deposits.
Average balances and average rates paid on deposits for the dates indicated were as follows:
The ratio of average noninterest-bearing deposits to average total deposits was 45.2% and 43.3% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Equity Investments
Equity investments increased $1.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in the investment in Federal Home Loan Bank stock. As a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank, the Bank is required to maintain a stock investment in the Federal Home Loan Bank calculated as a percentage of aggregate outstanding mortgages, outstanding Federal Home Loan Bank advances and other financial instruments.
Premises and Equipment, Net
Premises and equipment, net increased $10.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the purchase of the land and building of a branch that was previously leased for $10.7 million.
Table
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company has outstanding interest rate swap contracts with certain customers and equal and offsetting interest rate swaps with other financial institutions entered into at the same time. These interest rate swap contracts are not designated as hedging instruments for mitigating interest rate risk. The objective of the transactions is to allow customers to effectively convert a variable rate loan to a fixed rate.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had 23 and 19 interest rate swap agreements outstanding with borrowers and financial institutions, respectively. These derivative instruments are not designated as accounting hedges and changes in the net fair value are recognized in other noninterest income. Fair value amounts are included in other assets and other liabilities.
The Company entered into a credit risk participation agreement with another financial institution during the year ended December 31, 2020. This agreement is associated with an interest rate swap related to a loan for which the Company is the lead agent bank and provides credit protection to the Company should the borrower fail to perform under the terms of the interest rate swap agreement. The fair value of the agreement is determined based on the market value of the underlying interest rate swap adjusted for credit spreads and recovery rates.
Derivative instruments outstanding as of the dates shown below were as follows:
Deferred tax assets, net
Deferred income taxes are provided for differences in financial statement carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis. The increase in deferred taxes, net during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to timing differences for the ACL. Please see “Part II-Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 20.”
Other assets
Other assets increased $12.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in the fair value of interest rate swaps of $6.0 million as noted in the table above and a $4.6 million increase in interest receivable on loans, primarily due to interest that was deferred as part of the Company’s assistance to borrowers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other liabilities
Other liabilities increased $9.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in the fair value of interest rate swaps of $6.0 million as noted in the table above and a $3.8 million increase in the ACL for unfunded commitments.
The Company’s unfunded commitments are standby letters of credit and commitments to extend credit that are not unconditionally cancellable by the Company. See “Part II-Item 7.-Management’s Discussion and Analysis-
Table
Liquidity and Capital Resources-Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements.” The liability associated with the ACL for unfunded commitments was $4.2 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $378,000 at December 31, 2019. The adoption of CECL increased the ACL for unfunded commitments by $2.9 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Liquidity measures the ability to meet current and future cash flow needs as they become due. Liquidity involves having funds for operations on an ongoing basis, maintaining reserve requirements, supporting asset growth and acquisitions or reducing assets to meet deposit withdrawals and other payment obligations and manage unexpected events. The Company’s primary source of funds has been customer deposits and the primary use of funds has been funding of loans. Historically, the cost of the Company’s deposits has been lower than other sources of funds available.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no exposure to future cash requirements associated with known uncertainties or capital expenditure of a material nature. The Company monitors its liquidity and may seek to obtain additional financing to further support its business if necessary. The composition of funding sources and uses as a percentage of average total assets for the periods indicated was as follows:
Cash and Cash Equivalents
As of December 31, 2020, cash and cash equivalents was $538.0 million, compared to $372.1 million at December 31, 2019. The net increase of $165.9 million was primarily due to net deposit inflows of $449.4 million, partially offset by outflows to fund the $285.0 million increase in loans excluding loans held for sale.
Borrowings
At December 31, 2020, the Company had access to additional liquidity through various borrowing arrangements as shown below:
(1) Outstanding amount includes $50.0 million of Federal Home Loans Bank advances and a $10.8 million letter of credit.
Table
The Federal Home Loan Bank allows the Company to borrow on a blanket floating lien status collateralized by certain loans and the blanket lien amount was $1.1 billion at both December 31, 2020 and 2019. Federal Home Loan Bank advances outstanding totaled $50.0 million at both December 31, 2020 and 2019 and these borrowings were on a long-term basis. See contractual obligations table below. At December 31, 2020, there was a $10.8 million letter of credit that was issued under this agreement and used as collateral to secure certain public deposits. After considering the outstanding advances and letter of credit, the net capacity available under the Federal Home Loan Bank Facility was $1.0 billion at both December 31, 2020 and 2019.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company also borrowed under this agreement on a short-term basis. The average outstanding balance for Federal Home Loan Bank advances for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $55.2 million and $61.6 million, respectively. The weighted-average interest rate for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 1.64% and 2.25%, respectively.
In addition to the Federal Home Loan Bank borrowings mentioned above, the Company had additional available borrowing capacity at December 31, 2020. The Company has a loan agreement with Frost Bank, which provides for a $30.0 million revolving line of credit. At December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding borrowings on this line of credit and the Company did not draw on this line of credit during 2020 or 2019. The Company maintained federal funds lines of credit with commercial banks that provided for the availability to borrow up to an aggregate of $65.0 million at December 31, 2020 and $75.0 million at December 31, 2019. There were no funds outstanding under these lines of credit as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Contractual Obligations
In the normal course of operations, the Company enters into certain contractual obligations, such as obligations for operating leases, certificates of deposits and borrowings. Future cash payments associated with the Company’s contractual obligations, as of the dates indicated were as follows:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, the Company enters into various transactions, which in accordance with GAAP, are not included in the consolidated balance sheets. These transactions are entered into to meet the customer financing needs. These transactions include commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit, which involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk and interest rate risk in excess of the amounts recognized in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
Table
Commitments associated with outstanding standby letters of credit and commitments to extend credit expiring by period as of the dates indicated below were as follows:
Standby letters of credit are conditional commitments issued to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third-party. In the event of nonperformance by the customer, the Company would be required to fund the commitment to the third-party, but the Company has rights to the collateral underlying the commitment, which can include commercial real estate, physical plant and property, inventory, receivables, cash and/or marketable securities. The Company’s credit risk associated with issuing letters of credit is essentially the same as the risk involved in extending loan facilities to its customers.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since many of the commitments may expire without being fully drawn upon, the total commitment amounts disclosed above do not necessarily represent future cash requirements.
Capital Resources
Total shareholders’ equity increased to $546.5 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $535.7 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase of $10.7 million was primarily due to current year income of $26.4 million, a $4.4 million increase in other comprehensive income and $1.9 million of stock compensation expense, partially offset by $8.9 million paid to repurchase shares of common stock, $3.0 million due to the implementation of CECL and $9.9 million of dividends to common shareholders declared during 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company repurchased 431,814 shares under its share repurchase programs at an average price of $20.62 per share and during the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company repurchased 100 shares at an average price of $27.98 per share. Shares repurchased during 2020 and 2019 were retired and returned to the status of authorized but unissued.
As a general matter, FDIC insured depository institutions and their holding companies are required to maintain minimum capital relative to the amount and types of assets they hold. The Company and the Bank are both subject to regulatory capital requirements. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company and the Bank were in compliance with all applicable regulatory capital requirements at the bank holding company and bank levels, and the Bank was classified as “well capitalized” for purposes of the FDIC’s prompt corrective action regulations. The OCC or the FDIC may require the Bank to maintain capital ratios above the required minimums and the Federal Reserve may require the Company to maintain capital ratios above the required minimums. See “Part II-Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 20.”
Interest Rate Sensitivity and Market Risk
Market risk refers to the risk of loss arising from adverse changes in interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices and other relevant market rates and prices. As a financial institution, the Company’s primary component of market risk is interest rate volatility. The Company is not subject to foreign exchange or commodity price risk and does not own any trading assets. The Company does not enter into instruments such as leveraged derivatives, financial options, financial future contracts or forward delivery contracts to reduce interest rate risk.
Table
Interest rate risk is the potential of economic losses due to future interest rate changes. These economic losses can be reflected as a loss of future net interest income and/or a decrease in current fair market values. The objective is to measure the effect on net interest income and to adjust the balance sheet to minimize the inherent risk while at the same time maximizing income. Fluctuations in interest rates will ultimately impact both the level of income and expense recorded on most of the Company’s assets and liabilities and the market value of all interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, other than those which have a short-term to maturity.
The Company has asset, liability and funds management policies that provide the guidelines for effective funds management and has established a measurement system for monitoring the net interest rate sensitivity position. The Company’s exposure to interest rate risk is managed by the Funds Management Committee of the Bank. The committee formulates strategies based on appropriate levels of interest rate risk with consideration of the impact on earnings and capital of the current outlook on interest rates, potential changes in interest rates, regional economies, liquidity, business strategies and other factors. The committee meets regularly to review, among other things, the relationships between interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, the sensitivity of assets and liabilities to interest rate changes, the book and market values of assets and liabilities, unrealized gains and losses, purchase and sale activities, commitments to originate loans and the maturities of investments and borrowings. Additionally, the committee reviews liquidity, cash flow flexibility, maturities of deposits and consumer and commercial deposit activity.
The Company uses interest rate risk simulation models and shock analyses to test the interest rate sensitivity of net interest income and fair value of equity and the impact of changes in interest rates on other financial metrics. Contractual maturities and re-pricing opportunities of loans are incorporated in the model, as are prepayment assumptions, maturity data and call options within the investment portfolio. Average life of non-maturity deposit accounts are based on standard regulatory decay assumptions and are incorporated into the model. The assumptions used are inherently uncertain and the model cannot precisely measure future net interest income or precisely predict the impact of fluctuations in market interest rates on net interest income. Actual results will differ from the model’s simulated results due to timing, magnitude and frequency of interest rate changes as well as changes in market conditions and the application and timing of various management strategies.
On a quarterly basis, two simulation models are run, including a static balance sheet and dynamic growth balance sheet. These models test the impact on net interest income and fair value of equity from changes in market interest rates under various scenarios. Under the static and dynamic growth models, rates are shocked instantaneously and ramped rate changes over a 12-month horizon based upon parallel and non-parallel yield curve shifts. Parallel shock scenarios assume instantaneous parallel movements in the yield curve compared to a flat yield curve scenario. Non-parallel simulation involves analysis of interest income and expense under various changes in the shape of the yield curve. The Company’s internal policy regarding internal rate risk simulations currently specifies that for instantaneous parallel shifts of the yield curve, estimated net income at risk for the subsequent one-year period should not decline by more than 10% for a 100 basis-point shift, 20% for a 200-basis point shift and 30% for a 300-basis point shift.
Simulated change in net interest income and fair value of equity over a 12-month horizon as of the dates indicated below were as follows:
The results are primarily due to behavior of demand, money market and savings deposits during such rate fluctuations. Historically, interest rates on these deposits have changed more slowly than changes in the discount and federal funds rates. This assumption is incorporated into the simulation model and is generally not fully reflected in a gap analysis. The assumptions incorporated into the model are inherently uncertain and, as a result, the model cannot precisely measure future net interest income or precisely predict the impact of fluctuations in market interest rates on net interest income. Actual results will differ from the model’s simulated results due to timing, magnitude and frequency of interest rate changes as well as changes in market conditions and the application and timing of various strategies.
Table
LIBOR Transition
The London Interbank Offered Rate, or LIBOR, is used as an index rate for a majority of the Company’s interest-rate swaps and approximately 12.0% of the Company’s loans at December 31, 2020. It is expected that a number of private-sector banks that have been reporting information used to set LIBOR will stop doing so after 2021 when their reporting commitment ends. As a result, LIBOR may no longer be available as an index or may be seen as no longer representative of the market. Alternative reference rates are being identified, but existing contracts may not have been written to allow the use of these alternatives.
The Company has created a taskforce to identify and evaluate loans and interest-rate swaps that are indexed to LIBOR. For new loan originations and interest-rate swaps, the Company has transitioned away from utilizing LIBOR as a variable rate index and has started utilizing U.S. prime rate. During 2020, the Company modified three loans to transition the pricing index from LIBOR to U.S. prime rate. These loans had an outstanding principal balance of $5.0 million as of December 31, 2020. The Company is evaluating the risks related to this transition and its evaluation and mitigation of risks related to the discontinuation of LIBOR may span several reporting periods through 2022.
Impact of Inflation
The Company’s consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. GAAP requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars, without considering changes in the relative value of money over time due to inflation or recession.
Unlike many industrial companies, substantially all the Company’s assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a more significant impact on the Company’s performance than the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rates may not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services. However, other operating expenses do reflect general levels of inflation.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company’s accounting policies are described in “Part II-Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 1.” The Company believes that the following accounting policies involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity:
Allowance for Credit Losses
Determining the amount of the ACL is considered a critical accounting estimate, as it requires significant judgment and the use of subjective measurements, including forecasted national and local economic conditions and management’s assessment of overall portfolio quality. Changes in these estimates and assumptions are possible and may have a material impact on the ACL, and therefore the Company’s financial position, liquidity or results of operations.
The Company adopted CECL effective January 1, 2020 and as a result of this adoption, the Company’s ACL for the loan portfolio has two main components: a reserve for expected losses determined from the historical loss rates, adjusted for qualitative factors, and forecasted expected losses on the segments associated with the individual loan classes with similar risk characteristics, or general reserve; and a separate allowance representing the reserves assigned to individually evaluated loans that do not share similar risk characteristics with other loans, or specific reserves.
There are multiple qualitative factors, both internal and external, that could impact the potential collectability of the underlying loans. The various internal factors that may be considered include, among other things: (i) effectiveness of loan policies, procedures and internal controls; (ii) portfolio growth and changes in loan concentrations; (iii) changes in loan quality; (iv) experience, ability and effectiveness of lending management and staff; (v) legal and regulatory compliance requirements associated with underwriting, originating and servicing a loan and the impact of exceptions; and (vi) the effectiveness of the internal loan review function. The various external factors that may be considered include, among other things: (i) current national and local economic conditions; (ii) changes in the political, legal and regulatory landscape; (iii) industry trends, in particular those related to loan quality; and (iv) forecasted changes in the economy.
Table
As part of its assessment, the Company considers the need to adjust historical information to reflect the extent to which current conditions and forecasts differ from the conditions that existed for the period over which historical information was evaluated. The Company uses an economic forecast qualitative factor as noted above to adjust the expected loss rates for the effects of forecasted changes in the economy. The Company uses economic indicators and indexes including, but not limited to: (i) inflation indexes; (ii) unemployment rates; (iii) interest rates; (iv) economic growth; (v) government expenditures; (vi) gross domestic product indexes; (vii) productivity indicators; (viii) leading indexes; (ix) debt levels; and (x) narratives such as those supplied by the Federal Reserve’s beige book and Moody’s Analytics that provide information for determining an appropriate impact ratio for macro-economic conditions.
The COVID-19 pandemic, sustained instability in the oil and gas industry, increased adversely graded loans and charge-offs caused fluctuations in the Company’s estimates and assumptions during the year ended December 31, 2020 and increased the provision for credit losses. As the COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing, further fluctuations in the Company’s estimates and forecasts may occur.
For further detail of the factors considered in determining the ACL see “Part II-Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 1 and Note 6.”
Fair Values of Financial Instruments
Determining the amount of the fair values of financial instruments is considered a critical accounting estimate, as it requires significant judgment and the use of subjective measurements. In general, the fair values of the Company’s financial instruments are based upon quoted market prices, where available. If such quoted market prices are not available, fair value is based upon models that primarily use observable market-based parameters as inputs. Fair value estimates are based on judgments regarding: (i) current economic conditions; (ii) interest rates; (iii) credit risk; (iv) prepayments; (v) risk characteristics of the various instruments; and (vi) other factors. These estimates are subjective in nature and involve uncertainties and matters of significant judgment and therefore cannot be determined with precision. The Company’s valuation methodologies may produce a fair value calculation that may not be indicative of net realizable value or reflective of future fair values. While management believes the Company’s valuation methodologies are appropriate and consistent with other market participants, the use of different methodologies or assumptions to determine the fair value could result in different estimates of fair value.
Goodwill and Other Intangibles
Determining the fair value of goodwill and other intangibles is considered a critical accounting estimate because it requires significant management judgment and the use of subjective measurements. Goodwill, which is excess purchase price over the fair value of net assets from acquisitions, is evaluated for impairment at least annually and on an interim basis if events or circumstances indicate that it is likely an impairment has occurred. Impairment would exist if the fair value of the reporting unit at the date of the test is less than the goodwill recorded on the financial statements. If an impairment of goodwill exists, a loss would then be recognized in the consolidated financial statements to the extent of the impairment.
Qualitative factors are first assessed to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. The various qualitive factors considered include: (i) general economic conditions; (ii) industry conditions; (iii) conditions in the Company’s markets; (iv) overall financial performance of the Company; (v) market value of the Company’s stock; and (vi) other Company-specific events. If the Company determines that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount based on the assessment of qualitative factors, the Company then estimates the fair value of the reporting unit based on an analysis of market value, which includes estimates of quantitative factors such as: (i) estimated futures cash flows of the reporting unit; (ii) the discount rate used to discount estimated cash flows to their net present value; and (iii) the control premium. Impairment exists if the estimated fair value of the reporting unit at the date of the test is less than the goodwill recorded. If goodwill is impaired, a loss would then be recognized in the consolidated financial statements to the extent of the impairment. Variability in the market and changes in assumptions or subjective measurements used to determine fair value are reasonably possible and may have a material impact on the Company’s financial position, liquidity or results of operations.
During 2020, the Company’s stock price was volatile and declined significantly. The Company’s closing stock price was $25.51 per share as of December 31, 2020, down from the December 31, 2019 closing price of $31.12 per share. The Company’s peers have also experienced similar declines in their stock prices. Based on an assessment of the
Table
performance of the Company’s stock relative to its peers and the overall market, along with the other qualitative factors considered, the Company has not determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount at December 31, 2020.
The Company’s other intangible assets include core deposits, loan servicing assets and customer relationship intangibles. Other intangible assets are tested for impairment at least annually and on an interim basis whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable from future undiscounted cash flows. If impaired, the assets are recorded at fair value. Based on the Company’s assessment, there was no indication of impairment at December 31, 2020.
Emerging Growth Company
The JOBS Act permits an “emerging growth company” to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. The Company decided not to take advantage of this provision and is complying with new or revised accounting standards to the same extent that compliance is required for non-emerging growth companies. The decision to opt out of the extended transition period under the JOBS Act is irrevocable.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See “Part II-Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 1.”