ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on October 29, 2018 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). While we may pursue an acquisition opportunity in any business, industry, sector or geographical location, we intend to focus its efforts primarily on identifying businesses seeking to be a market leader in, and/or benefit from the increasing global initiatives to improve the efficiency of our energy ecosystems and reduce emissions (the “Energy Transition”). Our sponsor is Star Peak Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (our “Sponsor”).
Our registration statement for our Initial Public Offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) became effective on August 17, 2020. On August 20, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 35,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A common stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”) at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $350.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $20.2 million, inclusive of approximately $12.3 million in deferred underwriting commissions. On August 26, 2020, we consummated the sale of an additional 3,358,504 Units at the Initial Public Offering price at $10.00 per Unit pursuant to the notice of partial exercise from the underwriters, generating additional gross proceeds of approximately $33.6 million, and incurring additional offering costs of approximately $1.9 million, inclusive of an additional approximately $1.2 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 6,733,333 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant to our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $10.1 million. In connection with the consummation of the sale of additional Units pursuant to the underwriters’ over-allotment option, on August 26, 2020, we sold 447,801 Private Placement Warrants to our Sponsor, generating additional gross proceeds of approximately $0.7 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement on August 20, 2020, $350.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”), located in the United States at J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the assets held in the Trust Account as described below. Upon closing of the sale of Units
and Private Placement Warrants upon exercise of the over-allotment, on August 26, 2020, $33.6 million of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units and Private Placement Warrants were placed in the Trust Account.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or August 20, 2022, unless we provide the Public Stockholders with the opportunity to redeem their shares of Class A common stock in conjunction with any such amendment, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our franchise and income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Proposed Business Combination
On December 3, 2020, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “merger agreement”) with STPK Merger Sub Corp., a newly formed Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, and Stem, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Stem”). If the merger agreement is adopted by Stem’s stockholders, the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, including the issuance of common stock of the Company (“New Stem Common Stock”) to be issued or reserved as the merger consideration, is approved by the Company’s stockholders, and the merger is subsequently completed, Merger Sub will merge with and into Stem, with Stem surviving the merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the “merger”).
Refer to the preliminary proxy statement/consent solicitation statement/prospectus, as filed in Form S-4 with the Securities and Exchange Commission on January 22, 2021 for additional information.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $0.9 million in cash and working capital deficit of approximately $1.2 million.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a capital contribution of $25,000 from the Sponsor to purchase the Founder Shares (as defined below), the loan of up to $300,000 under the Note (see Note 4), and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. We fully repaid the Note on August 20, 2020. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our officers, directors and initial stockholders may, but are not obligated to, provide us the Working Capital Loans (see Note 4). To-date, there have been no borrowings under any Working Capital Loans.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the lack of liquidity raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be forced to liquidate before August 20, 2022.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2020 related to our formation, the preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to
date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of gain on investment (net), dividends and interest held in Trust Account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $3.4 million, which consisted of approximately $3.1 million in general and administrative expenses, approximately $163,000 in general and administrative expenses for costs incurred with our Sponsor and approximately $200,000 of franchise tax expense, which was partially offset by approximately $137,000 gain on investment (net), dividends and interest held in Trust Account.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had net loss of approximately $10,000, which consisted of approximately $9,000 in general and administrative expenses and $1,000 of franchise tax expense.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On November 8, 2018, the Sponsor purchased 2,875,000 shares (the “Founder Shares”) of our Class B common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, for an aggregate price of $25,000. On July 13, 2020, we effected a stock split resulting in the Sponsor holding 10,062,500 Founder Shares. All shares and the associated amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the aforementioned stock split. On July 29, 2020, the Sponsor transferred 40,000 Founder Shares to each of Desirée Rogers and C. Park Shaper, the Company’s independent director nominees. The initial stockholders agreed to forfeit up to 1,312,500 Founder Shares to the extent that the over-allotment option is not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the Founder Shares would represent 20% of the outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering. The underwriters partially exercised their over-allotment option on August 26, 2020, with the remaining portion of the over-allotment option expiring at the conclusion of the 45-day option period. As a result, an aggregate of 472,874 Founder Shares were forfeited upon the expiration of the over-allotment option.
The Founder Shares will automatically convert into Class A common stock on a one-for-one basis at the time of the Company’s initial Business Combination and are subject to certain transfer restrictions, as described below. In the case that additional shares of Class A common stock, or equity-linked securities, are issued or deemed issued in excess of the amounts sold in the Initial Public Offering and related to the closing of the initial Business Combination, the ratio at which shares of Class B common stock shall convert into shares of Class A common stock will be adjusted (unless the holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of Class B common stock agree to waive such adjustment with respect to any such issuance or deemed issuance) so that the number of shares of Class A common stock issuable upon conversion of all shares of Class B common stock will equal, in the aggregate, on an as-converted basis, 20% of the sum of the total number of all shares of common stock outstanding upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering plus all shares of Class A common stock and equity-linked securities issued or deemed issued in connection with the Business Combination (excluding any shares or equity-linked securities issued, or to be issued, to any seller in the Business Combination).
The initial stockholders agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination or (B) subsequent to the initial Business Combination, (x) if the last sale price of the Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination, or (y) the date on which the Company completes a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of the Company’s stockholders having the right to exchange their common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company consummated the Private Placement of 6,733,333 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $10.1 million. In connection with the consummation of the sale of
additional Units pursuant to the underwriters’ over-allotment option, on August 26, 2020, the Company sold an additional 447,801 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor, generating additional gross proceeds of approximately $0.7 million.
Each Private Placement Warrant is exercisable for one share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants will be added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering to be held in the Trust Account. If we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless. The Private Placement Warrants will be non-redeemable and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by the Sponsor or its permitted transferees.
The Sponsor and our officers and directors have agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Private Placement Warrants until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Related Party Reimbursements and Loans
Our Sponsor has agreed to loan us up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to a promissory note, dated November 8, 2018 and later amended on July 10, 2020 (the “Note”). This loan is non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. In 2018 and 2019, we borrowed approximately $182,000 under the Note and repaid approximately $125,000 when it temporary halted the Initial Public Offering in September 2019. We recapitalized and continued in July 2020, and borrowed an additional of $235,000 under the Note. We fully repaid the remaining balance the Note of approximately $292,000 on August 20, 2020.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial Business Combination, the initial stockholders, officers and directors and their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). Up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. Such warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans to date. We did not have any borrowings under the Working Capital Loans as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Administrative Service Agreement
Commencing on the date that the Company’s securities were first listed on the NYSE, we agreed to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor of total $10,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial support and administrative services. Upon completion of the initial Business Combination or the liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. The Company incurred approximately $50,000 in administrative expenses under the agreement, which is recognized in our unaudited consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 within general and administrative expenses - related party.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The initial stockholders and holders of the Private Placement Warrants are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The initial stockholders and holders of the Private Placement Warrants will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that we register such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders will have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the closing date of the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 5,250,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per Unit, less
underwriting discounts and commissions. On August 26, 2020, we consummated the sale of an additional 3,358,504 Units at the Initial Public Offering price at $10.00 per Unit pursuant to the notice of partial exercise from the underwriters.
The underwriter was entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $7.0 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or $12.3 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriter for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
In connection with the consummation of the sale of Units pursuant to the over-allotment option on August 26, 2020, the underwriter received an aggregate of $0.7 million in underwriting fees and additional deferred underwriting commissions of approximately $1.2 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the consolidated balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in net gain from investments held in Trust Account in the our consolidated statements of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Shares of conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 36,384,726 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net income per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) applicable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 19,967,302 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted earnings per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted earnings per share is the same as basic earnings per share for the period.
Our consolidated statement of operations includes a presentation of income per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per share, basic and diluted for Class A common stock is calculated by dividing the investment income earned on the Trust Account of approximately $137,000, net of applicable franchise taxes of approximately $137,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock outstanding for the periods. Net loss per share, basic and diluted for Class B common stock for the year ended December 31, 2020 is calculated by dividing the general and administration expenses of
approximately $3.1 million and franchise taxes of $200,000, resulting in a net loss of approximately $3.4 million, by the weighted average number of Class B common stock outstanding for the period.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, that would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.