Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Financial Information
This Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") section provides analysis of our operations and financial position for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 and includes information available to March 3, 2021, unless otherwise indicated herein. It is supplementary information and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Certain statements contained in this MD&A may constitute forward-looking statements as defined under securities laws. Forward-looking statements may relate to our future outlook and anticipated events or results and may include statements regarding our future financial position, business strategy, budgets, litigation, projected costs, capital expenditures, financial results, taxes, plans and objectives. In some cases, forward-looking statements can be identified by terms such as "anticipate," "estimate," "target," "intend," "project," "potential," "predict," "continue," "believe," "expect," "can," "could," "would," "should," "may," "might," "plan," "will," "budget," "forecast," or other similar expressions concerning matters that are not historical facts, or the negative of such terms are intended to identify forward-looking statements; however, the absence of these words does not necessarily mean that a statement is not forward-looking. To the extent any forward-looking statements contain future-oriented financial information or financial outlooks, such information is being provided to enable a reader to assess our financial condition, material changes in our financial condition, our results of operations, and our liquidity and capital resources. Readers are cautioned that this information may not be appropriate for any other purpose, including investment decisions.
Forward-looking statements contained in this MD&A are based on certain factors and assumptions regarding expected growth, results of operations, performance, and business prospects and opportunities. While we consider these assumptions to be reasonable, based on information currently available, they may prove to be incorrect. Forward-looking statements are also subject to certain factors, including risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from what we currently expect. These factors are more fully described in the "Risk Factors" section at Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Forward-looking statements contained in this commentary are based on our current estimates, expectations and projections, which we believe are reasonable as of the date of this report. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance or events. You should not place undue importance on forward-looking statements and should not rely upon this information as of any other date. Other than as required under securities laws, we do not undertake to update any forward-looking information at any particular time. Neither we nor any other person assumes responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of these forward-looking statements, and we hereby qualify all our forward-looking statements by these cautionary statements.
Unless otherwise noted herein, all currency amounts in this MD&A are expressed in U.S. dollars. All tabular dollar amounts are expressed in thousands of U.S. dollars, except per share amounts.
Overview
We are a leading company focused on the manufacture of plant-based and fruit-based foods and beverage products for sale to retail, foodservice and branded food customers. The composition of our two continuing operating segments is as follows:
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages - We offer a full line of plant-based beverages and liquid and dry ingredients (utilizing almond, soy, coconut, oat, hemp, and other bases), as well as broths, teas, and nutritional beverages. In addition, we package dry- and oil-roasted inshell sunflower and sunflower kernels, as well as corn-, soy- and legume-based roasted snacks, and we process and sell raw sunflower inshell and kernel for food and feed applications.
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages - We offer individually quick frozen ("IQF") fruit for retail (including strawberries, blueberries, mango, pineapple, blends, and other berries), IQF and bulk frozen fruit for foodservice (including purées, fruit cups and smoothies), and custom fruit preparations for industrial use. In addition, we offer fruit snacks, including bars, twists, ropes, and bite-sized varieties.
Until December 2020, we had a third operating segment referred to as Global Ingredients. The Global Ingredients operating segment was comprised of our organic ingredient sourcing and production business, Tradin Organic, and our soy and corn business, which were sold in December 2020 and February 2019, respectively, as discussed below under "Recent Developments."
SUNOPTA INC. 26 January 2, 2021 10-K
The segment information in this MD&A is presented on a continuing operations basis, with prior period information recast to reflect the reporting of Tradin Organic as discontinued operations.
Fiscal Year
We operate on a fiscal calendar that results in a given fiscal year consisting of a 52- or 53-week period ending on the Saturday closest to December 31. Fiscal year 2020 was a 53-week period ending on January 2, 2021. Fiscal years 2019 and 2018 were each 52-week periods ending on December 28, 2019 and December 29, 2018, respectively. Except as otherwise noted in this MD&A, the impact of the additional week on our results of operations for the current period was insignificant relative to the prior period.
Recent Developments
Sale of Tradin Organic
On December 30, 2020, we completed the sale of Tradin Organic, which included its global organic and non-GMO ingredient sourcing operations, together with its consumer-packaged premium juice co-manufacturing business, and ingredient processing facilities.
We received cash consideration from the sale of $373.7 million (€305.1 million), net of cash acquired and debt assumed by the purchaser and subject to post-closing adjustments, and realized a cash loss of $12.7 million on a foreign currency forward contract that was entered into to economically hedge the euro-denominated cash consideration. We recognized a pre-tax gain on sale of $111.8 million, which is included in the earnings from discontinued operations for the year ended January 2, 2021.
In conjunction with the divestiture of Tradin Organic, we were able to reduce our debt by approximately $355 million, including the redemption and retirement of the $223.5 million outstanding principal amount of our 9.5% senior secured second lien notes due October 2022, and repayment of approximately $132 million of the outstanding borrowings under our former Global Credit Facility (as described below under the heading "Liquidity and Capital Resources.")
For further information regarding the sale of Tradin Organic, see note 3 to the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K.
Sale of Soy and Corn Business
On February 22, 2019, we completed the sale of our specialty and organic soy and corn business for cash consideration of $66.5 million, which resulted in a pre-tax gain on sale of $44.0 million recognized in other income in 2019. The soy and corn business engaged in seed and grain conditioning and corn milling at five processing facilities located in the U.S. The net proceeds from this transaction were used to repay borrowings under the Global Credit Facility.
For further information regarding the sale of the soy and corn business, see note 4 to the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K.
Value Creation Plan
Established in 2016, our Value Creation Plan has been a multi-year, broad-based initiative focused on increasing shareholder value through structural investments in people, processes and assets, together with restructuring activities to streamline operations. In 2020, actions taken under the Value Creation Plan included the consolidation of manufacturing assets in our frozen fruit operations, including the exit from our Santa Maria, California, leased frozen fruit processing facility (completed February 1, 2021), and the consolidation of our corporate office functions into Minneapolis, Minnesota. In 2019 and 2018, measures taken under the Value Creation Plan included the sale of our soy and corn business in 2019 (as described above), and the consolidation of roasted snack operations and related disposal of our former roasting facility in Wahpeton, North Dakota, in 2018. In addition, over the course of the Value Creation Plan, we made a series of organizational changes to our executive and senior management teams, including new Chief Executive Officer ("CEO") and Chief Financial Officer ("CFO") appointments, and implemented a number of cost-saving measures and workforce reductions.
We consider that the measures taken in 2020 mark the substantial completion of the Value Creation Plan. In the first quarter of 2021, we expect to incur approximately $1.5 million of additional costs to complete the exit from the Santa Maria facility and transfer production to our other frozen fruit processing facilities. Going forward, our intention is to build on the foundation of the Value Creation Plan to expand the capabilities and capacity within our plant-based food and beverage operations, and to enhance the sales and margin performance of our fruit-based food and beverage operations, while continuing to focus on operational excellence and enhanced food safety and quality.
SUNOPTA INC. 27 January 2, 2021 10-K
The following table summarizes costs incurred by type under the Value Creation Plan that were charged to expense for the years ended January 2, 2021, December 28, 2019 and December 29, 2018:
For more information regarding the Value Creation Plan, see note 5 to the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K.
Impact of COVID-19
We are actively addressing the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations. We began to experience impacts to our business and results of operations late in the first quarter of 2020, and these impacts continued throughout the remainder of fiscal 2020. As a result, we saw significant shifts in the mix of our business, resulting in lower demand for our food and beverage products from the foodservice channel due to the full or partial closure of many foodservice outlets, and an increase in demand from retail customers as consumers increased their at-home food and beverage consumption. We saw a return towards normalized levels in the second half of 2020, as more foodservice outlets reopened, and consumers adapted to the evolving environment. However, overall foodservice demand for our products remained below 2019 volume levels and short of our initial expectations for 2020. We expect foodservice demand to continue to be affected by the pandemic until efforts to mitigate the pandemic permit normal operations of the foodservice channel.
To date, we have not experienced any material interruptions in our plant operations due to employee absences, or to our supply chains as a result of the pandemic. Our facilities have been exempt from government closure orders where applicable. In 2020, we incurred incremental costs of approximately $2 million to provide wage premiums and personal protective equipment for our plant employees, and to implement additional cleaning and disinfecting protocols at our facilities.
In March 2020, we experienced a significant foreign exchange impact from a more than 20% depreciation of the Mexican peso against the U.S. dollar. Subsequently, we entered into a combination of foreign currency put and call option contracts (a zero-cost collar) to economically hedge our exposure to fluctuations in the Mexican peso on fruit inventory purchases and operating costs in Mexico.
To date, COVID-19 has not had a significant impact on our liquidity, cash flows or capital resources.
SUNOPTA INC. 28 January 2, 2021 10-K
Overall, based on information available to us as of the date of this MD&A, we believe that we will continue to be able to deliver our products to our customers on a timely basis, while meeting our financial obligations. However, we cannot reasonably estimate the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic or its ultimate impact on the global economy and our business.
Consolidated Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2020 and 2019
(1) When assessing the financial performance of our operating segments, we use an internal measure of operating income/loss that excludes other income/expense items and goodwill impairments determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. This measure is the basis on which management, including the CEO, assesses the underlying performance of our operating segments.
We believe that disclosing this non-GAAP measure assists investors in comparing financial performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that are not indicative of our operating performance. However, the non-GAAP measure of operating income/loss should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The following table presents a reconciliation of segment operating income/loss to "earnings/loss from continuing operations before the following," which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure.
SUNOPTA INC. 29 January 2, 2021 10-K
We believe that investors' understanding of our financial performance is enhanced by disclosing the specific items that we exclude from segment operating income/loss. However, any measure of operating income/loss excluding any or all of these items is not, and should not be viewed as, a substitute for operating income/loss prepared under U.S. GAAP. These items are presented solely to allow investors to more fully understand how we assess financial performance.
(2) When assessing our financial performance, we use an internal measure of net earnings/loss determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP that excludes specific items recognized in other income/expense, impairment losses on goodwill and long-lived assets, and other unusual items that are identified and evaluated on an individual basis, which due to their nature or size, we would not expect to occur as part of our normal business on a regular basis. We believe that the identification of these excluded items enhances the analysis of our financial performance of our business when comparing those operating results between periods, as we do not consider these items to be reflective of normal business operations.
The following table presents a reconciliation of adjusted earnings/loss from net earnings/loss, which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure. In addition, we have prepared this table in a columnar format to present the effects of discontinued operations on our consolidated results for the periods presented. We believe this presentation assists investors in assessing the financial performance of our continuing operations.
SUNOPTA INC. 30 January 2, 2021 10-K
(a) Reflects the pre-tax gain on sale of Tradin Organic recorded in earnings from discontinued operations.
(b) Reflects a gain on the settlement of the remaining earn-out obligation related to a prior acquisition of a premium juice business, which was recorded in earnings from discontinued operations.
(c) Reflects a loss on a foreign currency forward contract to economically hedge the cash consideration from the sale of Tradin Organic, which was recorded in other expense.
(d) Reflects professional fees of $1.0 million and employee retention costs of $0.6 million recorded in SG&A expenses; and long-lived asset impairment and facility closure costs of $6.7 million, and employee termination costs of $3.2 million (offset by the reversal of $0.9 million of previously recognized stock-based compensation related to forfeited awards previously granted to terminated employees), which were recorded in other expense and earnings from discontinued operations.
(e) Reflects the premium paid ($5.3 million) and write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs ($3.6 million) on the redemption and retirement of our second lien notes, which was recorded in non-operating expenses.
(f) Reflects the write-down of owned and right-of-use assets related to the consolidation of roasting lines at our Crookston, Minnesota, facility, and the write-off of obsolete cocoa processing equipment at Tradin Organic, with was recorded in other expense and earnings from discontinued operations.
(g) Reflects start-up costs related to expansion projects within our plant-based ingredient extraction and beverage operations, which were recorded in cost of goods sold.
(h) Other includes a loss of $2.4 million on the settlement of a customer claim related to the recall of certain sunflower products in 2016, net of gains of $2.2 million on the settlement of unrelated matters, and reversal of previously accrued costs related to the withdrawal of certain consumer-packaged products, which was recorded in other income/expense.
(i) Reflects estimated income tax attributable to the gain on sale of Tradin Organic, together with the tax effect of the other preceding adjustments to earnings based on an overall estimated annual effective tax rate of approximately 30% for 2020.
(j) Reflects the gain on sale of the soy and corn business, which was recorded in other income.
(k) Reflects employee retention and relocation costs of $2.2 million, and professional fees of $1.4 million recorded in SG&A expenses; and employee termination costs of $8.6 million (offset by the reversal of $4.1 million of previously recognized stock-based compensation related to forfeited awards previously granted to terminated employees), CEO and CFO recruitment costs of $1.3 million, and facility closure costs of $0.3 million, which was recorded in other expense and earnings from discontinued operations.
(l) Reflects costs related to the expansion of our Allentown, Pennsylvania, plant-based beverage facility and start-up of Tradin Organic's avocado oil facility in Ethiopia, which were recorded in cost of goods sold and earnings from discontinued operations.
(m) Reflects costs related to the transition of Tradin Organic's premium juice production activities to new contract manufacturers, which were recorded in earnings from discontinued operations.
(n) Reflects product withdrawal and recall costs that were not eligible for reimbursement under insurance policies or exceeded the limits of those policies, including costs related to the recall of certain sunflower kernel products initiated in 2016, which were recorded in other expense.
SUNOPTA INC. 31 January 2, 2021 10-K
(o) Other includes gains on the settlement of certain legal matters and a project cancellation, partially offset by losses on disposal of assets, insurance deductibles, and business development costs, which were recorded in other income/expense and earnings from discontinued operations.
(p) Consolidated reflects the tax effect of the preceding adjustments to earnings and reflects an overall estimated annual effective tax rate of approximately 27% for 2019.
We believe that investors' understanding of our financial performance is enhanced by disclosing the specific items that we exclude to compute adjusted earnings/loss. However, adjusted earnings/loss is not, and should not be viewed as, a substitute for earnings prepared under U.S. GAAP. Adjusted earnings/loss is presented solely to allow investors to more fully understand how we assess our financial performance.
(3) We use a measure of adjusted EBITDA when assessing the performance of our operations, which we believe is useful to investors' understanding of our operating profitability because it excludes non-operating expenses, such as interest and income taxes, and non-cash expenses, such as depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation and asset impairment charges, as well as other unusual items that affect the comparability of operating performance. We also use this measure to review and assess our progress under the Value Creation Plan and to assess operating performance in connection with our employee incentive programs. We define adjusted EBITDA as segment operating income/loss plus depreciation, amortization, and non-cash stock-based compensation, and excluding other unusual items as identified in the determination of adjusted earnings (refer above to footnote (2)). The following table presents a reconciliation of segment operating income/loss and adjusted EBITDA from net earnings/loss, which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure. In addition, as described above in footnote (2), we have prepared this table in a columnar format to present the effect of discontinued operations on our consolidated results for the periods presented. We believe this presentation assists investors in assessing the financial performance of our continuing operations.
(a) Reflects non-controlling interests in the earnings/loss of certain subsidiaries of Tradin Organic, which is included in earnings from discontinued operations.
(b) Reflects the pre-tax gain on sale of Tradin Organic recorded in earnings from discontinued operations.
(c) Reflects the premium paid ($5.3 million) and write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs ($3.6 million) on the redemption and retirement of our second lien notes, which was recorded in non-operating expenses.
(d) For 2020 and 2019, consolidated stock-based compensation of $13.1 million and $11.6 million, respectively, was recorded in SG&A expenses and earnings from discontinued operations, and the reversal of $0.9 million and $4.1 million, respectively, of previously recognized stock-based compensation related to forfeited awards previously granted to terminated employees was recognized in other income.
(e) For 2020, reflects professional fees of $1.0 million (2019 - $1.4 million) and employee retention costs of $0.6 million (2019 - $2.2 million) recorded in SG&A expenses.
(f) Reflects start-up costs related to expansion projects within our plant-based ingredient extraction and beverage operations, which were recorded in cost of goods sold.
(g) Reflects costs related to the expansion of our Allentown, Pennsylvania, plant-based beverage facility and start-up of Tradin Organic's avocado oil facility in Ethiopia, which were recorded in cost of goods sold and earnings from discontinued operations.
(h) Reflects costs related to the transition of Tradin Organic's premium juice production activities to new contract manufacturers, which were recorded in earnings from discontinued operations.
Although we use adjusted EBITDA as a measure to assess the performance of our business and for the other purposes set forth above, this measure has limitations as an analytical tool, and should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for an analysis of our results of operations as reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
SUNOPTA INC. 32 January 2, 2021 10-K
adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest payments on our indebtedness;
adjusted EBITDA does not include the recovery/payment of taxes, which is a necessary element of our operations;
although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements; and
adjusted EBITDA does not include non-cash stock-based compensation, which is an important component of our total compensation program for employees and directors.
Because of these limitations, adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as a measure of discretionary cash available to us to invest in the growth of our business. Management compensates for these limitations by not viewing adjusted EBITDA in isolation, and specifically by using other U.S. GAAP and non-GAAP measures, such as revenues, gross profit, segment operating income/loss, earnings and adjusted earnings/loss to measure our operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement of financial performance under U.S. GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to our results of operations or cash flows from operations determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and our calculation of adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to the calculation of a similarly titled measure reported by other companies.
(4) In order to evaluate our results of operations, we use certain non-GAAP measures that we believe enhance an investor's ability to derive meaningful period-over-period comparisons and trends from our results of operations. In particular, we evaluate our revenues on a basis that excludes the effects of fluctuations in commodity pricing and the impacts of business acquisitions and divestitures. In addition, we exclude specific items from our reported results that due to their nature or size, we do not expect to occur as part of our normal business on a regular basis. These items are identified above under footnote (2), and in the discussion of our results of operations below. These non-GAAP measures are presented solely to allow investors to more fully assess our results of operations and should not be considered in isolation of, or as substitutes for an analysis of our results as reported under U.S. GAAP.
Revenues for the year ended January 2, 2021 increased by 9.4% to $789.2 million from $721.6 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. Excluding the impact on revenues of changes in commodity-related pricing (an increase in revenues of $12.4 million) and the 53rd week of sales in fiscal 2020 (an increase in revenues of $6.2 million), partially offset by the sale of the soy and corn business (a net decrease in revenues of $10.3 million), revenues increased by 8.1% in 2020, compared with 2019. The increase in revenues on an adjusted basis reflected the expansion of plant-based beverage and broth offerings for retail customers, growth in plant-based ingredient extraction volumes, and increased retail volumes of frozen fruit, partially offset by lower volumes of plant-based beverage, frozen fruit and fruit ingredient products sold into the foodservice channel.
Gross profit increased $43.6 million, or 66.5%, to $109.1 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with $65.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. As a percentage of revenues, gross profit for the year ended January 2, 2021 was 13.8% compared to 9.1% for the year ended December 28, 2019, an increase of 470 basis points.
Gross profit for the Plant-Based Foods and Beverages segment increased $21.7 million to $80.5 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with $58.8 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, and gross profit as a percentage of revenues increased to 19.4% in 2020 from 16.3% in 2019. The gross profit percentage would have been 19.8% in 2020 and 16.4% in 2019, excluding plant expansion costs of $1.9 million and $0.3 million recorded in cost of goods sold in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The 340-basis point increase in the gross profit percentage on an adjusted basis reflected higher sales and production volumes of plant-based beverages, broths and plant-based ingredients, and improved plant utilization and productivity-driven cost savings.
Gross profit for the Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages segment increased $22.1 million to $28.6 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with $6.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, and gross profit as a percentage of revenues increased to 7.6% in 2020 from 1.9% in 2019. The increase in gross profit and 570-basis point increase in gross profit percentage reflected increased sales pricing and a favorable mix of higher-margin retail sales of frozen fruit, and lower processing costs and productivity improvements for frozen fruit, together with increased sales and production volumes, and plant utilization for fruit snacks.
Gross profit for the Global Ingredients segment of $0.2 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, reflected the contribution from the soy and corn business prior to its sale in February 2019.
For the year ended January 2, 2021, we realized total segment operating income of $12.3 million, compared with a total segment operating loss of $24.1 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. The $36.4 million increase in total segment operating income reflected higher gross profit, as described above, together with a year-over-year favorable foreign exchange impact of $1.5 million, mainly related to mark-to-market gains on Mexican peso hedging activities, partially offset by an $8.9 million increase in SG&A expenses mainly due to higher employee-related variable compensation and benefit costs, and reserves for credit losses due to a weaker economic outlook, partially offset by the benefit from headcount reductions and other cost savings measures taken in 2019, together with lower travel costs due to COVID-19 restrictions.
Further details on revenue, gross profit and segment operating income/loss variances are provided below under "Segmented Operations Information."
SUNOPTA INC. 33 January 2, 2021 10-K
Other expense of $23.4 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, mainly reflected a $12.7 million loss on the foreign currency economic hedge of the cash consideration from the sale of Tradin Organic, together with $8.2 million of employee termination and facility closure costs, and asset impairments, mainly related to the exit from our Santa Maria, California, frozen fruit processing facility, and $2.7 million of other asset impairment charges mainly related to the consolidation of roasting lines at our Crookston, Minnesota, facility. Other income of $40.6 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, mainly reflected a pre-tax gain on sale of the soy and corn business of $44.0 million, the reversal of $4.1 million of previously recognized stock-based compensation related to forfeited awards previously granted to terminated employees, and legal settlement and project cancellation gains of $3.1 million. These other income amounts were offset mainly by employee termination and recruitment costs of $9.7 million associated with the Value Creation Plan, including costs related to our new CEO and CFO appointments, sale of the soy and corn business, and corporate office consolidation.
Net interest expense decreased by $2.8 million to $30.0 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with $32.8 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. Interest expense included the amortization of debt issuance costs of $4.1 million and $2.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The year-over-year decrease in net interest expense reflected lower average borrowings and weighted-average interest rates under our revolving credit facilities, together with interest income received on a tax refund in the first quarter of 2020.
On December 31, 2020, we redeemed in full the $223.5 million outstanding principal amount of our second lien notes. We recognized an $8.9 million loss on the retirement of the notes, including a premium paid of $5.3 million and the write-off of the remaining $3.6 million of unamortized debt issuance costs.
We recognized a recovery of income tax of $2.7 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with $3.1 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. Excluding the impact of non-deductible stock-based and executive compensation from pre-tax earnings, together with a change in the amount of valuation allowance recorded against certain deferred tax assets and benefits recognized in 2020 related to the net operating loss carryback provisions of the CARES Act, our effective tax rate was 26.7% in 2020, compared with 31.3% in 2019.
Loss from continuing operations for the year ended January 2, 2021 was $47.3 million, which was inclusive of the $12.7 million loss on the foreign currency economic hedge of the cash consideration from the Tradin Organic sale, and $8.9 million loss on the retirement of the second lien notes, compared with a loss of $13.1 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, which was inclusive of the $44.0 million gain on the sale of the soy and corn business. Diluted loss per share from continuing operations attributable to common shareholders (after dividends and accretion on preferred stock) was $0.65 for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with a loss per share $0.24 for the year ended December 28, 2019.
Earnings from the discontinued operations of Tradin Organic were $124.8 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, inclusive of a pre-tax gain on sale of $111.8 million, compared with earnings of $12.3 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. Revenues and gross profit of Tradin Organic were $503.0 million and $61.8 million, respectively, for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with $468.4 million and $49.8 million, respectively, for the year ended December 28, 2019. The year-over-year increase in revenues reflected increased sales volumes of certain organic ingredients and higher sales volumes and pricing for premium juice products, partially offset by the exit from certain bulk categories of organic ingredients, and decreased commodity pricing. The year-over-year increase in gross profit reflected increased pricing spreads and higher-margin product mix within certain categories of organic ingredients, and increased production volumes and manufacturing efficiencies in Tradin Organic’s cocoa and sunflower operations, together with higher volumes and pricing and lower bottling costs for premium juice products. Earnings from discontinued operations for 2020 included a gain of $2.3 million on the settlement of a remaining earn-out obligation that arose from a prior acquisition of a premium juice business.
On a consolidated basis, we realized earnings attributable to common shareholders of $67.2 million (diluted earnings per share of $0.75) for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with loss attributable to common shareholders of $8.8 million (diluted loss per share of $0.10) for the year ended December 28, 2019.
For the year ended January 2, 2021, adjusted loss was $0.5 million, or $0.01 per diluted share, on a consolidated basis, compared with an adjusted loss of $32.4 million, or $0.37 per diluted share, on a consolidated basis for the year ended December 28, 2019. For the year ended January 2, 2021, adjusted loss from continuing operations was $21.5 million, or $0.24 per diluted share, compared with an adjusted loss from continuing operations of $45.5 million, or $0.52 per diluted share, for the year ended December 28, 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended January 2, 2021 was $94.1 million on a consolidated basis, compared with $47.3 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations for the year ended January 2, 2021 was $58.7 million, compared with $19.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019.
SUNOPTA INC. 34 January 2, 2021 10-K
Adjusted loss and adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures. See footnotes (2) and (3) to the table above for a reconciliation of adjusted loss and adjusted EBITDA from net earnings/loss, which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure.
Segmented Operations Information
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages contributed $415.2 million in revenues for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared to $361.4 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, an increase of $53.8 million, or 14.9%. Excluding the impact on revenues of changes in sunflower commodity-related pricing (an increase in revenues of $5.1 million) and the 53rd week of sales in fiscal 2020 (an increase in revenues of $3.6 million), Plant-Based Foods and Beverages revenues increased approximately 12.5%. The table below explains the increase in reported revenues:
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages Revenue Changes
Revenues for the year ended December 28, 2019 $361,398
Higher retail sales volumes of plant-based beverages and everyday broth offerings, including output from additional aseptic processing capacity that came on-line in the third quarter of 2019, as well as increased sales of plant-based ingredients, partially offset by reduced sales volumes of plant-based beverage products to foodservice customers 51,222
Increased commodity pricing for sunflower 5,111
Lower volumes of sunflower inshell and kernel, and roasted ingredients, partially offset by higher volumes of birdfeed and roasted snacks (2,567)
Revenues for the year ended January 2, 2021 $415,164
Gross profit in Plant-Based Foods and Beverages increased by $21.7 million to $80.5 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared to $58.8 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, and the gross profit percentage increased by 310 basis points to 19.4%. The increase in the gross profit percentage reflected strong production volumes, improved plant utilization and productivity-driven cost savings within our plant-based beverage and ingredient extraction operations, and improved margin performance within our sunflower and roasting operations. The table below explains the increase in gross profit:
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages Gross Profit Changes
Gross profit for the year ended December 28, 2019 $58,812
Higher sales volumes, plant utilization and productivity improvements within our plant-based beverage and ingredient extraction operations 20,646
Higher sales volumes of birdfeed and roasted snacks and improved plant utilization within our sunflower and roasting operations, partially offset by lower volumes of sunflower inshell and kernel, and roasted ingredients 1,039
Gross profit for the year ended January 2, 2021 $80,497
SUNOPTA INC. 35 January 2, 2021 10-K
Operating income in Plant-Based Foods and Beverages increased by $21.3 million to $50.8 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared to $29.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. The table below explains the increase in operating income:
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages Operating Income Changes
Operating income for the year ended December 28, 2019 $29,476
Increase in gross profit, as explained above 21,685
Lower employee compensation costs due to headcount reductions and reduced travel costs, partially offset by higher product development and sales and marketing spending, and employee-related variable compensation 302
Increase in corporate cost allocations (683)
Operating income for the year ended January 2, 2021 $50,780
Looking forward, we expect significant growth in revenues and gross profit from our Plant-Based Foods and Beverages segment in fiscal year 2021, driven by the completion of three major capital projects to increase our plant-based beverage processing and ingredient extraction capacity and capabilities. We expect the gross margin profile of our plant-based operations in 2021 to be comparable to 2020, with planned productivity measures expected to offset the initial underutilization of the capital project assets as we fill the added capacity with new business. The statements in this paragraph are forward-looking statements. See "Forward-Looking Statements" above. Several factors could adversely impact our ability to meet these forward-looking expectations, including the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, unexpected delays in executing on our capital projects, less than anticipated benefits from productivity measures, as well as unforeseen customer actions, consumer behaviors, competitive pressures, and general economic and political conditions in North America, along with the other factors described above under "Forward-Looking Statements."
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages contributed $374.0 million in revenues for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared to $349.9 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, an increase of $24.2 million, or 6.9%. Excluding the impact on revenues of changes in raw fruit commodity-related pricing (an increase in revenues of $9.0 million) and the impact of the 53rd week of sales in fiscal 2020 (an increase in revenues of $2.6 million), Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages revenues increased approximately 3.6%. The table below explains the increase in reported revenues:
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages Revenue Changes
Revenues for the year ended December 28, 2019 $349,852
Increased volumes of frozen fruit into the retail channel, partially offset by lower demand for frozen fruit and fruit preparations from foodservice customers, together with sales volume constraints due to a short supply of frozen strawberries from California, as a larger portion of the 2020 crop went to the fresh market to meet COVID-19-driven demand 10,002
Increased commodity pricing for raw fruit 9,040
Higher sales volumes of fruit snacks products 5,155
Revenues for the year ended January 2, 2021 $374,049
SUNOPTA INC. 36 January 2, 2021 10-K
Gross profit in Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages increased by $22.1 million to $28.6 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared to $6.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, and the gross profit percentage increased by 570 basis points to 7.6%. The increase in the gross profit percentage reflected increased sales pricing and a favorable mix of higher-margin retail sales of frozen fruit. In addition, automation and productivity initiatives in our frozen fruit manufacturing facilities have generated higher yields and throughput, while allowing these facilities to operate at a lower cost and with fewer seasonal workers. The increase in the gross profit percentage also reflected strong fruit snack production volumes and plant utilization. These positive factors were partially offset by lower production volumes and plant utilization within our fruit ingredient operations. The table below explains the increase in gross profit:
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages Gross Profit Changes
Gross profit for the year ended December 28, 2019 $6,499
Higher sales volumes and pricing for frozen fruit, including a favorable mix of higher-margin retail versus foodservice sales, together with lower processing costs and productivity improvements for frozen fruit, partially offset by lower sales volumes and plant utilization for fruit ingredients 20,297
Sales volume growth for fruit snacks, together with increased production volumes and plant utilization 1,784
Gross profit for the year ended January 2, 2021 $28,580
Operating loss in Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages decreased by $19.6 million to $7.3 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared to $26.9 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. The table below explains the decrease in operating loss:
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages Operating Loss Changes
Operating loss for the year ended December 28, 2019 $(26,873)
Increase in gross profit, as explained above 22,081
Decrease in corporate cost allocations 1,840
Impact of increased reserves for credit losses due to weaker economic conditions and increased employee compensation related to new management hires and higher employee-related variable compensation, together with higher sales and marketing support for new products and unfavorable foreign exchange impact on our frozen fruit operations in Mexico (4,369)
Operating loss for the year ended January 2, 2021 $(7,321)
Looking forward, we expect gross margin improvement in our Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages segment in 2021, driven by ongoing automation and productivity efforts, together with cost savings from our frozen fruit network optimization projects, including the exit from our leased Santa Maria, California, facility in February 2021, and the start-up of production at our other facilities in advance of the California strawberry crop season. In addition, we intend to pursue pass-through contract pricing with more of our customers, while evaluating marginally profitable customers and products, which may lead to some customer and product rationalization. However, the profitability of our frozen fruit business remains largely dependent on the quality and quantity of the California strawberry supply for the frozen market, and the related impacts on the commodity pricing for available fruit. In that regard, we intend to take measures to further diversify our supplier base to include a larger proportion of strawberries, and other fruit varieties, from Mexico and South America, with the aim of improving the stability of our supply. The statements in this paragraph are forward-looking statements. See "Forward-Looking Statements" above. Several factors could adversely impact our ability to meet these forward-looking expectations, including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, our assessment of the margin improvement and cost savings to be realized from productivity, network optimization and portfolio rationalization initiatives, the outcome of pricing actions with customers, the availability and commodity pricing for fruit, our intent to diversify our supplier base and our assessment of the anticipated benefits, as well as unforeseen customer actions, consumer behaviors, competitive pressures, and general economic and political conditions in North America, along with the other factors described above under "Forward-Looking Statements."
SUNOPTA INC. 37 January 2, 2021 10-K
The table below explains the decrease in reported revenues in Global Ingredients:
Global Ingredients Revenue Changes
Revenues for the year ended December 28, 2019 $10,346
Impact of the sale of the soy and corn business (10,346)
Revenues for the year ended January 2, 2021 $-
The table below explains the decrease in gross profit in Global Ingredients:
Global Ingredients Gross Profit Changes
Gross profit for the year ended December 28, 2019 $192
Impact of the sale of the soy and corn business (192)
Gross profit for the year ended January 2, 2021 $-
The table below explains the decrease in operating loss in Global Ingredients:
Global Ingredients Operating Loss Changes
Operating loss for the year ended December 28, 2019 $(187)
Decrease in gross profit, as explained above (192)
SG&A reductions from the sale of the soy and corn business 379
Operating loss for the year ended January 2, 2021 $-
Operating loss at Corporate Services increased by $4.7 million to $31.2 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared to a loss of $26.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. The table below explains the increase in operating loss:
SUNOPTA INC. 38 January 2, 2021 10-K
Corporate Services Operating Loss Changes
Operating loss for the year ended December 28, 2019 $(26,471)
Higher employee-related variable compensation and benefit costs, partially offset by the impact of headcount reductions and reduced travel costs, together with realized and unrealized mark-to-market gains on Mexican peso hedging activities, and favorable foreign exchange impact on Canadian dollar-denominated SG&A expenses (3,331)
Increased stock-based compensation costs related to equity-based annual bonus and long-term incentive plans for certain employees (2,099)
Decrease in corporate cost allocations to SunOpta operating segments, as a result of lower corporate headcount and overhead costs (1,157)
Lower employee retention costs associated with the Value Creation Plan, partially offset by higher professional fees 1,907
Operating loss for the year ended January 2, 2021 $(31,151)
Corporate cost allocations mainly consist of salaries of corporate personnel who directly support the operating segments, as well as costs related to the enterprise resource management system. These expenses are allocated to the operating segments based on (1) specific identification of allocable costs that represent a service provided to each segment and (2) a proportionate distribution of costs based on a weighting of factors such as revenue contribution and the number of people employed within each segment.
SUNOPTA INC. 39 January 2, 2021 10-K
Consolidated Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2019 and 2018
(1) The following table presents a reconciliation of segment operating income/loss to "earnings/loss from continuing operations before the following," which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure (refer to footnote (1) to the "Consolidated Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2020 and 2019" table regarding the use of this non-GAAP measure).
SUNOPTA INC. 40 January 2, 2021 10-K
(2) The following table presents a reconciliation of adjusted earnings/loss from net earnings/loss, which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure (refer to footnote (2) to the "Consolidated Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2020 and 2019" table regarding the use of this non-GAAP measure). In addition, we have prepared this table in a columnar format to present the effects of discontinued operations on our consolidated results for the periods presented. We believe this presentation assists investors in assessing the financial performance of our continuing operations.
(a) Reflects the gain on sale of the soy and corn business, which was recorded in other income.
(b) Reflects employee retention and relocation costs of $2.2 million, and professional fees of $1.4 million recorded in SG&A expenses; and employee termination costs of $8.6 million (net of the reversal of $4.1 million of previously recognized stock-based compensation related to forfeited awards previously granted to terminated employees), CEO and CFO recruitment costs of $1.3 million, and facility closure costs of $0.3 million, which were recorded in other expense and earnings from discontinued operations.
SUNOPTA INC. 41 January 2, 2021 10-K
(c) Reflects costs related to the expansion of our Allentown, Pennsylvania, plant-based beverage facility and start-up of Tradin Organic's avocado oil facility in Ethiopia, which were recorded in cost of goods sold and earnings from discontinued operations.
(d) Reflects costs related to the transition of Tradin Organic's premium juice production activities to new contract manufacturers, which were recorded in earnings from discontinued operations.
(e) Reflects product withdrawal and recall costs that were not eligible for reimbursement under insurance policies or exceeded the limits of those policies, including costs related to the recall of certain sunflower kernel products initiated in 2016, which were recorded in other expense.
(f) Other includes gains on the settlement of certain legal matters and a project cancellation, partially offset by losses on disposal of assets, insurance deductibles, and business development costs, which were recorded in other income/expense and earnings from discontinued operations.
(g) Reflects the tax effect of the preceding adjustments to earnings and reflects an overall estimated annual effective tax rate of approximately 27% for 2019 (2018 - 27%) on adjusted earnings/loss before tax.
(h) Reflects the impairment of goodwill related to our frozen fruit operations.
(i) Reflects the write-down of certain frozen fruit inventory items, due to a change in expected use of aged stocks, and reduced sales pricing and high production costs, which was recorded in cost of goods sold.
(j) Reflects costs related to the start-up of new roasting equipment for grains, seeds and legumes at our Crookston, Minnesota, facility, as well as the start-up of a second processing line at Tradin Organic's cocoa facility in the Netherlands, which were recorded in cost of goods sold and earnings from discontinued operations.
(k) Reflects costs for development, production trials and start-up costs, incremental freight charges, and employee training related to the commercialization of new consumer products, which were recorded in cost of goods sold, SG&A expenses and earnings from discontinued operations.
(l) Reflects the write-down of inventories of $0.1 million recorded in cost of goods sold; professional and consulting fees, and employee recruitment and relocation costs of $0.6 million recorded in SG&A expenses; and asset impairment, facility closure and employee termination costs of $1.7 million recorded in other expense.
(m) Reflects a bad debt reserve for notes receivable associated with a previously sold business, which was recorded in other expense.
(n) Reflects product withdrawal and recall costs that were not eligible for reimbursement under insurance policies or exceeded the limits of those policies, including costs related to the sunflower recall, which were recorded in other expense.
(o) Other included the accretion of contingent consideration obligations, gain/loss on the sale of assets, severance costs unrelated to the Value Creation Plan, and settlement of a legal matter, which were recorded in other expense/income and earnings from discontinued operations.
(p) Reflects a fair value adjustment to reduce the contingent consideration obligation related to a prior acquisition of a premium juice business, based on the results for the business in fiscal 2018, which was recorded in earnings from discontinued operations.
(q) Reflects the recovery from a third-party supplier of $1.2 million of costs incurred relating to the withdrawal of certain consumer-packaged products due to quality-related issues, which was recorded in cost of goods sold. Costs incurred related to this withdrawal were recognized in cost of goods sold in 2016.
(r) Reflects the reversal of previously recognized stock-based compensation related to performance share units granted to certain employees as the performance conditions were not achieved, which was recorded in SG&A expenses and earnings from discontinued operations.
(3) The following table presents a reconciliation of segment operating income/loss and adjusted EBITDA, which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure (refer to footnote (2) to the "Consolidated Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2020 and 2019" table regarding the use of this non-GAAP measure). In addition, as described above in footnote (2), we have prepared this table in a columnar format to present the effect of discontinued operations on our consolidated results for the periods presented. We believe this presentation assists investors in assessing the financial performance of our continuing operations.
SUNOPTA INC. 42 January 2, 2021 10-K
(a) Reflects non-controlling interests in the earnings of certain subsidiaries of Tradin Organic, which is included in earnings from discontinued operations.
(b) For 2019, consolidated stock-based compensation of $11.6 million was recorded in SG&A expenses and earnings from discontinued operations, and the reversal of $4.1 million of previously recognized stock-based compensation related to forfeited awards previously granted to terminated employees was recognized in other income.
(c) For 2019, reflects employee retention and relocation costs of $2.2 million, and professional fees of $1.4 million recorded in SG&A expenses. For 2018, reflects the write-down of remaining flexible resealable pouch and nutrition bar inventories of $0.1 million recorded in cost of goods sold; and professional and consulting fees, and employee recruitment and relocation costs of $0.6 million recorded in SG&A expenses.
(d) Reflects costs related to the expansion of our Allentown, Pennsylvania, plant-based beverage facility and start-up of Tradin Organic's avocado oil facility in Ethiopia, which were recorded in cost of goods sold and earnings from discontinued operations.
(e) Reflects costs related to the transition of Tradin Organic's premium juice production activities to new contract manufacturers, which were recorded in earnings from discontinued operations.
(f) Reflects the write-down of certain frozen fruit inventory items , due to a change in expected use of aged stocks, and reduced sales pricing and high production costs, which was recorded in cost of goods sold.
(g) Reflects costs related to the start-up of new roasting equipment for grains, seeds and legumes at our Crookston, Minnesota, facility, as well as the start-up of a second processing line at Tradin Organic's cocoa facility in the Netherlands, which were recorded in cost of goods sold and earnings from discontinued operations.
(h) Reflects costs for development, production trials and start-up costs, incremental freight charges, and employee training related to the commercialization of new consumer products, which were recorded in cost of goods sold, SG&A expenses and earnings from discontinued operations.
(i) Reflects the recovery from a third-party supplier of $1.2 million of costs incurred relating to the withdrawal of certain consumer-packaged products due to quality-related issues, which was recorded in cost of goods sold. Costs incurred related to this withdrawal were recognized in cost of goods sold in 2016.
(4) Refer to footnote (4) to the "Consolidated Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2020 and 2019" table regarding the use of certain other non-GAAP measures in the discussion of our results of operations below.
Revenues for the year ended December 28, 2019 decreased by 8.0% to $721.6 million from $784.0 million for the year ended December 29, 2018. Excluding the impact on revenues of the sale of the soy and corn business in 2019 and the exit from flexible resealable pouch and nutrition bar product lines in 2018 (a decrease in revenues of $97.2 million), a profit-neutral change to a co-manufacturing agreement with a customer (a decrease in revenues of $9.8 million), and changes in commodity-related pricing (an increase in revenues of $7.2 million), revenues increased by 5.5% in 2019, compared with 2018. The increase in revenues on an adjusted basis reflected the expansion of plant-based beverage and broth offerings and growth in plant-based ingredient extraction volumes, partially offset by declines in sales volumes for frozen fruit, net of increased pricing, and reduced demand for fruit ingredients.
SUNOPTA INC. 43 January 2, 2021 10-K
Gross profit decreased $5.0 million, or 7.1%, to $65.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared with $70.5 million for the year ended December 29, 2018. As a percentage of revenues, gross profit for the year ended December 28, 2019 was 9.1% compared to 9.0% for the year ended December 29, 2018, an increase of 10 basis points.
Gross profit for the Plant-Based Foods and Beverages segment increased $18.3 million to $58.8 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared with $40.5 million for the year ended December 29, 2018, and gross profit as a percentage of revenues increased to 16.3% in 2019 from 12.9% in 2018. For 2019, the gross profit percentage would have been 16.4%, excluding plant expansion costs of $0.3 million, compared with a gross profit percentage of 14.5% for 2018, excluding equipment start-up and product introduction costs of $5.1 million. The increase in the gross profit percentage on an adjusted basis reflected the favorable impact of higher sales and production volumes of plant-based beverages, broths and plant-based ingredients, together with improved plant utilization and productivity-driven cost savings.
Gross profit for the Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages segment decreased $15.2 million to $6.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared with $21.7 million for the year ended December 29, 2018, and gross profit as a percentage of revenues decreased to 1.9% in 2019 from 5.9% in 2018. For 2018, the gross profit percentage would have been 6.5%, excluding $3.1 million of inventory write-downs for certain frozen fruit inventory items, partially offset by the recovery of $1.2 million of previously incurred product withdrawal costs from a third-party supplier. The decline in the gross profit percentage on an adjusted basis was largely due to the impact of a shortfall of frozen strawberry supply in 2019 due to poor weather conditions in both central Mexico and California, which resulted in higher fruit purchase prices and reduced production volumes and related inefficiencies for our frozen fruit operations. The negative impact to gross profit from the strawberry shortfall was estimated to be approximately $17.7 million in 2019.
Gross profit for the Global Ingredients segment was $0.2 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared with $8.3 million for the year ended December 29, 2018, reflecting the sale of the soy and corn business in February 2019.
For the year ended December 28, 2019, we realized a total segment operating loss of $24.1 million, compared with a loss of $21.5 million for the year ended December 29, 2018, which reflected lower overall gross profit, as described above, partially offset by a $1.9 million reduction SG&A expenses. The decline in SG&A expenses reflected the elimination of expenses associated with the sale of the soy and corn business, together with workforce reductions and other cost-saving initiatives taken in 2019, partially offset by increased stock-based compensation costs related to the adoption of an equity-based bonus plan in 2019 ($3.7 million), together with higher third-party professional fees and employee recruitment, relocation and retention costs associated with the Value Creation Plan ($2.9 million).
Further details on revenues, gross profit and segment operating income/loss variances are provided below under "Segmented Operations Information."
Other income of $40.6 million for the year ended December 28, 2019 mainly reflected a pre-tax gain on sale of the soy and corn business of $44.0 million, the reversal of $4.1 million of previously recognized stock-based compensation related to forfeited awards previously granted to terminated employees, and legal settlement and project cancellation gains of $3.1 million. These other income amounts were offset mainly by employee termination and recruitment costs of $9.7 million associated with the Value Creation Plan, including costs related to our new CEO and CFO appointments, sale of the soy and corn business, and corporate office restructuring. Other expense of $5.2 million for the year ended December 29, 2018, mainly reflected a bad debt reserve of $2.2 million for notes receivable associated with a previously sold business, facility closure costs and asset impairment charges of $1.3 million related to the closure of our nutrition bar facility and the sale of our former roasted snack facility, together with $0.4 million of associated employee termination costs, as well as $1.5 million of product withdrawal and recall costs.
In 2018, we recognized a non-cash impairment charge of $81.2 million to write-off the remaining goodwill related to our frozen fruit operation. This charge was recorded in the Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages segment.
Net interest expense decreased by $0.4 million to $32.8 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared with $33.1 million for the year ended December 29, 2018. Interest expense included the amortization of debt issuance costs of $2.7 million and $2.5 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively.
We recognized a recovery of income tax of $3.1 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared with a recovery of $13.6 million for the year ended December 29, 2018. Excluding the impact of stock-based compensation, goodwill impairment and other non-deductible amounts from pre-tax earnings, our effective tax rate was 31.3% in 2019, compared with 27.5% in 2018.
SUNOPTA INC. 44 January 2, 2021 10-K
Loss from continuing operations for the year ended December 28, 2019 was $13.1 million, which was inclusive of the $44.0 million gain on the sale of the soy and corn business, compared with a loss of $127.5 million for the year ended December 29, 2018, which was inclusive of the $81.2 million goodwill impairment. Diluted loss per share from continuing operations attributable to common shareholders (after dividends and accretion on preferred stock) was $0.24 for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared with a loss per share $1.55 for the year ended December 29, 2018.
Earnings from the discontinued operations of Tradin Organic were $12.3 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared with earnings of $18.3 million for the year ended December 29, 2018. Revenues and gross profit of Tradin Organic were $468.4 million and $49.8 million, respectively, for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared with $476.9 million and $52.9 million, respectively, for the year ended December 29, 2018. The year-over-year decrease in revenues reflected reduced commodity pricing and an unfavorable foreign exchange impact on euro-denominated sales, partially offset by increased volumes for certain organic ingredients. The year-over-year decrease in gross profit reflected reduced pricing spreads for certain organic ingredients, manufacturing inefficiencies within Tradin Organic’s cocoa and sunflower processing operations, and start-up costs related to Tradin Organic’s organic avocado oil facility, partially offset by a favorable foreign exchange result in 2019 on raw material purchase contracts. In addition, earnings from discontinued operations for 2018 included a gain of $2.8 million related to the reduction in the remaining contingent consideration obligation that arose from a prior acquisition of a premium juice business.
On a consolidated basis, we realized a loss attributable to common shareholders of $8.8 million (diluted loss per share of $0.10) for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared with a loss attributable to common shareholders of $117.1 million (diluted loss per share of $1.34) for the year ended December 29, 2018.
For the year ended December 28, 2019, adjusted loss was $32.7 million, or $0.37 per diluted share, on a consolidated basis, compared with an adjusted loss of $24.5 million, or $0.28 per diluted share, on a consolidated basis for the year ended December 29, 2018. For the year ended December 28, 2019, adjusted loss from continuing operations was $45.5 million, or $0.52 per diluted share, compared with an adjusted loss from continuing operations of $41.1 million, or $0.47 per diluted share, for the year ended December 29, 2018.
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 28, 2019 was $47.3 million on a consolidated basis, compared with $52.9 million on a consolidated basis for the year ended December 29, 2018. Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations for the year ended December 28, 2019 was $19.5 million, compared with $21.5 million for the year ended December 29, 2018.
Adjusted earnings and adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures. See footnotes (2) and (3) to the table above for a reconciliation of adjusted loss and adjusted EBITDA from net earnings/loss, which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure.
Segmented Operations Information
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages contributed $361.4 million in revenues for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared to $314.1 million for the year ended December 29, 2018, an increase of $47.3 million, or 15.1%. Excluding the impact on revenues of a profit-neutral change to a co-manufacturing agreement with a customer (a decrease in revenues of $9.8 million), sales of flexible resealable pouch and nutrition bar products (a decrease in revenues of $3.1 million), and changes in sunflower commodity-related pricing (an increase in revenues of $3.6 million), Plant-Based Foods and Beverages revenues increased approximately 18.2%. The table below explains the increase in reported revenues:
SUNOPTA INC. 45 January 2, 2021 10-K
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages Revenue Changes
Revenues for the year ended December 29, 2018 $314,076
Higher sales volumes of plant-based beverages and everyday broth offerings, including output from additional aseptic processing capacity that came on-line in the third quarter of 2019, as well as increased demand for plant-based ingredients 59,477
Increased commodity pricing for domestically-sourced sunflower 3,589
Lower revenues due to a profit-neutral change to a co-manufacturing agreement with a customer (9,828)
Impact of the exit from flexible resealable pouch and nutrition bars product lines (3,103)
Lower volumes of sunflower inshell and kernel, partially offset by higher volumes of retail birdfeed and roasted snacks and ingredients (2,813)
Revenues for the year ended December 28, 2019 $361,398
Gross profit in Plant-Based Foods and Beverages increased by $18.3 million to $58.8 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared to $40.5 million for the year ended December 29, 2018, and the gross profit percentage increased by 340 basis points to 16.3%. The increase in the gross profit percentage reflected strong production volumes, improved plant utilization and productivity-driven cost savings within our plant-based beverage and ingredient extraction operations. The table below explains the increase in gross profit:
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages Gross Profit Changes
Gross profit for the year ended December 29, 2018 $40,477
Higher sales volumes, plant utilization and productivity improvements within our plant-based beverage and ingredient extraction operations 18,266
Improved margin performance for roasted snacks and ingredients, partially offset by lower sales and production volumes of sunflower inshell and kernel 69
Gross profit for the year ended December 28, 2019 $58,812
Operating income in Plant-Based Foods and Beverages increased by $18.7 million to $29.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared to $10.8 million for the year ended December 29, 2018. The table below explains the increase in operating income:
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages Operating Income Changes
Operating income for the year ended December 29, 2018 $10,766
Increase in gross profit, as explained above 18,335
Impact of workforce reductions and other cost savings initiatives 3,219
Increase in corporate cost allocations due to the realignment of Corporate Services following the sale of the soy and corn business (2,844)
Operating income for the year ended December 28, 2019 $29,476
SUNOPTA INC. 46 January 2, 2021 10-K
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages contributed $349.9 million in revenues for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared to $365.5 million for the year ended December 29, 2018, a decrease of $15.6 million, or 4.3%. Excluding the impact on revenues of changes in raw fruit commodity-related pricing (an increase in revenues of $3.6 million), Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages revenues decreased approximately 5.3%. The table below explains the decrease in reported revenues:
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages Revenue Changes
Revenues for the year ended December 29, 2018 $365,469
Reduced volumes of frozen fruit mainly into the foodservice channel, together with a modest decline in demand for fruit ingredients from yogurt producers, partially offset by increased sales pricing for frozen fruit (16,187)
Higher sales volumes of fruit snack products 570
Revenues for the year ended December 28, 2019 $349,852
Gross profit in Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages decreased by $15.2 million to $6.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared to $21.7 million for the year ended December 29, 2018, and the gross profit percentage decreased by 400 basis points to 1.9%. The decrease in the gross profit percentage primarily reflected the impact of higher commodity pricing for frozen fruit due to the shortage of strawberries, together with unfavorable production variances within our frozen fruit operations due to lower plant utilization and rework of bulk inventories to meet customer demand, together with lower volumes and plant utilization for fruit ingredients. The weather-related impact to gross profit from frozen fruit was estimated to be approximately $17.7 million in 2019, or approximately a negative 5% impact on the gross profit percentage. These factors were partially offset by strong production volumes and productivity-driven cost savings within our fruit snacks operations. The table below explains the decrease in gross profit:
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages Gross Profit Changes
Gross profit for the year ended December 29, 2018 $21,744
Impact of the strawberry shortage due to higher commodity pricing and costs associated with reduced plant utilization and rework of bulk inventories (approximately $17.7 million), and lower volumes and plant utilization for fruit ingredients, together with the impact of a claim recovery from a supplier in 2018 for $1.2 million, partially offset by higher sales pricing for frozen fruit (15,843)
Higher sales volumes, plant utilization and productivity improvements within our fruit snack operations 598
Gross profit for the year ended December 28, 2019 $6,499
Operating loss in Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages increased by $10.8 million to $26.9 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared to $16.0 million for the year ended December 29, 2018. The table below explains the increase in operating loss:
SUNOPTA INC. 47 January 2, 2021 10-K
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages Operating Loss Changes
Operating loss for the year ended December 29, 2018 $(16,029)
Decrease in gross profit, as explained above (15,245)
Increase in corporate cost allocations due to the realignment of Corporate Services resources following the sale of the soy and corn business (674)
Impact of headcount reductions due in part to the centralization of transactional and other support functions, and other cost savings initiatives, together with a favorable foreign exchange impact on our frozen fruit operations in Mexico 5,075
Operating loss for the year ended December 28, 2019 $(26,873)
The table below explains the decrease in reported revenues in Global Ingredients:
Global Ingredients Revenue Changes
Revenues for the year ended December 29, 2018 $104,427
Impact of the sale of the soy and corn business (94,081)
Revenues for the year ended December 28, 2019 $10,346
The table below explains the decrease in gross profit in Global Ingredients:
Global Ingredients Gross Profit Changes
Gross profit for the year ended December 29, 2018 $8,310
Impact of the sale of the soy and corn business (8,118)
Gross profit for the year ended December 28, 2019 $192
The table below explains the decrease in operating income in Global Ingredients:
Global Ingredients Operating Income Changes
Operating income for the year ended December 29, 2018 $2,245
Decrease in gross profit, as explained above (8,118)
Decrease in corporate cost allocations due to the sale of the soy and corn business 4,531
SG&A reductions from the sale of the soy and corn business 1,155
Operating loss for the year ended December 28, 2019 $(187)
SUNOPTA INC. 48 January 2, 2021 10-K
Operating loss at Corporate Services increased by $8.0 million to $26.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared to a loss of $18.4 million for the year ended December 29, 2018. The table below explains the increase in operating loss:
Corporate Services Operating Loss Changes
Operating loss for the year ended December 29, 2018 $(18,433)
Increased stock-based compensation costs related to the initiation of an equity-based annual bonus plan for certain employees in 2019 (3,698)
Higher non-structural third-party professional fees and employee recruitment, relocation and retention costs associated with the Value Creation Plan (2,943)
Decrease in corporate cost allocations to SunOpta operating segments (1,013)
Higher employee-related variable compensation, and salary increases, partially offset by reductions in travel and other discretionary spending, and favorable foreign exchange impact on Canadian dollar-denominated SG&A expenses (384)
Operating loss for the year ended December 28, 2019 $(26,471)
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In conjunction with the divestiture of Tradin Organic, we reduced our debt by approximately $355 million, including the redemption the of $223.5 million outstanding principal amount of our second lien notes and repayment of approximately $132 million of the outstanding borrowings under our former Global Credit Facility. Together with our entry into a new five-year credit agreement (discussed below), the reduction in our indebtedness significantly improves our leverage and provides financial flexibility for future operating and investing needs, including our plans to expand our plant-based beverage platform. In addition, the retirement of the second lien notes results in cash interest savings of approximately $21 million on an annual basis.
On December 31, 2020, we entered into a five-year credit agreement for a senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility in the maximum aggregate principal amount of $250 million, subject to borrowing base capacity. In addition, the credit agreement provides a five-year, $75 million delayed draw term loan, to be used for capital expenditures. The delayed draw term loan can be borrowed within 18 months from closing. The new credit facility replaces our previous Global Credit Facility that was set to expire on March 31, 2022, and will be used to support our operational objective and capital expenditures for the next five years, as well as our working capital and general corporate needs. As at January 2, 2021, we had outstanding borrowings of $47.3 million and available borrowing capacity of approximately $116 million under the revolving credit facility, after giving effect to $10.3 million of outstanding letters of credit, and the weighted-average interest rate on all borrowings under the revolving credit facility was 2.42%.
For more information on the new credit agreement, see note 14(1) to the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K.
On October 7, 2016, our U.S. subsidiary, SunOpta Foods Inc. ("SunOpta Foods"), issued 85,000 shares of Series A Preferred Stock (the "Series A Preferred Stock") for $85.0 million. On February 22, 2021, funds managed by Oaktree Capital Management, L.P., the holders of the Series A Preferred Stock, exchanged all of their shares of Series A Preferred Stock for 12,633,427 shares of our common stock, representing 12.3% of our issued and outstanding common shares on a post-exchange basis. The number of common shares issued in exchange for the Series A Preferred Shares was determined by dividing the aggregate liquidation preference of the Series A Preferred Stock of $88,434,000 by the exchange price of $7.00. Following the exchange, we will no longer be required to pay the 8.0% per year dividend on the Series A Preferred Stock, representing approximately $7.1 million of annual dividend savings.
SUNOPTA INC. 49 January 2, 2021 10-K
On April 24, 2020, SunOpta Foods issued 30,000 shares of Series B-1 Preferred Stock (the "Series B-1 Preferred Stock") for $30.0 million. The Series B-1 Preferred Stock currently has a liquidation preference of approximately $1,015 per share and is exchangeable into shares of our common stock at an exchange price of $2.50 per share. Cumulative preferred dividends accrue daily on the Series B-1 Preferred Stock at an annualized rate of 8.0% of the liquidation preference prior to September 30, 2029, which presently equates to quarterly dividend distributions of approximately $0.6 million, and 10.0% of the liquidation preference thereafter.
For more information on the Series A and Series B-1 Preferred Stock, see note 15 to the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K.
We have commitments under certain master lease agreements that provide for up to approximately $45 million of financing in the aggregate related to the addition of new plant-based beverage and ingredient extraction processing and packaging equipment. As at January 2, 2021, approximately $40 million of the related finance leases had not commenced. The assets underlying these leases are expected to be available for use in 2021.
We believe that our operating cash flows, together with our new revolving and term loan facilities, will be adequate to meet our operating, investing, and financing needs in the foreseeable future. However, in order to finance significant investments in our existing businesses, or significant business acquisitions, if any, that may arise in the future, we may need additional sources of cash that we could attempt to obtain through a combination of additional bank or subordinated financing, a private or public offering of debt or equity securities, or the issuance of common stock. There can be no assurance that these types of financing would be available at all or, if so, on terms that are acceptable to us. In addition, we may explore the sale of selected non-core businesses or assets from time to time to reduce our indebtedness and/or improve our position to obtain additional financing.
Cash Flows
Operating Cash Flows from Continuing Operations
Cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations was $52.7 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with cash used of $17.0 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, an increase in cash provided of $69.7 million, which reflected the period-over-period increase in our operating results, including the growth in our plant-based operations and improved performance in our frozen fruit operations, together with working capital improvements in 2020 and cost savings from headcount reductions and other measures taken in 2019.
Cash used in operating activities of continuing operations was $17.0 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared with cash provided of $6.0 million for the year ended December 29, 2018, an increase in cash used of $23.0 million. The decrease in cash provided reflected a decline in the profitability of our frozen fruit operations due to the shortfall of frozen strawberry supply in 2019, and an increase in cash payments for costs incurred under the Value Creation Plan in 2019, together with reduced working capital efficiency.
Investing Cash Flows from Continuing Operations
Cash used in investing activities of continuing operations related to capital expenditures was $24.8 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, which reflected spending on the plant-based beverage and ingredient expansion projects, together with the addition of new automation at our frozen fruit facilities, compared with capital expenditures of $28.4 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. The year-over-year decrease in capital expenditures reflect an increased use of leasing arrangements to support certain capital projects. In 2020, we paid $12.7 million to settle the foreign currency economic hedge of the cash consideration from the sale of Tradin Organic. Net proceeds from the sale of the soy and corn business were $63.3 million in 2019.
Excluding net proceeds from the sale of the soy and corn business of $63.3 million, cash used in investing activities of continuing operations was $28.4 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared with cash used of $24.0 million for the year ended December 29, 2018, an increase in cash used of $4.4 million. Cash used in 2018 related to capital expenditures to expand our plant-based beverage capacity and increase automation in our frozen fruit operations. Cash used in 2018 reflected capital expenditures of $26.9 million, related to the expansion of our plant-based beverage, roasted snack and frozen fruit processing capabilities, together with company-wide information technology enhancements, partially offset by $2.7 million from the sale of non-core businesses and assets.
SUNOPTA INC. 50 January 2, 2021 10-K
Financing Cash Flows from Continuing Operations
Cash used in financing activities of continuing operations was $386.6 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with cash used of $18.6 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, an increase in cash used of $368.0 million, which reflected the repayment of approximately $355 million of indebtedness following the sale of Tradin Organic, together with other reductions in revolver borrowings through cash generated from operations and use of the net proceeds of $26.8 million from the issuance of Series B-1 Preferred Stock in 2020.
Cash used in financing activities of continuing operation was $18.6 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared with cash provided of $17.8 million for the year ended December 29, 2018, an increase in cash used of $36.4 million, which reflected the use of the net proceeds from the sale of the soy and corn business to repay revolver borrowings in 2019.
Cash Flows from Discontinued Operations
Net cash provided by discontinued operations was $369.9 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with net cash used of $1.1 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, an increase in net cash provided of $371.0 million, which reflected the cash consideration received from the sale of Tradin Organic, together with an improved operating performance by Tradin Organic and reduced inventories of organic ingredients, offset by the repayment of revolver borrowings.
Net cash used by discontinued operations was $1.1 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, compared with net cash provided of $0.3 million for the year ended December 29, 2018, an increase in net cash used of $1.4 million, which reflected the net effect of a repayment of revolver borrowings in 2019 through the reduction of inventories of organic ingredients, compared with an increase in revolver borrowings in 2018 to support the expansion of Tradin Organic's cocoa processing operations.
Off - Balance Sheet Arrangements
There are currently no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations
The table below sets out our contractual obligations as at January 2, 2021:
Payments due by Period
Total 2021 2022-2023 2024-2025 Thereafter
$ $ $ $ $
Long-term debt 72,679 4,219 11,494 55,127 1,839
Interest on long-term debt(1) 5,890 1,314 2,288 2,288 -
Purchase commitments(2) 97,305 97,305 - - -
Operating leases 42,981 13,084 18,095 8,189 3,613
Long-term liabilities 200 200 - - -
219,055 116,122 31,877 65,604 5,452
(1) Interest on long-term debt is calculated based on scheduled repayments over the periods as indicated, using applicable interest rates at January 2, 2021.
(2) Purchase obligations primarily represent open purchase orders for raw materials used in our production processes.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, related revenues and expenses, and disclosure of gain and loss contingencies at the date of the financial statements. The estimates and assumptions made require us to exercise our judgment and are based on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. We continually evaluate the information that forms the basis of our estimates and assumptions as our business and the business environment generally changes. The use of estimates is pervasive throughout our financial statements. The following are the accounting estimates which we believe to be most significant to our business.
SUNOPTA INC. 51 January 2, 2021 10-K
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when we transfer control of promised goods to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods. Control is typically transferred when title and physical possession of the product has transferred to the customer, which is at the point in time that a product is shipped from our facilities or delivered to a specified destination, depending on the terms of the contract, and we have a present right to payment.
Consideration is typically determined based on a fixed unit price for the quantity of product transferred. Certain of our revenue contracts may give rise to an element of variable consideration in the form of rebates or discounts; however, variable consideration has historically been immaterial in the context of the total consideration due under the contracts. We do not typically grant customers a general right of return for goods transferred, but we will generally accept returns of product for quality-related issues. The cost of satisfying this promise of quality is accounted for as an assurance-type warranty obligation rather than variable consideration. Our contracts do not typically include any significant payment terms, as payment is normally due shortly after the time of transfer.
Revenue contracts are typically represented by short-term, binding purchase orders from customers. The timing of our revenue recognition, customer billings and cash collections, does not result in significant unbilled receivables (contract assets) or customer advances (contract liabilities) on the consolidated balance sheet. Contract costs, such as sales commissions, are generally expensed as incurred given the short-term nature of the associated contracts.
See note 2 of the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K for disclosures related to revenue.
Accounts Receivable
Our accounts receivable primarily includes amounts due from our customers. The carrying value of each account is carefully monitored with a view to assessing the likelihood of collection. An allowance for credit losses is provided for as an estimate of losses that could result from customers defaulting on their obligations to us. In assessing the amount of allowance required, a number of factors are considered including the age of the account, the credit-worthiness of the customer, payment terms, the customer's historical payment history, and general economic conditions. Because the amount of the allowance is an estimate, the actual amount collected could differ from the carrying value of the amount receivable. Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K provides a summary of the changes in the allowance for credit losses.
Inventory
Inventory is our largest current asset and consists primarily of raw materials and finished goods held for sale. Inventories are valued at the lower of cost and estimated net realizable value. In order to determine the value of inventory at the balance sheet date, we evaluate a number of factors to determine the adequacy of provisions for inventory. These factors include the age of inventory, the amount of inventory held by type, future demand for products, and the expected future selling price we expect to realize by selling the inventory. Our estimates are judgmental in nature and are made at a point in time, using available information, including expected business plans and market conditions. As a result, the actual amount received on sale could differ from our estimated value of inventory. Note 8 of the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K provides a summary of the movements in the inventory reserve.
Leases
Lease assets and liabilities are recognized and measured based on the present value of future lease payments over the lease term. In measuring lease assets and liabilities, critical estimates and assumptions include the amount and timing of the future lease payments based on the expected lease term, and the discount rate to apply to those future lease payments. We generally use initial noncancelable lease term when determining the lease asset and liability. The discount rate used to determine the present value of the future lease payments is the implicit rate in the lease if readily determinable. When that rate is not readily determinable, we use our incremental borrowing rate, which we estimate using relevant interest rate yield curves and credit spreads derived from available market data and our corporate credit rating.
See note 10 of the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K for disclosures related to leases.
SUNOPTA INC. 52 January 2, 2021 10-K
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess in a business combination of the purchase price over the estimated fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized but is instead tested for impairment at least annually, or whenever events or circumstances change between the annual impairment tests that would indicate the carrying amount of goodwill may be impaired. We perform the annual test for goodwill impairment in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below. Goodwill impairment charges are recognized based on the excess of a reporting unit's carrying amount over its estimated fair value.
We can elect to qualitatively assess goodwill for impairment if it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value. If we elect to quantitatively assess goodwill, or it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, we estimate the fair values of each of our reporting units. Fair value is determined using an income approach (discounted cash flow method). We believe an income approach provides the most reliable indication of fair value as it reflects forecasted revenues and earnings based on business and market conditions that are unique to each individual reporting unit, which a market approach may not fully incorporate. Because the business is assumed to continue in perpetuity, the discounted cash flows include a terminal value. Cash flows to perpetuity are forecasted based on projected revenue growth and our planned business strategies in future periods. Examples of planned strategies would include a plant or line expansion at an existing facility; a reduction of working capital at a specific location; and price increases or cost reductions within a reporting unit. The discount rate is based on a reporting unit's targeted weighted-average cost of capital, which is not necessarily the same as our weighted-average cost of capital. These assumptions are subject to change and are impacted by our ability to achieve our forecasts and by economic conditions that may impact future results and result in projections not being attained. Each year we re-evaluate the assumptions used to reflect changes in the business environment.
For the year ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, we performed a qualitative assessment of goodwill and determined that the fair values of the Tradin Organic and Fruit Snacks reporting units with goodwill significantly exceeded their carrying values. As a result, we concluded that goodwill was not impaired in 2020 or 2019. Based on the results of quantitative testing performed for the year ended December 29, 2018, we recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $81.2 million (accumulated $196.2 million) to fully write-off the goodwill associated with the Frozen Fruit reporting unit, which is included in the Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages segment.
Intangible Assets
We evaluate amortizable intangible assets acquired through business combinations for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of these assets may not be recoverable. Our evaluation is based on an assessment of potential indicators of impairment, such as an adverse change in the business climate that could affect the value of an asset; the loss of a significant customer; current or forecasted operating or cash flow losses that demonstrate continuing losses associated with the use of an asset; the introduction of a competing product that results in a significant loss of market share; and a current expectation that, more likely than not, an intangible asset will be disposed of before the end of its previously estimated useful life, such as a plan to exit a product line or business in the near term.
Impairment exists when the carrying amount of an amortizable intangible asset is not recoverable through undiscounted future cash flows and its carrying value exceeds its estimated fair value. A discounted cash flow analysis is typically used to determine fair value using estimates and assumptions that market participants would apply. Some of the estimates and assumptions inherent in a discounted cash flow model include the amount and timing of the projected future cash flows, and the discount rate used to reflect the risks inherent in the future cash flows. A change in any of these estimates and assumptions could produce a different fair value, which could have a material impact on our results of operations. In addition, an intangible asset's expected useful life can increase estimation risk, as longer-lived assets necessarily require longer-term cash flow forecasts, which for some of our long-lived assets can be in excess of 20 years. In connection with an impairment evaluation, we also reassess the remaining useful life of the intangible asset and modify it, as appropriate.
Contingencies
We make estimates for payments that are contingent on the outcome of uncertain future events. These contingencies include accrued but unpaid bonuses; tax-related matters; and claims or litigation. In establishing our estimates, we consider historical experience with similar contingencies and the progress of each contingency, as well as the recommendations of internal and external advisors and legal counsel. We re-evaluate all contingencies as additional information becomes available; however, given the inherent uncertainties, the ultimate amount paid could differ from our estimates.
SUNOPTA INC. 53 January 2, 2021 10-K
Income Taxes
We are liable for income taxes in the U.S., Canada, and Mexico. Our effective tax rate differs from the statutory tax rate and will vary from year to year primarily as a result of numerous permanent differences, investment and other tax credits, the provision for income taxes at different rates in foreign and other provincial jurisdictions, enacted statutory tax rate increases or reductions in the year, the benefit of cross-jurisdictional financing structures, changes due to foreign exchange, changes in valuation allowance based on our recoverability assessments of deferred tax assets, and favorable or unfavorable resolution of various tax examinations.
In making an estimate of our income tax liability, we first assess which items of income and expense are taxable in a particular jurisdiction. This process involves a determination of the amount of taxes currently payable as well as the assessment of the effect of temporary timing differences resulting from different treatment of items for accounting and tax purposes. These differences in the timing of the recognition of income or the deductibility of expenses result in deferred income tax balances that are recorded as assets or liabilities as the case may be on our balance sheet. We also estimate the amount of valuation allowance to maintain relating to loss carry forwards and other balances that can be used to reduce future taxes payable. This judgment is based on forecasted results in the jurisdiction and certain tax planning strategies and as a result actual results may differ from forecasts. We assess the likelihood of the ultimate realization of these tax assets by looking at the relative size of the tax assets in relation to the profitability of the businesses and the jurisdiction to which they can be applied, the number of years based on management's estimate it will take to use the tax assets and any other special circumstances. If different judgments had been used, our income tax liability could have been different from the amount recorded. In addition, the taxing authorities of those jurisdictions upon audit may not agree with our assessment. Note 19 of the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K provides an analysis of the changes in the valuation allowance and the components of our deferred tax assets.
While we believe we have adequately provided for all tax positions, amounts asserted by taxing authorities could differ from our accrued position. Accordingly, additional provisions on federal, provincial, state and foreign tax-related matters could be recorded in the future as revised estimates are made or the underlying matters are settled or otherwise resolved.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recent accounting pronouncements is provided in note 1 of the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K.