Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and consolidated results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should carefully read the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” to gain an understanding of the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are pioneering a new way to treat the underlying causes of severe genetic diseases by precisely upregulating protein expression. We are developing novel antisense oligonucleotide (“ASO”), medicines that target ribonucleic acid (“RNA”), and modulate precursor-messenger RNA, splicing to upregulate protein expression where needed and with appropriate specificity to near normal levels. We utilize our proprietary RNA therapeutics platform, Targeted Augmentation of Nuclear Gene Output (“TANGO”), to design ASOs to upregulate the expression of protein by individual genes in a patient. Our approach is designed to allow us to deliver in a highly precise, durable and controlled manner disease-modifying therapies to a wide range of relevant tissues, including the central nervous system, eye, kidney and liver.
We were incorporated in June 2014. In July 2015 and April 2016, we entered into worldwide license agreements with Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (“CSHL”), and the University of Southampton, respectively, with respect to certain licensed patents and applications relating to TANGO. TANGO exploits non-productive splicing events to effect targeted enhancement of protein expression. Since our inception through June 21, 2019, our operations had been financed primarily from the sale of convertible notes payable and our convertible preferred stock.
On June 21, 2019, we completed an initial public offering (“IPO”), of our common stock and issued and sold 9,074,776 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $18.00 per share, which included 1,183,666 shares sold upon full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares of common stock resulting in net proceeds of $151.9 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions but before deducting offering costs of approximately $2.5 million.
In July 2020, we filed a universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (the “Registration Statement”) with the SEC. The Registration Statement was declared effective by the SEC on July 20, 2020, and covers the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $400,000,000 of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants to purchase our common stock, preferred stock or debt securities, subscription rights to purchase our common stock, preferred stock or debt securities and/or units consisting of some or all of these securities. On July 10, 2020, we entered into an “at-the-market” program and sales agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., or Cantor, and Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, or Stifel, under which we may, from time to time, offer and sell common stock having an aggregate offering value of up to $150.0 million, referred to as our “at-the-market” offering with Cantor and Stifel. As of December 31, 2020, no such shares of our common stock had been offered or sold pursuant to this “at-the-market” program with Cantor and Stifel. We may terminate this at-the-market program at any time, pursuant to its terms.
On November 24, 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering, of our common stock and issued and sold 2,875,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $39.00 per share, which included 375,000 shares sold upon full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares of common stock resulting in net proceeds of $104.9 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses.
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had $287.5 million and $222.7 million, respectively, in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash.
Since inception, we have had operating losses, the majority of which are attributable to research and development activities. Our net losses were $52.3 million and $32.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $110.3 million and as of December 31, 2019, we had an accumulated deficit of $58.0 million.
Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures, and to a lesser extent, general and administrative expenditures. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses. We expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect our research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses, and capital expenditures will continue to increase. In particular, we expect our expenses and losses to increase as we continue our development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our
product candidates, and begin to commercialize any approved products, as well as hire additional personnel, develop commercial infrastructure, pay fees to outside consultants, lawyers and accountants, and incur increased costs associated with being a public company such as expenses related to services associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq listing rules and Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) requirements, insurance and investor relations costs. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our clinical trials and our expenditures on other research and development activities.
Based upon our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash as of December 31, 2020, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into 2024. To date, we have not had any products approved for sale and have not generated any product sales. We do not expect to generate any revenues from product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for one or more of our product candidates, which we expect will take a number of years. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. As a result, until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Any failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and on our ability to pursue our business plans and strategies. If we are unable to raise capital, we will need to delay, reduce or terminate planned activities to reduce costs.
In July 2020, we filed a universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (the “Registration Statement”) with the SEC. The Registration Statement was declared effective by the SEC on July 20, 2020, and contains two prospectuses: a base prospectus, which covers the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $400,000,000 of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants to purchase our common stock, preferred stock or debt securities, subscription rights to purchase our common stock, preferred stock or debt securities and/or units consisting of some or all of these securities; and a sales agreement prospectus covering the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $150,000,000 of our common stock that may be issued and sold under a Controlled Equity Offering Sales Agreement. The specific terms of any securities to be offered pursuant to the base prospectus will be specified in a prospectus supplement to the base prospectus. The $150,000,000 of common stock that may be offered, issued and sold under the sales agreement prospectus is included in the $400,000,000 of securities that may be offered, issued and sold by us under the base prospectus.
Business Update Regarding COVID-19
The current COVID-19 pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world and is affecting our employees, patients, communities and business operations, as well as the U.S. economy and financial markets. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations, liquidity and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets.
To date, our third party contract research organizations (“CROs”), contract manufacturing organizations (“CMOs”), and other third party vendors have been able to continue to provide services and supply reagents, materials, and products and currently do not anticipate any significant disruption in services or interruptions in supply. We have pursued mitigation strategies to keep key research activities on track. Our third-party CMOs continue to operate their manufacturing facilities at or near normal levels. While we currently do not anticipate any significant interruptions in our manufacturing processes, it is possible that the COVID-19 pandemic and response efforts may have an impact in the future on our third-party suppliers and CMO’s ability to manufacture reagents, materials, or products that we need to use in our research and clinical trial. However, we are continuing to assess the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations, including our expenses, our observational study, our clinical trial, and our ability to hire and retain employees.
Our ability to continue our observational study may be adversely affected, directly or indirectly, by the COVID-19 pandemic. Currently we are monitoring patient enrollment in our observational study, including the duration and degree to which we may see declines in enrollment, delays in conducting in-person follow-ups, and disruptions in our ability to monitor patients due to hospitals closing sites or diverting the resources that are necessary to conduct our observational study. Despite a slowdown in new patient enrollment due to the impact of COVID-19 on sites, we believe we have achieved sufficient participation in the study to provide informative data about the natural progression of Dravet syndrome.
While we continue to enroll and dose patients in our Phase 1/2a clinical trial at sites across the United States, we expect that COVID-19 precautions may directly or indirectly impact the timeline for some of our clinical trial activities due to hospitals closing sites and/or diverting the resources that are necessary to conduct clinical trials. We are pursuing approaches to help mitigate the impact to our clinical trial. Currently we have not experienced any substantial delay in initiating our clinical trial.
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused us to modify our business practices (including but not limited to curtailing or modifying employee travel, moving to partial remote work, and cancelling physical participation in meetings, events and conferences) and we may take further actions as may be required by government authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, patients and business partners.
Our office-based employees have been working from home since early March 2020, while ensuring essential staffing levels in our operations remain in place, including maintaining key personnel in our laboratories.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please read Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this report.
Program Update
Dravet syndrome clinical program-STK-001
We designed our lead product candidate, STK-001, to treat Dravet syndrome, a severe and progressive genetic epilepsy. This program draws on a well-defined patient population based on routine genetic testing and learnings from drugs approved for the treatment of Dravet syndrome to inform the clinical and regulatory pathways for STK-001.
We submitted an investigational new drug application (“IND”) for STK-001 to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”) in late 2019. In August 2020, we dosed the first patient with STK-001 in the single ascending dose portion of the MONARCH Phase 1/2a Study at the 10mg dose level.
The MONARCH Study is designed to evaluate single and multiple ascending dose levels of STK-001 in children and adolescents with Dravet syndrome. Patients are eligible for the trial if they are between the ages of 2 to 18, have an established diagnosis of Dravet syndrome and have evidence of a pathogenic genetic mutation in the SCN1A gene. Requiring an SCN1A mutation (of which more than 1,700 SCN1A mutations have been identified) for trial enrollment allows for a clear and definitive etiologic diagnosis, a more homogeneous patient population and tailored treatment based on a precision medicine approach. Eligible patients will also have failed at least two epilepsy treatments in the past and currently be taking at least one antiepileptic drug. All medications and interventions will remain unchanged throughout the trial, which will allow for assessment of STK-001 with a variety of antiepileptic therapies.
The primary objectives are the assessment of the safety and tolerability of STK-001, as well as to characterize human pharmacokinetics. A secondary objective is to assess the efficacy as an adjunctive antiepileptic treatment with respect to the percentage change from baseline in convulsive seizure frequency over a 12-week treatment period. We are measuring non-seizure aspects of the disease, such as quality of life as secondary endpoints. These endpoints as well as other exploratory endpoints will be informed based on our two-year observational study (BUTTERFLY). Enrollment in BUTTERFLY is complete and the study is ongoing. BUTTERFLY is designed to evaluate seizure frequency and non-seizure comorbidities associated with the disease, including motor and speech impairment, intellectual and developmental disabilities, behavioral deficits and abnormal sleep patterns. Data from the study will support clinical development plans for STK-001.
In March 2020, we announced the FDA had placed a partial clinical hold on doses of STK-001 above 20mg in the MONARCH Study, pending additional preclinical testing to determine the safety profile of doses higher than the current no observed adverse effect level (“NOAEL”). When intrathecal doses above the NOAEL were administered to non-human primates (“NHPs”) adverse hind limb paresis was observed. This finding is known to occur following intrathecal delivery of ASOs to NHPs and is not known to translate to the human experience. When extremely high dose levels were administered, acute convulsions were observed immediately following STK-001 administration. The dose levels were well above the range of corresponding human doses that would ever be administered in the clinic and were delivered in a formulation that was at a higher concentration than would be administered in the clinic. There is no apparent correlation of these acute adverse events with the mechanism of action of STK-001.
Following interactions with the FDA, in October 2020, we announced that the FDA agreed to allow us to add an additional higher dose level to the SAD portion of the study such that a total of three dose levels will be evaluated: 10 mg, 20 mg, and 30mg. Dosing above 30mg in this study remains on FDA partial clinical hold.
In addition, a multiple ascending dose (“MAD”) portion was added to the MONARCH Study based on preclinical repeat-dose toxicology data, which were reviewed by the FDA. There were no adverse effects observed in the NHP repeat dose study.
Enrollment and dosing in the first two cohorts (10mg and 20mg) of the single ascending dose portion of the study are now complete. Enrollment and dosing of patients in the 30mg single ascending dose cohort is now underway. In February
2021, the first patient in the MAD portion of the study was dosed with STK-001 at the 20mg level. We expect to announce initial safety and pharmacokinetic data from the SAD portion of the MONARCH Study in the second half of 2021.
In January 2021, we initiated enrollment and dosing in our SWALLOWTAIL Open Label Extension (OLE) study of STK-001 for children and adolescents with Dravet syndrome. SWALLOWTAIL is designed to evaluate the long-term safety and tolerability of repeated doses of STK-001 in patients with Dravet syndrome who previously participated in studies of STK-001. In this study, patients will initially be administered the same dose level they received in the previous study and will receive a maximum of three doses. One dose will be administered every four months.
While we continue working to minimize any potential delay to continued clinical testing of STK-001, we expect that the COVID-19 pandemic may directly or indirectly impact the timeline. Our ability to continue the clinical trial or initiate the MAD portion of the clinical trial may be adversely affected, directly or indirectly, by the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, although our Phase 1/2a study of STK-001 for the treatment of Dravet syndrome has not been delayed, we plan to have clinical trial sites in various parts of the United States, some of which have had high incident rates of COVID-19 patients. Restrictions on travel and/or transport of clinical materials, as well as diversion of hospital staff and resources to COVID-19 infected patients, could disrupt trial operations as well as recruitment, possibly resulting in a slowdown in enrollment and/or deviations from or disruptions in key clinical trial activities, such as clinical trial site monitoring. These challenges may lead to difficulties in meeting protocol-specified procedures.
We have not yet discussed with regulatory authorities the evidence necessary for approval of STK-001. However, in addition to requesting Fast Track Designation, if we see evidence of clinical efficacy, then we would plan to meet with regulatory authorities to discuss expedited regulatory pathways, such as Breakthrough Therapy Designation.
Autosomal Dominant Optic Atrophy Program
In November 2020, we announced the nomination of OPA1 as our next target for preclinical development to treat Autosomal Dominant Optic Atrophy (“ADOA”). ADOA is the most common inherited optic nerve disorder seen in clinical practice and causes progressive and irreversible vision loss in both eyes starting in the first decade of life. Many children progress to blindness. Roughly half of people with ADOA fail driving standards and up to 46% are registered as legally blind. The disease affects one in 30,000 people globally with a higher incidence of approximately one in 10,000 in Denmark due to a founder effect. 65% to 90% of ADOA is caused by mutations in one allele of the OPA1 gene, most of which leads to haploinsufficiency and disease manifestation. More than 400 different OPA1 mutations have been reported in people diagnosed with ADOA. Most mutations result in a severe decrease - up to 50% - of the normal amount of the OPA1 protein. There is no strong genotype-phenotype correlation.
OPA1 is a dynamin-related GTPase that plays a key role in maintaining mitochondria structure and dynamics. The OPA1 protein is imported into the mitochondria and is the crucial molecule that mediates inner mitochondria membrane fusion and cristae morphogenesis and is critical for oxidative phosphorylation and ATP synthesis. Insufficient OPA1 activity causes mitochondria dysfunction with consequent insufficient ATP production, excess reactive oxygen species production and eventual cell death. High energy demanding cells such as neurons and cardiomyocytes are particularly susceptible to mitochondria dysfunction, and retinal ganglion cells (“RGCs”) are a neuronal cell type most susceptible to loss of OPA1 protein as evidenced by RGC death in ADOA caused by OPA1 haploinsufficiency.
A clinical diagnosis of ADOA is made when a patient meets some or all of the following criteria: pathogenic variant of the OPA1 gene identified in the patient or a family member; reduced visual acuity; temporal disc pallor; visual field defect; color vision defect (acquired blue-yellow loss); thinning of retinal nerve fiber layer and abnormal visual evoked potentials. Clinical findings are based on: intraocular pressure measurement; visual field assessment; color discrimination; dilated slit lamp biomicroscopy; optical coherence tomography; or visual electrophysiology. Patients suspected of ADOA are recommended to receive genetic testing to confirm the clinical diagnosis, help identify other family members who are affected and ensure patients avoid stressors that could increase disease progression (e.g. smoking, alcohol). The prognosis for many patients with ADOA is poor and the rate of visual loss can be difficult to predict given significant inter- and intra-familial variability.
There are currently no available treatments for ADOA. Because ADOA causes deterioration of the optic nerves, corrective aids such as glasses or contacts do not help to improve vision lost to the disease. Supportive services and low-vision aids are offered for patients with severely decreased visual acuity. Our ASOs are designed to target the underlying cause of ADOA, which is OPA1 haploinsufficiency, by decreasing a non-productive mRNA splicing event in the OPA1 gene to increase productive OPA1 mRNA and OPA1 protein in the retinal ganglion cells.
Financial operations overview
Revenue
We currently do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue since inception. If we are able to successfully develop, receive regulatory approval for and commercialize any of our current or future product candidates alone or in collaboration with third parties, we may generate revenue from the sales of these product candidates.
Operating expenses
Research and development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of our discovery work and preclinical programs, which include:
•
personnel costs, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense;
•
expenses incurred under agreements with consultants, third-party contract organizations that conduct research and development activities on our behalf, costs related to production of preclinical material and laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of preclinical studies;
•
scientific consulting, collaboration and licensing fees;
•
laboratory supplies; and
•
facilities costs, depreciation and other expenses related to internal research and development activities.
We use our personnel and infrastructure resources across multiple research and development programs directed toward identifying and developing product candidates. Our direct research and development expenses are tracked on a program-by-program basis from the point a program becomes a clinical candidate for us and consists primarily of external costs, such as fees paid to consultants, central laboratories and contractors in connection with our preclinical activities. We do not allocate employee costs, costs associated with our technology or facility expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific programs because these costs are currently deployed across multiple product development programs and, as such, are not separately classified. We use internal resources to manage our development activities and our employees work across multiple development programs and, therefore, we do not track their costs by program.
The table below summarizes our research and development expenses incurred by development program:
We expense all research and development costs in the periods in which they are incurred. Costs for certain development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors and third-party service providers.
We expect that our expenses will increase substantially in connection with our planned discovery work, preclinical and clinical development activities in the near term and our planned clinical trials in the future. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the costs for completing the preclinical and clinical development of any of our other product candidates. We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and development activities related to developing our product candidates, including investments in manufacturing, as our programs advance into later stages of development and we conduct clinical trials. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming, and the successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. As a result, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we cannot determine with certainty the duration and completion costs of the current or future preclinical studies and clinical trials or if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenues from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for our product candidates. The duration, costs and timing of preclinical studies and clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including:
•
successful completion of preclinical studies and investigational new drug-enabling studies;
•
successful enrollment in, and completion of, clinical trials;
•
receipt of regulatory approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•
furthering our commercial manufacturing capabilities and arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
•
obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and non-patent exclusivity;
•
launching commercial sales of our product candidates, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
•
acceptance of our product candidates, if and when approved, by patients, the medical community and third-party payors;
•
effectively competing with other therapies and treatment options;
•
a continued acceptable safety profile following approval;
•
enforcing and defending intellectual property and proprietary rights and claims; and
•
achieving desirable medicinal properties for the intended indications.
A change in the outcome of any of these factors could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of our current and future preclinical and clinical product candidates. For example, if the FDA, or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development, or if we experience significant delays in execution of or enrollment in any of our preclinical studies or clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of preclinical and clinical development. We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of product candidates.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, costs related to maintenance and filing of intellectual property, expenses for outside professional services, including legal, human resources, information technology, audit and accounting services, and facilities and other expenses. Personnel costs consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase over the next several years to support our continued research and development activities, manufacturing activities, increased costs of operating as a public company and the potential commercialization of our product candidates. These increases are anticipated to include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel, developing commercial infrastructure, fees to outside consultants, lawyers and accountants, and increased costs associated with being a public company such as expenses related to services associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq listing rules and SEC requirements, insurance and investor relations costs.
Other income (expense)
The decrease in our other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 principally reflects decreased interest income due to overall decreased market interest rates.
Results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth our results of operations:
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $32.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $23.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $8.4 million. The table below summarizes our research and development expenses:
The increases in research and development expenses were primarily attributable to the increase of $7.4 million in personnel-related expenses, stock compensation expense and facilities costs resulting from increased growth in our research and development personnel. Increases of $0.7 million in our STK-001 and OPA 1 programs were comprised primarily of third party services and scientific consulting fees.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $20.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $11.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $8.9 million.
The increases in general and administrative expenses were primarily attributable to an increase of $3.4 million in personnel costs and $2.5 million in stock compensation expense resulting from an increase in headcount, an increase of $1.2 million in D&O insurance expense due to increased premiums, an increase of $0.8 million in IP legal fees due to current phases of patents, and an increase of $0.5 million in third-party services to support our in-house personnel in various aspects of developing and supporting the business including human resources, information technology, audit, tax, public relations, communications and other general and administrative activities.
Other income (expense)
The decrease in our other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 principally reflects decreased interest income due to overall decreased market interest rates.
Liquidity and capital resources
Since our inception through December 31, 2020, our operations have been financed by net proceeds of $385.3 million from the sale of convertible notes payable and our convertible preferred stock as well as our IPO and follow-on offering. As of December 31, 2020, we had $287.5 million in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash. Cash in excess of immediate requirements is invested in accordance with our investment policy, primarily with a view to liquidity and capital preservation.
We have incurred losses since our inception in June 2014 and, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had accumulated deficits of $110.3 million and $58.0 million, respectively. Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures, and to a lesser extent, general and administrative expenditures. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Our product candidates may never achieve commercialization and we anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future. We expect that our research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses, and capital expenditures will continue to increase. As a result, until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, third-party clinical research and development services, costs relating to the build-out of our headquarters and manufacturing facility, license payments or milestone obligations that may arise, laboratory and related supplies, clinical costs, manufacturing costs, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead costs.
Based upon our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash as of December 31, 2020, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into 2024. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. We will continue to require additional financing to advance our current product candidates through clinical development, to develop, acquire or in-license other potential product candidates and to fund operations for the foreseeable future. We will continue to seek funds through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. Any failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and on our ability to pursue our business plans and strategies. If we are unable to raise capital, we will need to delay, reduce or terminate planned activities to reduce costs.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•
the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing our lead product candidates or any future product candidates, and conducting nonclinical studies and clinical trials;
•
the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals or clearances for our lead product candidates or any future product candidates;
•
the number and characteristics of any additional product candidates we develop or acquire;
•
the timing of any cash milestone payments if we successfully achieve certain predetermined milestones;
•
the cost of manufacturing our lead product candidates or any future product candidates and any products we successfully commercialize, including costs associated with building-out our manufacturing capabilities;
•
our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of any such agreements that we may enter into;
•
the expenses needed to attract and retain skilled personnel;
•
the costs associated with being a public company; and
•
the timing, receipt and amount of sales of any future approved or cleared products, if any.
Further, our operating plans may change, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements for clinical trials and other research and development activities. We currently have no credit facility or committed sources of capital. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenditures associated with our current and anticipated product development programs.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows:
Operating activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $42.2 million and was attributable to a net loss of $52.2 million, a net change of $3.4 million in our operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by non-cash charges of $6.7 million for share-based compensation and depreciation.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $31.1 million and was attributable to a net loss of $32.3 million, a net change of $1.1 million in our operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by non-cash charges of $2.3 million for share-based compensation and depreciation.
Investing activities
Our investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 have consisted principally of purchases of property and equipment.
Financing activities
Our financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily included net proceeds of $104.9 million attributed to an underwritten public offering of our common stock, $2.8 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon exercise of stock options, and $0.4 million in proceeds from our Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
Our financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily included net proceeds of $149.4 million from our Initial Public Offering in June 2019.
Contractual obligations and commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the effects that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods:
In August 2018, we entered into an agreement to lease approximately 23,000 square feet of space for a term of three years. Lease terms are triple net lease commencing at $0.9 million per year, then with 3% annual base rent increases plus operating expenses, real estate taxes, utilities and janitorial fees. The lease commencement date was December 10, 2018.
In December 2018, we entered into an agreement to lease 2,485 square feet of space for a term of three years. The lease includes one renewal option for an additional two years. Lease terms commence at $0.2 million per year, with 2.5% annual base rent increases plus operating expenses, real estate taxes, utilities and janitorial fees. We occupied this space in May 2019.
Commitments
Our commitments primarily consist of obligations under our agreements with CSHL and the University of Southampton. As of December 31, 2020, we were unable to estimate the timing or likelihood of achieving the milestones or making future product sales. For additional information regarding our agreements, see “Business-License agreements.”
Additionally, we have entered into agreements with third-party contract manufacturers for the manufacture and processing of certain of our product candidates for preclinical testing purposes, and we have entered and will enter into other contracts in the normal course of business with contract research organizations for clinical trials and other vendors for other services and products for operating purposes. These agreements generally provide for termination or cancellation, other than for costs already incurred.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
During the periods presented, we did not have, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under SEC rules.
Critical accounting policies and significant judgments and estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical in order to fully understand and evaluate our financial condition and results of operations.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing financial statements, we are required to estimate and accrue research and development expenses. This process involves the following:
•
communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost;
•
estimating and accruing expenses in our consolidated financial statements as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at the time; and
•
periodically confirming the accuracy of our estimates with selected service providers and making adjustments, if necessary.
Examples of estimated research and development expenses that we accrue include:
•
fees paid to investigative sites in connection with clinical studies;
•
fees paid to contract manufacturing organizations in connection with non-clinical development, preclinical research, and the production of clinical study materials; and
•
professional service fees for consulting and related services.
We base our expense accruals related to non-clinical development, preclinical studies, and clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with organizations/consultants that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts may depend on many factors, such as the successful enrollment of patients, site initiation, and the completion of clinical study milestones.
Our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If we do not identify costs that we have begun to incur, or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates. To date, we have not experienced significant changes in our estimates of accrued research and development expenses after a reporting period. However, due to the nature of estimates, we cannot assure you that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the status or conduct of our clinical trials and other research activities.
Stock-based compensation
Stock Options
We recognize compensation costs related to share-based awards granted to employees and directors, including stock options, based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. We estimate the grant date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The grant date fair value of the stock-based awards is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective awards.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions to determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
•
Fair value of common stock-Historically, for all periods prior to our initial public offering, the fair value of the shares of common stock underlying our share-based awards was estimated on each grant date by our board of directors. To determine the fair value of our common stock underlying option grants, our board of directors considered, among other things, valuations of our common stock prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, or the Practice Aid. Since becoming a public company we have used our stock price to determine fair value of our common stock.
•
Expected term-The expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term for option grants is determined using the simplified method. The simplified method deems the expected term to be the midpoint between the vesting date and the contractual life of the stock-based awards.
•
Expected volatility- We completed our IPO in June 2019 and accordingly, we lack sufficient company-specific historical and implied volatility information for our shares traded in the public markets. Therefore, we estimate our expected share price volatility based on the historical volatility of publicly traded peer companies and expect to continue to do so until such time as we have adequate historical data regarding the volatility of our own traded share price. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty.
•
Expected term- The expected term of our stock options has been determined utilizing the "simplified" method for awards.
•
Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of option.
•
Expected dividend-We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
The following table presents the weighted-average assumptions used to estimate the fair value of share-based awards granted:
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions utilized for our share-based compensation expense calculations on a prospective basis. In addition to the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, the amount of stock-based compensation expense we recognize in our consolidated financial statements includes actual stock option forfeitures.
Other Information
Net Operating Loss Carryforwards
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had federal net operating loss carryforwards of $116.9 million and $54.5 million, respectively, which may be available to reduce future taxable income, and expire at various dates beginning in 2034, for those net operating loss carryforwards generated prior to 2018. Net operating losses generated in 2018 and beyond have no expiration. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had state net operating loss carry forwards of $118.8 million and $56.3 million, respectively, which may be available to reduce future taxable income and expire at various dates beginning in 2034. In addition, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had federal research and development tax credit carryforwards of $2.0 million and $1.5 million, respectively, and state research and development tax credit carry forwards of $1.0 million and $0.8 million, respectively. Both federal and state research and development tax credit carry forwards may be available to reduce future tax liabilities and expire at various dates beginning in 2030.
In accordance with Statement of Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 740, Accounting for Income Taxes, our management has evaluated the positive and negative evidence bearing upon the realizability of its deferred tax assets, which are comprised principally of net operating loss carryforwards. Management has determined that it is more likely than not that we will not recognize the benefits of federal and state deferred tax assets and, as a result, a full valuation allowance of $37.2 million and $17.9 million was established at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change in the valuation allowance was an increase of $19.3 million and $10.3 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Utilization of the net operating loss carryforwards and research and development tax credit carryforwards may be subject to a substantial annual limitation under Sections 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the Code due to ownership changes that have occurred previously or that could occur in the future. These ownership changes may limit the amount of carryforwards that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income. We have not conducted a formal study to assess whether a change of control has occurred or whether there have been multiple changes of control since inception due to the significant complexity and cost associated with such a study. If we have experienced a change of control, as defined for purposes of Section 382 and 383 of the Code, at any time since inception, utilization of the net operating loss carryforwards or research and development tax credit carryforwards may be subject to an annual limitation under Section 382 and 383 of the Code, which is determined by first multiplying the value of our stock at the time of the ownership change by
the applicable long-term tax-exempt rate, and then could be subject to additional adjustments, as required. Any limitation may result in expiration of a portion of the net operating loss carryforwards or research and development tax credit carryforwards before utilization.
We apply ASC 740 related to accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. Our reserves related to income taxes are based on a determination of whether, and how much of, a tax benefit taken by us in our tax filings or positions is more likely than not to be realized following resolution of any potential contingencies present related to the tax benefit. At December 31, 2020, and 2019 we had no unrecognized tax benefits. Interest and penalty charges, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits would be classified as income tax expense in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Emerging growth company and smaller reporting company status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies.
We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act.
As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) the last day of our first fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion, or (c) when we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the prior June 30th and (ii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
We are also a “smaller reporting company,” meaning that the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates was less than $700 million and our annual revenue is less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year. We will continue to be a smaller reporting company for so long as either (i) the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million or (ii) our annual revenue is less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million. If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an emerging growth company, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and, similar to emerging growth companies, smaller reporting companies have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements
In July 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-11, Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (Topic 480) and Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815): I. Accounting for Certain Financial Instruments with Down Round Features; II. Replacement of the Indefinite Deferral for Mandatorily Redeemable Financial Instruments of Certain Nonpublic Entities and Certain Mandatorily Redeemable Noncontrolling Interests with a Scope Exception. Part I of this update addresses the complexity of accounting for certain financial instruments with down round features. Down round features are features of certain equity-linked instruments (or embedded features) that result in the strike price being reduced on the basis of the pricing of future equity offerings. Current accounting guidance creates cost and complexity for entities that issue financial instruments (such as warrants and convertible instruments) with down round features that require fair value measurement of the entire instrument or conversion option. Part II of this update addresses the difficulty of navigating Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, because of the existence of extensive pending content in the FASB Accounting Standards Codification. This pending content is the result of the indefinite deferral of accounting requirements about mandatorily redeemable financial instruments of certain nonpublic entities and certain mandatorily redeemable noncontrolling interests. The amendments in Part II of this update do not have an accounting effect. For public business entities, the amendments in Part I of ASU-2017-11 are effective for fiscal years and interim periods within those years beginning after December 15, 2018. For all other entities, the amendments in Part I of this update are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. We adopted
Part I of this update on January 1, 2020, and the adoption did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, “Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820), Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement”. This ASU removed the following disclosure requirements: (1) the amount of and reasons for transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy; (2) the policy for timing of transfers between levels; and (3) the valuation processes for Level 3 fair value measurements. Additionally, this update added the following disclosure requirements: (1) the changes in unrealized gains and losses for the period included in other comprehensive income and loss for recurring Level 3 fair value measurements held at the end of the reporting period; (2) the range and weighted average of significant unobservable inputs used to develop Level 3 fair value measurements. For certain unobservable inputs, an entity may disclose other quantitative information (such as the median or arithmetic average) in lieu of the weighted average if the entity determines that other quantitative information would be a more reasonable and rational method to reflect the distribution of unobservable inputs used to develop Level 3 fair value measurements. ASU 2018-13 will be effective for all entities, for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019 with early adoption permitted. We adopted this standard on January 1, 2020 and the adoption did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. This guidance removes certain exceptions for recognizing deferred taxes for investments, performing intraperiod allocation and calculating income taxes in interim periods. It also adds guidance to reduce complexity in certain areas, including recognizing deferred taxes for tax goodwill and allocating taxes to members of a consolidated group. This ASU is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2020, and early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of this standard on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Quantitative and Qualitative disclosures about market risk
Interest rate risk
We are exposed to market risks in the ordinary course of our business. These risks primarily include interest rate sensitivities. We held cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $287.5 million and $222.7 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We generally hold our cash in interest-bearing money market accounts. Our primary exposure to market risk is interest rate sensitivity, which is affected by changes in the general level of U.S. interest rates. An immediate 100 basis point change in interest would affect the fair market value of our cash equivalents by approximately $2.9 million.