Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Executive Overview
The Company has determined it could best assist healthcare providers in improving their revenue cycle management by providing solutions and services in the middle portion of the revenue cycle, that is, the revenue cycle operations from initial charge capture to bill drop. We continue to make decisions supporting our focus in the middle of the revenue cycle. In late fiscal 2017, the Company introduced a new product for the middle of the revenue cycle, eValuator. This product has significant implications to the timing and accuracy of our customers’ invoicing through rules that are created to review the accuracy of invoicing prior to the physical invoices being released. This is a notable change to existing processes of our customers. The development activities continued through the end of fiscal 2018. There are continued development efforts planned for eValuator in fiscal 2021, generally, in the same levels as fiscal 2020.
With the focus on the middle of the revenue cycle, the Company is committed to leading an industry movement to improve hospitals’ financial performance by moving billing interventions upstream, to improve coding accuracy before billing, enabling our customers to reduce revenue leakage, mitigate both under-billing and over-billing risk, and reduce denials and days in accounts receivable.
By narrowing our focus to the middle of the revenue cycle, we believe there is a distinct and compelling value proposition that can help us attract more customers. By innovating new technologies, we have been able to expand our target markets beyond just hospitals and into outpatient centers, clinics and physician practices. Our coding solutions like CDI, Physician Query, Abstracting and eValuator are competitive in the market and enabled us to engage five significant new eValuator customers in fiscal year 2020. These five new eValuator customers are some of the largest names in healthcare as we moved upstream to customers that were more likely to change their internal processes to the pre-bill audit.
The Company divested its ECM Assets on February 24, 2020. As discussed above, such divestiture is consistent with the Company’s efforts to focus on the middle of the revenue cycle and its pre-bill technology, eValuator. Management believes that the revenue cycle technology platforms have higher growth opportunities than its legacy products, including the ECM Assets. The Company accounted for the sale of the ECM Assets as a sale of assets. See Note 13 - Discontinued Operations to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
The Company has continued to implement and maintain tight cost and investment controls so that the transition to focusing our efforts in the middle of the revenue cycle has not resulted in a negative impact to our cash flows. While there have been lower revenues in the most recent fiscal years, the Company’s earnings and EBITDA have expanded and the Company is focused on achieving cash generation. During fiscal 2019, the Company recorded non-recurring costs that are added back to Adjusted EBITDA. These costs include; (i) $789,000 for executive transition, (ii) $388,000 for severance related to the Company’s previously disclosed workforce rationalization plan, (iii) $150,000 related to the extinguishment of the Wells Fargo term loan and revolving credit facility, and (iv) $230,000 related to professional fees associated with the Company’s correction of immaterial errors.
Regardless of the state of the Affordable Care Act, the healthcare industry continues to face sweeping changes and new standards of care that are putting greater pressure on healthcare providers to be more efficient in every aspect of their operations. We believe these changes represent ongoing opportunities for our Company to work with our direct customers and partner with various resellers to provide information technology solutions to help providers meet these new requirements.
Near the end of the Company’s fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic emerged globally, and it continued through the Company’s fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. The pandemic, and its attendant economic damage, has had an adverse impact on our revenue and may continue to adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition. The ultimate extent of its impact on us will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning the severity of the pandemic and actions taken to contain or prevent its further spread, including the widespread availability and use of effective vaccines, among others. These and other potential impacts of COVID-19 could therefore continue to materially and adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Results of Operations
Statements of Operations for the fiscal years ended January 31 (in thousands):
(1) Non-GAAP measure meaning net earnings (loss) before net interest expense, tax expense (benefit), depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation expense, transactional and other expenses that do not relate to our core operations. See “Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for additional information and reconciliation.
The following table sets forth, for each fiscal year indicated, certain operating data as percentages of total revenues:
Statements of Operations (1)
(1) Because a significant percentage of the operating costs are incurred at levels that are not necessarily correlated with revenue levels, a variation in the timing of systems sales and installations and the resulting revenue recognition can cause significant variations in operating results. As a result, period-to-period comparisons may not be meaningful with respect to the past results nor are they necessarily indicative of the future results of the Company in the near or long-term. The data in the table is presented solely for the purpose of reflecting the relationship of various operating elements to revenues for the periods indicated.
Comparison of fiscal year 2020 with 2019
Revenues
Proprietary software and term licenses - Proprietary software revenues recognized in fiscal 2020 were $437,000, as compared to $941,000 in fiscal 2019. The decreased fiscal 2020 revenues as compared to fiscal 2019 revenues are primarily attributable to two larger perpetual license sales of our Streamline Health® Abstracting. During fiscal 2020, the Company’s distributor partners experienced a slower sales cycle as their customers, which are hospital systems, prioritized addressing the COVID-19 pandemic over software projects. Term license revenue for fiscal 2020 decreased $27,000 from fiscal 2019, to $153,000.
Professional services - Revenues from professional services in fiscal 2020 were $618,000 as compared to $1,163,000 in fiscal 2019. The decrease in professional services revenue is primarily due to the completion of large implementation projects in fiscal 2019 combined with customer-initiated delays in ongoing implementation projects in fiscal 2020. Fiscal 2020 professional services fees are driven, primarily, from certain large CDI & Abstracting projects that were sold in 2019 and 2020, and the related implementation and services associated with these. The COVID-19 pandemic contributed to the decrease in revenue as our customers temporarily placed implementation projects on hold. We expect these projects to restart and revenues to return to 2019 levels as our customers shift priorities away from addressing COVID-19.
Audit services - Audit services revenue for fiscal 2020 increased, to $1,891,000 from $1,712,000, in fiscal 2019. Audit services revenue increase was primarily impacted by the Company’s audit services personnel being on-shore and the use of the Company’s proprietary product, eValuator. Looking ahead to fiscal 2021, the Company continues to see demand for on-shore, technically proficient auditors in the marketplace. The Company believes it has a competitive advantage utilizing eValuator for these professional services. The Company expects modest growth for its audit services business in fiscal 2021.
Maintenance and support - Revenues from maintenance and support in fiscal 2020 were $4,586,000 as compared to $5,356,000 in fiscal 2019. The decrease in maintenance and support revenues in fiscal 2020 resulted primarily from (i) $482,000 related to maintenance terminations due to the Company’s sunsetting of the clinical analytics software and (ii) the termination of a large coding software maintenance customer. The Company believes it has mitigated future terminations through aggressively pursuing long-term contracts with our significant legacy product customers. These activities have proven useful, as they have resulted in substantially better visibility in the near-term revenue base for the Company. The Company expects minimal growth for the maintenance and support line item for fiscal 2021 because pricing pressure and terminations should keep pace with new sales.
Software as a service (SaaS) - Revenues from SaaS in fiscal 2020 were $3,661,000, as compared to $2,501,000 in fiscal 2019. The increase in fiscal 2020 revenue was primarily attributable to growth associated with the Company’s new eValuator product. The Company’s new eValuator product had five new significant sales during fiscal 2020. Not all five of the fiscal 2020 sales had a substantial impact to the full year fiscal 2020 revenue, however, they will have a significant impact to the Company’s fiscal 2021 revenue. The Company expects substantial growth for its SaaS business, year-over-year, and sequentially, in each quarter of fiscal 2021.
Cost of Sales
Total cost of sales includes personnel directly affiliated with earning the revenue, amortization of capitalized software expenditures, and royalties on third-party licensing of products used by the Company to deliver its solutions and services. The increase in expense for fiscal 2020 compared with fiscal 2019 was primarily due to a change in the way the Company moved projects through the agile method of development. In fiscal 2021, as previously announced, the Company shortened the time which it was developing specific projects. The change was primarily related to creating velocity and focus on moving projects through the Company’s development quicker. Such change was successful and resulted in higher rates of amortization from new projects placed in service as compared to the previous year. We incurred total amortization expense on internally developed software of $1,662,000 and $1,494,000 in fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively.
Cost of systems sales consists of costs associated with amortization of capitalized software costs for our Coding & CDI Solutions. The decrease in expense of systems sales in fiscal 2020 from fiscal 2019 was primarily due to the decrease in amortization of capitalized software costs related to adjustments made to correct immaterial errors in fiscal 2019. Refer to the Immaterial Corrections of Errors section of Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 for further discussion on these corrections.
The cost of professional services includes compensation and benefits for personnel and related expenses. The decrease in expense for fiscal 2020 as compared with fiscal 2019 is primarily due to the decrease in professional services personnel as the implementation effort for SaaS implementations requires substantially less time than our legacy on-premise products.
The cost of audit services includes compensation and benefits for audit services personnel, and related expenses. The increase in expense for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 is attributed to additional coding auditors required to review higher volumes of coding transactions processed, and the related higher revenue. Again, the Company is beginning to receive renewed interest in its audit services as a result of the Company’s on-shore capabilities and expertise in pre-billing audit and coding services. Further, the internal use of eValuator is making our coders and auditors more efficient.
The cost of maintenance and support includes compensation and benefits for customer support personnel. Expenses for fiscal 2020 as compared with fiscal 2019 were flat.
The cost of SaaS solutions consists of costs (i) associated with amortization of capitalized software costs for our eValuator and Financial Management solutions, (ii) royalties payable to third-parties for use of their coding related content, and (iii) personnel and network related expenses to provision the application for each customer. The royalty and network related agreements are becoming variable as the cost is derived by attributes of the customer’s accessing the system. Amortization expense increased $631,000, from $517,000 in fiscal 2019 to $1,148,000 in fiscal 2020. The additional amortization expense was driven by the increased number of projects put into service in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, primarily related to the increased investment in eValuator. The royalties payable to third-parties increased by $134,000 for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, with $177,000 and $43,000 being reported in the respective periods. The growth in royalties payable is directly attributable to new customers beginning to use the system and triggering fees owed to the third-party coding content providers. Personnel related expenses also increased in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 by $230,000 with $472,000 and $242,000 reported in the respective periods. The Company invested in additional personnel to support SaaS solutions as the customer base has been expanding. The Company anticipates the costs in these categories will continue to rise in fiscal 2021 as the Company continues to invest in eValuator and as new customers begin to use the system.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and related benefits, reimbursable travel and entertainment expenses related to our executive and administrative staff, general corporate expenses, amortization of intangible assets, and occupancy costs. The decrease in general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 is primarily the result of lower expense incurred for audit, financial, and legal professional services. The Company continues to critically analyze the overhead cost of the Company, relative to its revenue.
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of compensation and related benefits and reimbursable travel and entertainment expenses related to our sales and marketing staff, as well as advertising and marketing expenses, including expenses related to trade shows. The decrease in sales and marketing expense for fiscal 2020 compared with fiscal 2019 was primarily due to reduction in salaries and benefits as positions vacated in the latter half of fiscal 2019 were not backfilled. Travel and entertainment expenses and marketing trade show expenses have also decreased for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company has temporarily stopped travel until its employee safety can be assured. There is no date to re-institute travel for its sales, and other personnel. The Company has been productive using web-based meeting media to continue its sales and customer service processes. For fiscal 2021, the Company expects to increase investment in sales and marketing compared to fiscal 2020, in an effort to grow certain products, primarily eValuator, through personnel cost, trade shows expense, sales and marketing, and investor relations consultant fees.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of compensation and related benefits, the use of independent contractors for specific near-term development projects and an allocated portion of general overhead costs, including occupancy costs, if material. Fiscal 2020 capitalized costs include $40,528 of capitalized non-employee stock compensation as explained in Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”. Total research and development costs for fiscal 2020 include increased spend with our development partner. The overall lower total cost comes from fewer personnel as a result of employee rationalization announced January 31, 2020, which impacted research and development personnel. The Company continues to focus on and be more efficient in research and development activities on those products with its highest growth prospects, primarily eValuator. The Company expects fiscal 2021 total research and development spend to continue at approximately the same level as fiscal 2020. For fiscal 2020, as a percentage of revenue, total research and development costs were 42%. In fiscal 2020, the Company was awarded $86,000 from the State of Georgia for its annual research and development tax credit. At the end of fiscal 2020, the cumulative balance of unused research and development credits was $86,000. These research and development tax credits can be applied to current Georgia Payroll Taxes due. The fiscal 2021 and future research and development tax credits are expected to be approximately $74,000 per year.
Executive Transition Cost
We recorded $789,000 in cost related to replacing the Company’s CEO in the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020. These costs included placement fees, retention bonuses for existing key personnel and certain required consulting costs directly attributable to the successful placement of our new CEO with the Company. The Company did not incur any executive transition costs in fiscal year 2020.
Rationalization Costs
In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019, we implemented a rationalization plan to make the operation of the Company more efficient and for the purpose of aligning the Company’s personnel needs and capital requirements in light of the Company’s sale of its enterprise content management business. The rationalization plan included a reduction in workforce resulting in the termination of approximately twenty (20) employees, or approximately twenty percent (20%) of the Company’s workforce. As a result of the rationalization plan, the Company recorded $388,000 in one-time severance and other employee termination-related costs. The Company did not incur any rationalization charges in fiscal year 2020.
Transaction Costs
In fiscal 2019, the Company incurred cost to account for the immaterial correction of an error. The Company incurred approximately $230,000 of legal and accounting cost in conjunction with the company’s immaterial correction of an error. See Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”. These costs were necessary to file the Company’s third quarter Form 10-Q for the period ended October 30, 2019 and were completed on January 8, 2020. The Company did not incur any transaction costs in fiscal year 2020.
Loss on Exit of Operating Lease
Refer to Note 4 - Operating Leases in our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further details and development with respect to the shared office arrangement in Atlanta. We recorded $105,000 in cost related to the remaining payments required under the agreement with the landlord on shared office space in Atlanta that was abandoned when the Company entered a new lease for office space in Alpharetta, Georgia.
Other Expense
Interest expense consists of interest and commitment fees on the line of credit, term loan, the Company’s PPP (as defined below) loan and is inclusive of deferred financing cost amortization. Amortization of deferred financing cost was $28,000 and $82,000 in fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively. Interest expense was $23,000 and $227,000 in fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively.
The Company refinanced its term loan and revolving credit facility to a new bank on December 12, 2019. Upon completion of the refinancing, the Company had charges to income for (i) the write-off of deferred finance cost on the refinanced debt and (ii) legal and finance cost to close out the previous indebtedness. Aggregate extinguishment costs of $150,000 were recorded in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019.
The decrease in miscellaneous expense in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily a result of losses reported in fiscal 2019 from (i) certain failed financing cost, and (ii) the purchase of certain options from a terminated employee that were about to expire. Other items reported in miscellaneous expense are the valuation adjustments on the Montefiore minimum royalty liability and certain foreign exchange losses. Refer to Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further information concerning the resolution of the Montefiore liability.
Provision for Income Taxes
We recorded an income tax benefit from continuing operations of $1,260,000 and $1,632,000 in fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively. Refer to Note 7 - Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for details on the provision for income taxes.
The income tax benefit from continuing operations was netted with the income tax provision on discontinued operations as disclosed in prior filings resulting in $0 federal tax expense in fiscal 2020. The Company has a substantial amount of net operating losses for federal and state income tax purposes.
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In order to provide investors with greater insight and allow for a more comprehensive understanding of the information used by management and the Board of Directors in its financial and operational decision-making, the Company has supplemented the Consolidated Financial Statements presented on a GAAP basis in this Report with the following non-GAAP financial measures: EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin and Adjusted EBITDA per diluted share.
These non-GAAP financial measures have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of Company results as reported under GAAP. The Company compensates for such limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP financial measures only as supplemental data. We also provide a reconciliation of non-GAAP to GAAP measures used. Investors are encouraged to carefully review this reconciliation. In addition, because these non-GAAP measures are not measures of financial performance under GAAP and are susceptible to varying calculations, these measures, as defined by the Company, may differ from and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, and Adjusted EBITDA per diluted share
We define: (i) EBITDA as net earnings (loss) before net interest expense, income tax expense (benefit), depreciation and amortization; (ii) Adjusted EBITDA as net earnings (loss) before net interest expense, income tax expense (benefit), depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation expense, and in the Company’s fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 Adjusted EBITDA, transaction related expenses and other expenses that do not relate to our core operations such as severances and impairment charges; (iii) Adjusted EBITDA Margin as Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of GAAP net revenue; and (iv) Adjusted EBITDA per diluted share as Adjusted EBITDA divided by adjusted diluted shares outstanding. EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin and Adjusted EBITDA per diluted share are used to facilitate a comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis from period to period and provide for a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our business than GAAP measures alone. These measures assist management and the board and may be useful to investors in comparing our operating performance consistently over time as they remove the impact of our capital structure (primarily interest charges), asset base (primarily depreciation and amortization), items outside the control of the management team (taxes) and expenses that do not relate to our core operations including: transaction-related expenses (such as professional and advisory services), corporate restructuring expenses (such as severances) and other operating costs that are expected to be non-recurring in nature. Adjusted EBITDA removes the impact of share-based compensation expense, which is another non-cash item. Adjusted EBITDA per diluted share includes incremental shares in the share count that are considered anti-dilutive in a GAAP net loss position.
The Board of Directors and management also use these measures (i) as one of the primary methods for planning and forecasting overall expectations and for evaluating, on at least a quarterly and annual basis, actual results against such expectations; and (ii) as a performance evaluation metric in determining achievement of certain executive and associate incentive compensation programs.
Our lender uses a measurement that is similar to the Adjusted EBITDA measurement described herein to assess our operating performance. The lender under our Loan and Security Agreement requires delivery of compliance reports certifying compliance with financial covenants, certain of which are based on a measurement that is similar to the Adjusted EBITDA measurement reviewed by our management and Board of Directors.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are not measures of liquidity under GAAP or otherwise, and are not alternatives to cash flow from continuing operating activities, despite the advantages regarding the use and analysis of these measures as mentioned above. EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, and Adjusted EBITDA per diluted share, as disclosed in this Report have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider these measures in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP; nor are these measures intended to be measures of liquidity or free cash flow for our discretionary use. Some of the limitations of EBITDA and its variations are:
● EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
● EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense, or the cash requirements to service interest or principal payments under our Loan and Security Agreement;
● EBITDA does not reflect income tax payments that we may be required to make; and
● Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized often will have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements.
Adjusted EBITDA has all the inherent limitations of EBITDA. To properly and prudently evaluate our business, the Company encourages readers to review the GAAP financial statements included elsewhere in this Report, and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business. We also strongly urge readers to review the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most comparable GAAP measure in this section, along with the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
The following table reconciles EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net loss from continuing operations, and Adjusted EBITDA per diluted share to loss per diluted share for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2021 and 2020. All of the items included in the reconciliation from EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net loss from continuing operations and the related per share calculations are either recurring non-cash items, or items that management does not consider in assessing our on-going operating performance. In the case of the non-cash items, management believes that investors may find it useful to assess the Company’s comparative operating performance because the measures without such items are less susceptible to variances in actual performance resulting from depreciation, amortization and other expenses that do not relate to our core operations and are more reflective of other factors that affect operating performance. In the case of items that do not relate to our core operations, management believes that investors may find it useful to assess our operating performance if the measures are presented without these items because their financial impact does not reflect ongoing operating performance.
(1) In fiscal year 2020 and 2019, executive transition cost on the consolidated statement of operations includes $0 and $64,000 in stock compensation expense, respectively, which is included within Share-based compensation expense in the Adjusted EBITDA calculation above.
(2) Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of GAAP net revenues.
(3) Adjusted EBITDA per adjusted diluted share for the Company’s common stock is computed using the more dilutive of the two-class method or the if-converted method.
(4) The number of incremental shares that would be dilutive under profit assumption, only applicable under a GAAP net loss. If GAAP profit is earned in the current period, no additional incremental shares are assumed.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies
The following is a summary of the Company’s most critical accounting policies. Refer to Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a complete discussion of the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The Company derives revenue from the sale of internally developed software, either by licensing for local installation or by a SaaS delivery model, through our direct sales force or through third-party resellers. Licensed, locally installed customers on a perpetual model utilize our support and maintenance services for a separate fee, whereas term-based locally installed license fees and SaaS fees include support and maintenance. The Company also derives revenue from professional services that support the implementation, configuration, training and optimization of the applications, as well as audit services provided to help customers review their internal coding audit processes. Additional revenues are also derived from reselling third-party software and hardware components. The Company recognizes revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
Performance obligations are the unit of accounting for revenue recognition and generally represent the distinct goods or services that are promised to the customer. If we determine that we have not satisfied a performance obligation, we will defer recognition of the revenue until the performance obligation is deemed to be satisfied. Maintenance and support and SaaS agreements are generally non-cancellable or contain significant penalties for early cancellation, although customers typically have the right to terminate their contracts for cause if we fail to perform material obligations. However, if non-standard acceptance periods, non-standard performance criteria, or cancellation or right of refund terms are required, revenue is recognized upon the satisfaction of such criteria. Significant judgment is required to determine the standalone selling price (“SSP”) for each performance obligation, the amount allocated to each performance obligation and whether it depicts the amount that the Company expects to receive in exchange for the related product and/or service. As the selling prices of the Company’s software licenses are highly variable, the Company estimates SSP of its software licenses using the residual approach when the software license is sold with other services and observable SSPs exist for the other services. The Company estimates the SSP for maintenance, professional services, and audit services based on observable standalone sales.
Refer to Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information regarding our revenue recognition policies.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts and contract receivables are comprised of amounts owed the Company for solutions and services provided. Contracts with individual customers and resellers determine when receivables are due and payable. In determining the allowances for doubtful accounts, the unpaid receivables are reviewed periodically to determine the payment status based upon the most currently available information. During these periodic reviews, the Company determines the required allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the unwillingness or inability of its customers or resellers to make required payments.
Capitalized Software Development Costs
Software development costs for software to be sold, leased, or marketed are accounted for in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 985-20, Software - Costs of Software to be Sold, Leased or Marketed. Costs associated with the planning and design phase of software development are classified as research and development costs and are expensed as incurred. Once technological feasibility has been established, a portion of the costs incurred in development, including coding, testing and quality assurance, are capitalized until available for general release to customers, and subsequently reported at the lower of unamortized cost or net realizable value. Amortization is calculated on a solution-by-solution basis and is included in Cost of system sales on the consolidated statements of operations. Annual amortization is measured at the greater of a) the ratio of the software product’s current gross revenues to the total of current and expected gross revenues or b) straight-line over the remaining economic life of the software (typically two years). Unamortized capitalized costs determined to be in excess of the net realizable value of a solution are expensed at the date of such determination.
Internal-use software development costs are accounted for in accordance with ASC 350-40, Internal-Use Software. The costs incurred in the preliminary stages of development are expensed as research and development costs as incurred. Once an application has reached the development stage, internal and external costs incurred to develop internal-use software are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the software (typically three to five years). Maintenance and enhancement costs, including those costs in the post-implementation stages, are typically expensed as incurred, unless such costs relate to substantial upgrades and enhancements to the software that result in added functionality, in which case the costs are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the software. The Company reviews the carrying value for impairment whenever facts and circumstances exist that would suggest that assets might be impaired or that the useful lives should be modified. Amortization expense related to capitalized internal-use software development costs is included in Cost of software as a service on the consolidated statements of operations.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill and other intangible assets were recognized in conjunction with the acquisitions of Interpoint Partners, LLC (“Interpoint”), Meta Health Technology, Inc. (“Meta”), Clinical Looking Glass® (“CLG”), Opportune IT and Unibased Systems Architecture, Inc. (“Unibased”). Identifiable intangible assets include purchased intangible assets with finite lives, which primarily consist of internally-developed software, customer relationships, non-compete agreements and license agreements. Finite-lived purchased intangible assets are amortized over their expected period of benefit, which generally ranges from one month to 10 years, using the straight-line and undiscounted expected future cash flows methods.
We assess the useful lives and possible impairment of existing recognized goodwill on at least an annual basis, and goodwill and intangible assets when an event occurs that may trigger such a review. Factors considered important which could trigger a review include:
● significant under-performance relative to historical or projected future operating results;
● significant changes in the manner of use of the acquired assets or the strategy for the overall business;
● identification of other impaired assets within a reporting unit;
● disposition of a significant portion of an operating segment;
● significant negative industry or economic trends;
● significant decline in the Company’s stock price for a sustained period; and
● a decline in the market capitalization relative to the net book value.
Determining whether a triggering event has occurred involves significant judgment by the Company.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and for tax credits and loss carry-forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. In assessing net deferred tax assets, we consider whether it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We establish a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized. Refer to Note 7 - Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further details.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s liquidity is dependent upon numerous factors including: (i) the timing and amount of revenues and collection of contractual amounts from customers, (ii) amounts invested in research and development and capital expenditures, and (iii) the level of operating expenses, all of which can vary significantly from quarter-to-quarter. The Company’s primary cash requirements include regular payment of payroll and other business expenses, principal and interest payments on debt and minor amounts of capital expenditures. Capital expenditures generally include computer hardware and computer software to support internal development efforts or SaaS data center infrastructure. Operations are funded with cash generated by operations and borrowings under the bank credit facilities. The Company believes that cash flows from operations and available credit facilities are adequate to fund current obligations for twelve months from the date of issuance of the audit report on the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Cash and cash equivalent balances at January 31, 2021 and 2020 were $2,409,000 and $1,649,000, respectively. Continued expansion may require the Company to take on additional debt or raise capital through issuance of equities, or a combination of both. There can be no assurance the Company will be able to raise the capital required to fund further expansion.
Capital Raise
On March 2, 2021, the Company completed an underwritten public offering of $16.1 million in common stock, including the underwriters’ exercise of an option to purchase additional shares of common stock to cover over-allotments. The proceeds from such capital raise are to be utilized for working capital, general corporate purposes and potential strategic partnerships that will complement or assist in the future growth of eValuator. See Note 15 - Subsequent Events to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
Credit Facility
The Company has liquidity through the Loan and Security Agreement described in more detail in Note 5 - Debt to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”. The Company has a $2,000,000 revolving credit facility, which can be advanced based upon 80% of eligible accounts receivable, as defined in the Loan and Security Agreement. In order to draw upon the revolving credit facility, the Company must comply with certain financial covenants, including the requirement that the Company maintain certain minimum recurring revenue and Bank EBITDA levels, calculated pursuant to the Loan and Security Agreement, measured on a monthly basis over a trailing three-month period and year-to-date then ended, and which shall not deviate by the greater of (i) thirty percent of its projected Bank EBITDA or (ii) $150,000, or 15% or 20% of the Company’s recurring revenue for the trailing three and twelve-month period then ended, respectively. Our lender uses a measurement that is similar to the Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure described above. The bank uses an Adjusted EBITDA that is further reduced by the Company’s spend on capitalized software development for the period. The bank agreement initially required the Company to maintain a minimum Asset Coverage Ratio. However, the Asset Coverage Ratio was eliminated as a covenant under an amendment dated April 11, 2020.
The Company was in compliance with the foregoing loan covenants on January 31, 2021. The Company was not compliant during one month of the covenant calculation, November 2020. That one month of non-compliance was waived in the Company’s new credit facility (see below). Based upon the borrowing base formula set forth in the Loan and Security Agreement, as of January 31, 2021, the Company had access to the full amount of the $2,000,000 revolving credit facility.
On March 2, 2021, upon closing of the $16.1 million capital raise, the Company also closed on a new credit facility with Bridge Bank. The new credit facility is a recurring revenue line of credit with a $3,000,000 capacity and an initial two-year term. The new credit facility has substantially the same interest rate as the previous asset-based line of credit. Interest on the recurring revenue line of credit is accrued at 1.0% over the base rate (defined as the prime interest rate). We believe that the recurring revenue line is structured to assist with the anticipated eValuator growth. The covenants on the new recurring revenue line are (i) recurring revenue and (ii) Adjusted EBITDA as set by the Company’s annual plan. See Note 15 - Subsequent Events to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
The Company’s asset based loan and recurring revenue line prohibits the Company from declaring or paying any dividend or making any other payment or distribution, directly or indirectly, on account of equity interests issued by the Company if such equity interests: (a) mature or are mandatorily redeemable pursuant to a sinking fund obligation or otherwise (except as a result of a change of control or asset sale so long as any rights of the holders thereof upon the occurrence of a change of control or asset sale event shall be subject to the prior repayment in full of the loans and all other obligations that are accrued and payable upon the termination of the Loan and Security Agreement), (b) are redeemable at the option of the holder thereof, in whole or in part, (c) provide for the scheduled payments of dividends in cash, or (d) are or become convertible into or exchangeable for indebtedness or any other equity interests that would constitute disqualified equity interests pursuant to clauses (a) through (c) hereof, in each case, prior to the date that is 180 days after the maturity date of the Loan and Security Agreement.
PPP Loan
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, also known as the CARES Act, was signed into law on March 17, 2020. Among other things, the CARES Act provided for a business loan program known as the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). Qualifying companies are able to borrow, through the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”), up to two months of payroll expenses. On April 21, 2020, the Company received approximately $2,301,000 through the SBA under the PPP. These funds were utilized by the Company to fund payroll expenses and avoid further staffing reductions during the slowdown resulting from COVID-19. The loan requires principal payments, beginning after the tenth month anniversary, and must be fully paid in two years. The PPP loan bears an interest rate of 1.0% per annum.
Significant cash obligations
(1) Term loan balance is reported net of deferred financing costs of $ - and $128,000 as of January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Refer to Note 5 - Debt to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information and further description of the PPP loan. The term loan balance as of January 31, 2021 is the Company’s PPP loan. The term loan payable as of January 31, 2020 was bank term debt.
(2) Refer to Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Operating cash flow activities
The increase in net cash provided by operating activities is primarily due to the impacts of the Company’s non-recurring expenses of approximately $1,407,000 million for fiscal 2019 that were not present in fiscal 2020. These cost include; (i) $789,000 for executive transition, (ii) $388,000 for severance related to the Company’s previously disclosed workforce rationalization plan, and (iii) $230,000 related to the Company’s costs associated with an out of period correction.
The Company’s customers are well-established hospitals, medical facilities or major health information system companies that resell the Company’s solutions, which have good credit histories, and payments have been received within normal time frames for the industry. However, some healthcare organizations have experienced significant operating losses as a result of limits on third-party reimbursements from insurance companies and governmental entities. Agreements with clients often involve significant amounts and contract terms typically require customers to make progress payments. Adverse economic events, as well as uncertainty in the credit markets, may adversely affect the liquidity for some of our clients.
Investing cash flow activities
Cash provided by investing activities in fiscal 2020 was approximately $13 million higher than fiscal 2019 primarily due to the realization of proceeds from the sale of the ECM Assets. See research and development cost (above). The investment in capitalized software development costs in fiscal 2020 was lower than fiscal 2019 primarily due to the sale of the ECM Assets in fiscal 2020.
The Company estimates that to replicate its existing internally-developed software would cost significantly more than the stated net book value of $5,945,000 at January 31, 2021, including the acquired internally-developed software of Opportune IT. Many of the programs related to capitalized software development continue to have significant value to our current solutions and those under development, as the concepts, ideas and software code are readily transferable and are incorporated into new solutions.
Financing cash flow activities
The decrease in cash provided by financing activities in fiscal 2020 over the prior year was the result of proceeds from issuance of common stock in fiscal 2019 that did not occur in fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2020 the Company also repaid the bank term loan on February 24, 2020, upon closing the sale of the ECM Assets. The company was required to repay the bank term loan at close and funding of the sale of the ECM Assets. Additionally, The Company filed for, and received, a PPP loan in the amount of $2,301,000 as accounted for in the “Proceeds from term loan payable” line item. See Note 5 - Debt to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for more information on the PPP loan.