Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the attached financial statements and notes thereto. This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including the following sections, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. These statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. For a detailed discussion of these risks and uncertainties, see the “Risk Factors” section in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We caution the reader not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which reflect management’s analysis only as of the date of this Form 10-K. We undertake no obligation to update forward-looking statements, which reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical stage drug discovery, development and manufacturing company focused on deploying our proprietary integrated cell-free protein synthesis platform, XpressCF®, to create a broad variety of optimally designed, next-generation protein therapeutics, initially for cancer. We aim to design therapeutics using the most relevant and potent modalities, including cytokine-based therapeutics, immuno-oncology, or I/O, agents, antibody-drug conjugates, or ADCs, and bispecific antibodies that are directed primarily against clinically validated targets where the current standard of care is suboptimal. We believe our platform allows us to accelerate the discovery and development of potential first-in-class and best-in-class molecules by enabling the rapid and systematic evaluation of protein structure-activity relationships to create optimized homogeneous product candidates. Our mission is to transform the lives of patients by using our XpressCF® Platform to create medicines with improved therapeutic profiles for areas of unmet need.
Once identified, production of protein drug candidates can be rapidly and predictably scaled in our current Good Manufacturing Practices compliant manufacturing facility. We have the ability to manufacture our cell-free extract that supports our production of proteins on a large scale using a semi-continuous fermentation process. Our two most advanced product candidates are wholly owned: STRO-001, an ADC directed against CD74, for patients with multiple myeloma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma, or NHL, and STRO-002, an ADC directed against folate receptor-alpha, or FolRα, for patients with ovarian and endometrial cancers.
We are developing STRO-001, an optimally designed ADC directed against the cancer target CD74, for multiple myeloma and NHL. STRO-001 was designed and optimized for maximal therapeutic index by placing linker-warheads at specific locations within the antibody using our proprietary XpressCF+™ Platform. The Phase 1 trial for STRO-001 is an open-label study that is evaluating STRO-001 as a monotherapy for patients with multiple myeloma and NHL. The trial is being conducted in two parts: dose escalation and dose expansion. The primary objectives of the trial are to determine the safety and tolerability profile of STRO-001, determine the recommended Phase 2 dose and interval and evaluate preliminary anti-tumor activity. The secondary objectives are to characterize the human pharmacokinetics of STRO-001 and additional safety, tolerability and efficacy measures.
STRO-002 was designed and optimized for an improved therapeutic index by placing a precise number of linker-warheads at four specific locations within the antibody using our proprietary XpressCF+™ Platform. Our Phase 1 trial for STRO-002 is an open-label study evaluating STRO-002 as a monotherapy for patients with ovarian and endometrial cancers. The trial is being conducted in two-parts, dose escalation and dose expansion. The primary objectives of the STRO-002 clinical trial are to determine the safety and tolerability profile, to define the recommended Phase 2 dose level and interval and to evaluate preliminary anti-tumor activity. Our secondary objectives are to characterize the human pharmacokinetics and additional safety, tolerability and efficacy measures.
We have also entered into multi-target, product-focused collaborations with leaders in the field of oncology, including a cytokine derivatives collaboration with Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., a subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, NJ, or Merck, a B Cell Maturation Antigen, or BCMA, ADC collaboration with Celgene Corporation, or Celgene, a wholly owned subsidiary of Bristol Myers Squibb Company, New York, NY, or BMS, and a MUC1-EGFR ADC collaboration with Merck KGaA, Darmstadt Germany (operating in the United States and Canada under the name “EMD Serono”).
In November 2019, BMS acquired Celgene, and Celgene became a wholly owned subsidiary of BMS. However, we continue to refer to our agreements with Celgene throughout this Form 10-K as being with Celgene.
Since the commencement of our operations, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to performing research and development and manufacturing activities in support of our own product development efforts and those of our collaborators, raising capital to support and expand such activities and providing general and administrative support for these operations. We have funded our operations to date primarily from upfront, milestone and other payments under our collaboration agreements with Celgene (now BMS), Merck and EMD Serono, the issuance and sale of redeemable convertible preferred stock, our public offerings of common stock and debt proceeds.
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from commercial product sales. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our net loss was $32.1 million and $55.7 million, respectively. Substantially all of our losses have resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations. The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 included the benefit from the non-operating, unrealized gain of $41.5 million related to our holdings of Vaxcyte common stock. We cannot assure you that we will have net income or that we will generate positive cash flow from operating activities in the future. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $227.9 million. We do not expect to generate any revenue from commercial product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for one or more of our product candidates, which we expect will take a number of years. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. We expect our operating expenses to significantly increase as we continue to develop, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates, engage in other research and development activities, expand our pipeline of product candidates, continue to develop our manufacturing and research and development facilities and capabilities, maintain and expand our intellectual property portfolio, seek regulatory and marketing approval for any product candidates that we may develop, acquire or in-license other assets or technologies, ultimately establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any products for which we may obtain marketing approval and operate as a public company. Our losses from operations may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our clinical trials, our expenditures on other research and development activities and the timing of achievement and receipt of upfront, milestones and other collaboration agreement payments.
Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, impacts on our clinical studies, employee or industry events, and effects on our collaboration partners, suppliers, service providers and manufacturers, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. The COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse effects have become more prevalent in the locations where we, our CROs, suppliers or third-party business partners conduct business. We are beginning to experience the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business through delays in the availability of materials routinely used in biologic therapeutic development and manufacturing, which may cause delays in our research, development and/or manufacturing activities, but overall patient enrollment and treatment remains on track. We may experience more pronounced disruptions in our operations, liquidity, supply chain, facilities, and clinical trials in the future as well. With respect to our clinical trials, we have experienced minor delays in enrollment and occasional delays in data entry by trial sites, but overall enrollment and treatment remains on track. We may in the future experience more significant delays in enrollment, participant dosing, distribution of clinical trial materials, study monitoring and data analysis that could materially adversely impact our business, results of operations and overall financial performance in future periods. Specifically, we may experience impact from changes in how we and companies worldwide conduct business due to the COVID-19 pandemic, including but not limited to restrictions on travel and in-person meetings, delays in site activations and enrollment of clinical trials, prioritization of hospital resources toward pandemic effort, delays in review by the FDA and comparable foreign regulatory agencies, and disruptions in our supply chain for our product candidates. As of the filing date of this Form 10-K, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our financial condition, results of operations or guidance is uncertain. The effect of the COVID-19 pandemic will not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods. See the section titled “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
A discussion and analysis of our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2018 is included in Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on March 16, 2020.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from commercial product sales. Our total revenue to date has been generated principally from our collaboration and license agreements with Celgene (now BMS), Merck and EMD Serono, and to a lesser extent, from manufacturing, supply and services and products we provide to the above collaborators and to Vaxcyte.
As described in Note 2 to our Financial Statements, on January 1, 2019, we adopted ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606). ASC 606 supersedes the guidance in ASC 605, Revenue Recognition (ASC 605). We adopted ASC 606 on a modified retrospective basis under which we recognized the $10.3 million cumulative effect of adoption as a reduction to the accumulated deficit balance as of January 1, 2019.
We derive revenue from collaboration arrangements, under which we may grant licenses to our collaboration partners to further develop and commercialize our proprietary product candidates. We may also perform research and development activities under the collaboration agreements. Consideration under these contracts generally includes a nonrefundable upfront payment, development, regulatory and commercial milestones and other contingent payments, and royalties based on net sales of approved products. Additionally, the collaborations may provide options for the customer to acquire from us materials and reagents, clinical product supply or additional research and development services under separate agreements. We assess which activities in the collaboration agreements are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately. We develop assumptions that require judgement to determine whether the license to our intellectual property is distinct from the research and development services or participation in activities under the collaboration agreements.
At the inception of each agreement, we determine the arrangement transaction price, which includes variable consideration, based on the assessment of the probability of achievement of future milestones and contingent payments and other potential consideration. We also evaluate estimates of our resources, which are used as the basis of measurement for revenue to be recognized on a proportion of performance basis.
For arrangements that include multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to the identified performance obligations based on the standalone selling price, or SSP, of each distinct performance obligation. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, we develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the SSP for each performance obligation identified in the contract. These key assumptions may include full-time equivalent, or FTE, personnel effort, estimated costs, discount rates and probabilities of clinical development and regulatory success.
Please see further discussion on the revenue recognition treatment of performance obligations under Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses represent costs incurred in performing research, development and manufacturing activities in support of our own product development efforts and those of our collaborators, and include salaries, employee benefits, stock-based compensation, laboratory supplies, outsourced research and development expenses, professional services and allocated facilities-related costs. We expense both internal and external research and development costs as they are incurred. Non-refundable advance payments for services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses and recognized as expenses as the related services are performed.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase in the future as we advance our product candidates into and through preclinical studies and clinical trials, pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates, expand our pipeline of product candidates and continue to develop our manufacturing facility and capabilities. The process of conducting the necessary preclinical and clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. The actual probability of success for our product candidates may be affected by a variety of factors including: the safety and efficacy of our product candidates, early clinical data, investment in our clinical programs, the ability of collaborators to successfully develop our licensed product candidates, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred during the periods indicated. The internal costs include personnel, facility costs and research and scientific related activities associated with our pipeline. The external program costs reflect external costs attributable to our clinical development candidates and preclinical candidates selected for further development. Such expenses include third-party costs for preclinical and clinical studies and research services, and other consulting costs.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, expenses for outside professional services, including legal, human resources, audit, accounting and tax services and allocated facilities-related costs. Personnel costs include salaries, employee benefits and stock-based compensation. We expect to incur additional expenses operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and listing standards applicable to companies listed on the Nasdaq Global Market, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services. We also expect to increase the size of our administrative function to support the anticipated growth of our business.
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on our invested funds.
Unrealized Gain on Equity Securities
Unrealized gain on equity securities consists of the remeasurement of our investment in Vaxcyte common stock.
Interest and Other Expense, Net
Interest expense includes interest incurred on our debt and amortization of debt issuance costs. Additionally, the Company identified a financing component under the Merck 2018 Agreement and recorded interest expense associated with the upfront payment. Other income (expense) in years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 includes changes in values attributable to the arrangement with the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society, Inc. and the Call Option Plan (each as defined in the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this report).
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
*
Percentage not meaningful
Revenue
We have recognized revenue as follows during the periods indicated:
(1)
In January 2019, BMS announced the entry into a definitive agreement to acquire Celgene and the transaction was completed in the fourth quarter of 2019.
(2)
Merck was a related party until the closing of our public offering on May 14, 2020.
(3)
Vaxcyte was a related party until the closing of its initial public offering on June 16, 2020.
Total revenue decreased by $14,000, or 0%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to an increase of $4.6 million from Merck which reflects a $5.9 million increase in ongoing performance and research and development services, partially offset by a $1.3 million decrease related to the financing component associated with the upfront payment, and a $0.1 million net increase from Celgene, of which $1.1 million was an increase in research and development services and contract research and manufacturing activities supporting clinical trial supply, offset by a $1.0 million decrease due to the completion in September 2020 of recognition of the transaction price. Additionally, there was a decrease $0.9 million from Vaxcyte under the supply agreement and a decrease of $3.8 million from EMD Serono due to a $4.0 million decrease from the completion in May 2019 of recognition of the transaction price, and a decrease of $1.5 million from a contingent payment earned in 2019, partially offset by a $1.0 million milestone earned in 2020 and a $0.7 million increase under the supply agreement.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense increased by $11.3 million, or 17%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due primarily to increases of $7.0 million in consulting and outside services, $5.8 million in personnel-related expenses due to higher headcount, and $1.1 million in facilities-related expenses, partially offset by decreases of $2.3 million in laboratory supplies and production materials-related expenses and $0.2 million in travel-related expenses.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense increased by $4.2 million, or 13%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due primarily to increases of $2.7 million in personnel-related expenses due to higher headcount, $1.2 million in legal, audit and external services, $0.7 million in insurance and other fees associated with being a public company, and $0.6 million in facilities-related expenses, partially offset by decreases of $0.7 million in IT and equipment-related expenses and $0.3 million in travel-related expenses.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased by $2.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to a $2.0 million decrease in the amortization of premiums on investments and a $0.6 million decrease in interest income due to declining interest rates in 2020.
Unrealized Gain on Equity Securities
Unrealized gain on equity securities was $41.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to zero for the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to the unrealized gain from the
remeasurement of the estimated fair value of our investment in Vaxcyte common stock.
Interest and Other Expense, Net
Interest and other expense, net decreased by $0.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to a $1.3 million decrease in interest expense associated with the financing component related to the 2018 Merck Agreement, partially offset by a $0.1 million increase in other expenses related to the remeasurement of the vested call options under the Call Option Plan and other fees and a $0.9 million increase in interest expense related to our outstanding debt.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
To date, we have incurred significant net losses, and negative cash flows from operations. Our operations have been funded primarily by payments received from our collaborators, and net proceeds from equity sales and debt. As of December 31, 2020, we had $326.5 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, and outstanding debt of $24.5 million and an accumulated deficit of $227.9 million.
2020 Public Offerings
On May 14, 2020, we closed a public offering of 12,650,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $7.75 per share, which included the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase 1,650,000 shares of common stock. Our net proceeds from this offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses, was approximately $91.4 million.
On December 11, 2020, we closed a public offering of 6,900,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $21.00 per share, which included the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase 900,000 shares of common stock. Our net proceeds from this offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses, was approximately $135.8 million.
At-The-Market Sales
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold an aggregate of 2,614,286 shares of our common stock through our At-the-Market ATM facility, or ATM Facility, pursuant to a sales agreement dated October 4, 2019 with Cowen and Company, LLC, as sales agent. The gross proceeds from these sales were approximately $24.6 million, before deducting fees of approximately $0.8 million, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $23.8 million.
Vaxcyte, Inc. Equity Ownership
In June 2020, Vaxcyte closed an initial public offering of its common stock at a price per share of $16.00. The Vaxcyte common stock held by us is measured at fair value at each reporting period based on the closing price of Vaxcyte’s common stock on the last trading day of each reporting period, adjusted for a discount for lack of marketability due to the presence of a lock-up agreement during certain periods in 2020, with any unrealized gains and losses recorded in our statements of operations. The lock-up agreement expired in December 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we held 1,567,324 shares of Vaxcyte common stock with an estimated fair value of $41.6 million.
Term Loan
On February 28, 2020, (the “Effective Date”), we entered into a loan and security agreement (the “Loan and Security Agreement”) with Oxford Finance LLC (“Oxford”), as the collateral agent and a lender, and Silicon Valley Bank, as a lender (together with Oxford, the “Lenders”), pursuant to which the Lenders have agreed to lend us up to an aggregate of $25.0 million in a series of term loans (the “Term A Loan”). Upon entering into the Loan and Security Agreement, we borrowed $25.0 million from the Lenders, with approximately $9.6 million of such amount applied to the repayment of the outstanding principal, interest and final payment fees owed pursuant to the prior loan and security agreement dated August 4, 2017.
Under the terms of the Loan and Security Agreement, we may, at our sole discretion, borrow from the Lenders up to an additional $5.0 million (the “Term B Loan” and together with the Term A Loan, the “Term Loans”) upon the closing of a new collaboration agreement that includes an upfront payment of at least $50.0 million to us, as determined by Oxford in its sole and absolute discretion (the “Term B Milestone Event”). We may draw the Term B Loan during the period commencing on the date of the occurrence of the Term B Milestone Event and ending on the earliest of (i) December 31, 2020, (ii) the thirtieth (30th) day following the occurrence of the Term B Milestone Event, and (iii) the occurrence of an event of default. The Term B Loan provision lapsed on December 31, 2020, without any related additional borrowings by us.
The proceeds from the Term Loans under the Loan and Security Agreement may be used to satisfy our future working capital needs and to fund our general business requirements. Our obligations under the Loan and Security Agreement are secured by all our assets, other than our intellectual property. We have also agreed not to encumber our intellectual property assets, except as permitted by the Loan and Security Agreement.
The Term Loans mature on March 1, 2024 (the “Maturity Date”) and will be interest-only through March 1, 2022, followed by 24 equal monthly payments of principal and interest. The Term Loans will bear interest at a floating per annum rate equal to the greater of (i) 8.07% or (ii) the sum of (a) the greater of (1) the thirty (30) day U.S. LIBOR rate reported in the Wall Street Journal on the last business day of the month that immediately precedes the month in which the interest will accrue or (2) 1.67%, plus (b) 6.40%.
We will be required to make a final payment of 3.83% of the original principal amount of the Term Loans drawn, payable on the earlier of (i) the Maturity Date, (ii) the acceleration of any Term Loans, or (iii) the prepayment of the Term Loans (the “Final Payment”). We may prepay all, but not less than all, of the Term Loans upon 30 days’ advance written notice to Oxford, provided that we will be obligated to pay a prepayment fee equal to (i) 3.00% of the principal amount of the applicable Term Loan prepaid on or before the first anniversary of the applicable funding date, or (ii) 2.00% of the principal amount of the applicable Term Loan prepaid between the first and second anniversary of the applicable funding date, or (iii) 1.00% of the principal amount of the applicable Term Loan prepaid thereafter, and prior to the Maturity Date (each, a “Prepayment Fee”).
The Loan and Security Agreement contains customary affirmative and restrictive covenants, including covenants regarding incurrence of additional indebtedness or liens, investments, transactions with affiliates, delivery of financial statements, maintenance of inventory, payment of taxes, maintenance of insurance, protection of intellectual property rights, dispositions of property, business combinations or acquisitions, among other customary covenants. We are also restricted from paying dividends or making other distributions or payments on our capital stock, subject to limited exceptions. The Loan and Security Agreement provides that an event of default will occur if, among other triggers, there occurs any circumstances that could reasonably be expected to result in a material adverse change in our business, or operations or condition (financial or otherwise) or a material impairment of the prospect of us to repay any portion of our obligations under the Loan and Security Agreement. The Loan and Security Agreement also includes customary representations and warranties, other events of default and termination provisions.
In connection with entering into the Loan and Security Agreement, we issued to the Lenders warrants exercisable for 81,257 shares of our common stock (the “Debt Warrants”). The Debt Warrants are exercisable in whole or in part, immediately, and have a per share exercise price of $9.23, which is the closing price of our common stock reported on the Nasdaq Global Market on the day prior to the Effective Date. The Debt Warrants will terminate on the earlier of February 28, 2030 or the closing of certain merger or consolidation transactions.
Funding Requirements
Based upon our current operating plan, we believe that our existing capital resources will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through at least the next twelve months after the date of this filing. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. We will continue to require additional financing to advance our current product candidates into and through clinical development, to develop, acquire or in-license other potential product candidates, pay our obligations and to fund operations for the foreseeable future.
We may seek to raise any necessary additional capital through a combination of public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements, marketing and distribution arrangements, or other sources of financing. Adequate additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Any failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and on our ability to pursue our business plans and strategies, and may cause us to delay, reduce the scope of or suspend one or more of our pre-clinical and clinical studies, research and development programs or commercialization efforts, and may necessitate us to delay, reduce or terminate planned activities in order to reduce costs. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our product candidates and the extent to which we may enter into additional collaborations with third parties to participate in their development and commercialization, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenditures associated with our current and anticipated clinical studies.
To the extent we raise additional capital through new collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our product candidates, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity or convertible debt offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows during the periods indicated:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $67.8 million. Our net loss of $32.1 million included $41.5 million of unrealized gain on equity securities as a result of the remeasurement of the estimated fair value of our investment in Vaxcyte common stock, and was partially offset by non-cash charges of $11.9 million for stock-based compensation, $4.3 million for depreciation and amortization, $0.2 million related to revaluation of the vested options under the Call Option Plan, $0.5 million for the amortization of premiums on our marketable securities, and $0.3 million for the amortization of debt issuance costs. Cash used in operating activities also reflected a net decrease in operating assets and liabilities of $11.5 million, due to a decrease of $15.0 million in our deferred revenue balance from revenue recognized under our collaboration agreements, which were partially offset by an increase of $2.8 million in accrued compensation due to increased headcount and bonuses resulting from certain company goal achievements and a decrease of $0.7 million in accounts receivable from our collaborators.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $65.0 million. Our net loss of $55.7 million was reduced by non-cash charges of $10.3 million for stock-based compensation, $4.8 million for depreciation and amortization, and a $0.3 million loss on disposal of property and equipment, which were offset partially by a $1.5 million increase in the accretion of discount on our marketable securities and a $0.1 million reduction of the liability attributable to the agreement with the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society, Inc. Cash used in operating activities also reflected a net decrease in operating assets and liabilities of $23.3 million, due to a decrease in our deferred revenue balance of $20.2 million from revenue recognized under our collaboration agreements, a decrease of $0.2 million in accrued compensation expense primarily due to bonuses paid in connection with certain goal achievements and increases of $1.4 million in prepaid expenses and other assets and $3.8 million in accounts receivable from higher research and development services revenues from our collaborators. This was offset partially by a $2.3 million increase in accounts payable due to timing of payments.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to purchases of marketable securities of $130.7 million and purchases of property and equipment of $7.1 million, principally for laboratory and manufacturing equipment, offset partially by maturities and sales of marketable securities of $138.4 million.
Cash used in investing activities of $51.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to purchases of marketable securities of $196.2 million and purchases of property and equipment of $3.5 million, principally for laboratory and manufacturing equipment, offset partially by maturities and sales of marketable securities of $148.6 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities of $269.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to $251.4 million of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock from our public offering and the sales of common stock pursuant to our ATM Facility, $25.0 million of gross proceeds from our debt refinancing, and $2.8 million of net proceeds received from participants in our employee equity plans and from the exercise of common stock options, partially offset by a $10.0 million repayment of the August 2017 Loan (as defined in Note 7 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Cash used in financing activities of $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to principal repayment on the August 2017 Loan of $5.0 million and payment of $0.3 million related to the entry into a sales agreement for an at-the-market offering of our common stock, partially offset by $1.3 million of net proceeds received from participants in our employee equity plans.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
On September 3, 2020, we entered into a sublease agreement, or the Sublease, with Five Prime Therapeutics, Inc. (the “Sublessor”), for approximately 115,466 square feet, located in South San Francisco, California (the “Premises”). We expect to use the Premises as our new corporate headquarters and in which to conduct (or expand) research and development activities. The commencement date for the first 85,755 square feet of the Premises (“Initial Premises”) is expected to be by mid-2021 at which time we will occupy the space and commence making monthly payments under the Sublease. We were provided early access to the Sublease space commencing in the fourth quarter of 2020 to conduct certain planning and tenant improvement work, which resulted in us recording rent expense prior to space occupancy and making actual lease payments. The Sublease is subordinate to the lease agreement, effective December 12, 2016, between the Sublessor and HCP Oyster Point III LLC (the “Landlord”). The commencement date for the remaining 29,711 square feet of the Premises (the “Expansion Premises”) is expected to be 24 months following the commencement date on the Initial Premises, although we have the right to accelerate the commencement date on the Expansion Premises to an earlier date upon six months’ prior written notice to the Sublessor. The Sublease for both the Initial Premises and Expansion Premises will expire on December 31, 2027. Assuming a commencement date on the Initial Premises of July 1, 2021, the aggregate estimated base rent payments due over the term of the Sublease are approximately $45.5 million, excluding the approximately $5.2 million in potential financial benefit to us of base rent abatement to be provided by Sublessor, subject to certain terms contained in the Sublease. The Sublease contains customary provisions requiring us to pay our pro rata share of utilities and a portion of the operating expenses and certain taxes, assessments and fees of the Premises and provisions allowing the Sublessor to terminate the Sublease upon the termination of the lease with the Landlord or if we fail to remedy a breach of certain of our obligations within specified time periods. Additionally, we posted a security deposit which is reflected as restricted cash in non-current assets on our balance sheet as of December 31, 2020.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Excludes approximately $5.2 million in potential financial benefit to us of base rent abatement to be provided by sublessor for months 7 - 18 of the sublease period, subject to certain terms contained in the Sublease.
In addition, we enter into agreements in the normal course of business, including with contract research organizations for clinical trials, contract manufacturing organizations for certain manufacturing services, and vendors for preclinical studies and other services and products for operating purposes, which are generally cancelable upon written notice. These payments are not included in this table of contractual obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules. While we have an investment classified as variable interest entity, its purpose is not to provide off-balance sheet financing.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this report, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from commercial product sales. Our total revenue to date has been generated principally from our collaboration and license agreements with Celgene (now BMS), Merck and EMD Serono, and to a lesser extent, from manufacturing, supply and services and products we provide to the above collaborators and to Vaxcyte.
When we enter into collaboration agreements, we assess whether the arrangements fall within the scope of ASC 808, Collaborative Arrangements (ASC 808) based on whether the arrangements involve joint operating activities and whether both parties have active participation in the arrangement and are exposed to significant risks and rewards. To the extent that the arrangement falls within the scope of ASC 808, we assess whether the payments between us and our collaboration partner fall within the scope of other accounting literature. If we conclude that payments from the collaboration partner to us represent consideration from a customer, such as license fees and contract research and development activities, we account for those payments within the scope of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. However, if we conclude that our collaboration partner is not a customer for certain activities and associated payments, such as for certain collaborative research, development, manufacturing and commercial activities, we present such payments as a reduction of research and development expense or general and administrative expense, based on where we present the underlying expense. As described in Note 2 to our Financial Statements, on January 1, 2019, we adopted ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. ASC 606 supersedes the guidance in ASC 605, Revenue Recognition. We adopted ASC 606 on a modified retrospective basis under which we recognized the $10.3 million cumulative effect of adoption as a reduction to the accumulated deficit balance as of January 1, 2019.
Collaboration revenue
We derive revenue from collaboration arrangements, under which we may grant licenses to our collaboration partners to further develop and commercialize our proprietary product candidates. We may also perform research and development activities under the collaboration agreements. Consideration under these contracts generally includes a nonrefundable upfront payment, development, regulatory and commercial milestones and other contingent payments, and royalties based on net sales of approved products. Additionally, the collaborations may provide options for the customer to acquire from us materials and reagents, clinical product supply or additional research and development services under separate agreements.
We assess which activities in the collaboration agreements are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately. We develop assumptions that require judgement to determine whether the license to our intellectual property is distinct from the research and development services or participation in activities under the collaboration agreements.
At the inception of each agreement, we determine the arrangement transaction price, which includes variable consideration, based on the assessment of the probability of achievement of future milestones and contingent payments and other potential consideration.
For arrangements that include multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to the identified performance obligations based on the standalone selling price, or SSP, of each distinct performance obligation. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, we develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the SSP for each performance obligation identified in the contract. These key assumptions may include full-time equivalent, or FTE, personnel effort, estimated costs, discount rates and probabilities of clinical development and regulatory success.
Upfront Payments: For collaboration arrangements that include a nonrefundable upfront payment, if the license fee and research and development services cannot be accounted for as separate performance obligations, the transaction price is deferred and recognized as revenue over the expected period of performance using a cost-based input methodology. We use judgement to assess the pattern of delivery of the performance obligation. In addition, amounts paid in advance of services being rendered may result in an associated financing component to the upfront payment. Accordingly, the interest on such borrowing cost component will be recorded as interest expense and revenue, based on an appropriate borrowing rate applied to the value of services to be performed by us over the estimated service performance period.
License Grants: For collaboration arrangements that include a grant of a license to our intellectual property, we consider whether the license grant is distinct from the other performance obligations included in the arrangement. For licenses that are distinct, we recognize revenues from nonrefundable, upfront payments and other consideration allocated to the license when the license term has begun and we have provided all necessary information regarding the underlying intellectual property to the customer, which generally occurs at or near the inception of the arrangement.
Milestone and Contingent Payments: At the inception of the arrangement and at each reporting date thereafter, we assess whether we should include any milestone and contingent payments or other forms of variable consideration in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue would not occur upon resolution of the uncertainty, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of each such milestone and any related constraint and, if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Since milestone and contingent payments may become payable to us upon the initiation of a clinical study or filing for or receipt of regulatory approval, we review the relevant facts and circumstances to determine when we should update the transaction price, which may occur before the triggering event. When we update the transaction price for milestone and contingent payments, we allocate the changes in the total transaction price to each performance obligation in the agreement on the same basis as the initial allocation. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period of adjustment, which may result in recognizing revenue for previously satisfied performance obligations in such period. Our collaborators generally pay milestones and contingent payments subsequent to achievement of the triggering event.
Research and Development Services: For amounts allocated to our research and development obligations in a collaboration arrangement, we recognize revenue over time using a cost-based input methodology, representing the transfer of goods or services as activities are performed over the term of the agreement.
Materials Supply: We provide materials and reagents, clinical materials and services to certain of our collaborators under separate agreements. The consideration for such services is generally based on FTE personnel effort used to manufacture those materials reimbursed at an agreed upon rate in addition to agreed-upon pricing for the provided materials. The amounts billed are recognized as revenue as the performance obligations are met by us.
Our revenue recognition policies under ASC 605 are described in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Research and Development
We record accrued expenses for estimated costs of our research and development activities conducted by third party service providers, which include outsourced research and development expenses, professional services and contract manufacturing activities. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced, and include these costs in current liabilities in the balance sheets and within research and development expense in the statements of operations.
Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are deferred and capitalized and recognized as an expense as the goods are delivered or the related services are performed.
For outsourced research and development expenses, such as professional fees payable to third parties for preclinical studies, clinical trials and research services and other consulting costs, we estimate the expenses based on the services performed, pursuant to contracts with research institutions that conduct and manage preclinical studies, clinical trials and research services on our behalf. We estimate these expenses based on discussions with internal management personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of services and the contracted fees to be paid for such services. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the original estimates, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. Payments made to third parties under these arrangements in advance of the performance of the related services by the third parties are recorded as prepaid expenses until the services are rendered.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation costs related to stock-based awards granted to employees based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. We account for forfeitures of stock-based awards as they occur. We estimate the grant date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The grant date fair value of the stock-based awards is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective awards.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions to determine the fair value of stock-based awards, including the expected term and expected volatility of the underlying stock. We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected term and expected volatility utilized for our stock-based compensation calculations on a prospective basis.
The closing sale price per share of our common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Global Market on the date of grant is used to determine the exercise price per share of our stock-based awards to purchase common stock.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2020, we had federal net operating loss, or NOL, carryforwards of $193.3 million and federal general business credits from research and development expenses totaling $19.3 million, as well as state NOL carryforwards of $90.8 million and state research and development credits of $13.9 million. If not utilized, the federal NOL carryforwards will expire at various dates beginning in 2032, and the federal credits will expire at various dates beginning in 2023. The state NOL carryforwards will expire at various dates beginning in 2030, if not utilized. The state research and development tax credits can be carried forward indefinitely.
Utilization of the net operating loss carryforwards may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to the ownership change limitations provided by the Tax Reform Act of 1986, or the Tax Reform Act, as amended, and similar state provisions. The annual limitation may result in the expiration of NOLs and credits before utilization. We have performed a Section 382 study for the period of June 16, 2003 through December 31, 2019 and concluded that it is more likely than not that we experienced an ownership change on November 20, 2019. This change does not limit our ability to use our existing NOLs within the carryforward period provided by the Internal Revenue Code, subject to availability of taxable income. We may experience ownership changes in the future as a result of equity offerings or other shifts in our stock ownership, some of which are outside our control. If there is a subsequent event or further change in ownership, these losses may be subject to limitations, resulting in their expiration before they can be utilized.
We assess all material positions taken in any income tax return, including all significant uncertain positions, in all tax years that are still subject to assessment or challenge by relevant taxing authorities. Assessing an uncertain tax position begins with the initial determination of the position’s sustainability and is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. As of each balance sheet date, unresolved uncertain tax positions must be reassessed, and we will determine whether (i) the factors underlying the sustainability assertion have changed and (ii) the amount of the recognized tax benefit is still appropriate. The recognition and measurement of tax benefits requires significant judgment. Judgments concerning the recognition and measurement of a tax benefit might change as new information becomes available.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies.
We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) the last day of our first fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion, or (ii) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700.0 million as of the prior June 30th and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this report for more information.