Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the sections titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” for a discussion of forward-looking statements and important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. The last day of our fiscal year is January 31. Our fiscal quarters end on April 30, July 31, October 31, and January 31. Our fiscal years ended January 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 are referred to herein as fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020, and fiscal 2019, respectively.
Overview
Sumo Logic is the pioneer of Continuous Intelligence, a new category of software, which enables organizations of all sizes to address the challenges and opportunities presented by digital transformation, modern applications, and cloud computing. Our Continuous Intelligence Platform enables organizations to automate the collection, ingestion, and analysis of application, infrastructure, security, and IoT data to derive actionable insights within seconds. Continuous Intelligence leverages AI/ML capabilities, and is provided as a multi-tenant cloud service that allows organizations to more rapidly deliver reliable applications and digital services, protect against modern security threats, and consistently optimize their business processes in real time. This empowers employees across all lines of business, development, IT, and security teams with the data and insights needed to address the technology and collaboration challenges required for modern business. With our Continuous Intelligence Platform, executives and employees have the intelligence they require to take prescriptive action in real time-a modern business imperative.
We generate revenue through the sale of subscriptions to customers that enable them to access our cloud-native platform. We recognize subscription revenue ratably over the term of the subscription, which is generally one year, but can be three years or longer. We offer multi-tiered paid subscription packages for access to our platform, the pricing for which differs based on a variety of factors, including volume of data to be ingested, duration of data retention, and breadth of access to platform features and functionalities. Our subscription packages encourage customers to expand their adoption of our platform by providing them with the flexibility to ingest and analyze large volumes of data and the ability to access a broad suite of platform features and functionalities without incurring overage fees, as well as insights into their usage patterns. We also deliver basic customer support with each of our paid subscription packages, and customers have the ability to purchase subscriptions to our premium support service.
Our go-to-market strategy consists of self-service adoption through our website, an inside sales team, a field sales team, and a partner channel. We offer free trials that enable potential customers to experience the benefits of our platform, and we see significant conversion from our trial users to paid customers, with approximately one-third of our new customers in fiscal 2021 having been free trial users who converted into paying customers. We leverage our user community to proactively identify trends, gather global insights, and create new use cases, thereby empowering us to deliver out-of-the-box value to our customers. We employ a land-and-expand business model centered around our platform offerings, which have a rapid time to value for our customers and are easily extensible to multiple use cases across a business. We utilize the analytical capabilities of our platform and our customer success team to understand how our customers use, and how they would benefit from expanding their use of, our platform. This understanding helps us successfully upsell and cross sell to our existing customers.
The power of our platform, and the benefits that it delivers to customers, has driven rapid growth in our revenue. For fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, our revenue was $202.6 million, $155.1 million, and $103.6 million, respectively, representing year-over-year growth rates of 31% and 50% respectively. We generated GAAP operating losses of $77.7 million, $93.1 million, and $48.2 million for fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We define non-GAAP operating loss as loss from operations excluding stock-based compensation expense, amortization of acquired intangible assets, acquisition-related expenses, and impairment of capitalized internal-use software. We generated non-GAAP operating losses of $29.9 million, $58.8 million, and $41.3 million for fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for the reconciliation of GAAP operating loss to non-GAAP operating loss.
Impact of COVID-19
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have temporarily closed or reduced capacity at our offices, required our employees and contractors to work remotely, and implemented travel restrictions, all of which represent a significant disruption in how we operate our business. Additionally, in May 2020, as part of our efforts to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic and ensure longer-term financial stability, we initiated cost reduction measures, including a headcount reduction. The operations of our partners and customers have likewise been disrupted, and we believe this has caused delays in renewal decisions for some of our existing customers, caused customers to request concessions such as extended payment terms or better pricing, and affected contraction or churn rates for our
customers. While the duration and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic depends on future developments that cannot be accurately predicted at this time, such as the duration and spread of the outbreak, the extent and effectiveness of containment actions, and the effectiveness of vaccination efforts, it has already had an adverse effect on the global economy and the ultimate societal and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic remains unknown. We believe that the COVID-19 pandemic could also accelerate customer transformation into digital businesses, which we expect will generate additional opportunities for us in the future. Due to our subscription-based business model, the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our revenue until future periods. See “Risk Factors - The recent global COVID-19 pandemic has harmed and could continue to harm our business and results of operations” for further discussion of the challenges and risks we have encountered and could encounter related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
New Customer Acquisition
Our business depends, in part, on our ability to add new customers. As businesses transition to the public cloud and with the increasing number of cloud-native businesses, continuous intelligence will become even more of a strategic imperative. We believe this growing adoption of cloud infrastructure across all organizations will continue to drive demand for our platform and broaden our customer base. Since our platform has offerings for organizations of all sizes and across industries, including organizations of all stages of cloud maturity, we believe these market changes present a significant opportunity for growth. As of January 31, 2021, we had 2,164 customers worldwide, spanning organizations of a broad range of sizes and industries. However, we expect that our ability to add new customers may be negatively impacted by current economic uncertainty in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. We will continue to focus on new customer acquisition by investing in sales and marketing to build brand awareness, expanding our community, and driving adoption of our platform as we further capture the opportunity in our addressable market.
We define a customer as a separate legal entity, such as a company or an educational or government institution, that is under a paid contract with us or with which we are negotiating a renewal contract at the end of a given period. To the extent we are negotiating a renewal with a customer after the expiration of the contract, we continue to include that customer in our customer count if we are in active discussions for a renewal or upgrade. Given our historical experience of customer renewals, if we are in active discussions for a renewal or upgrade, we continue to include customers with expired contracts in our customer count until the customer either renews its contract or negotiations terminate without renewal. In situations where an organization has multiple subsidiaries or divisions that separately contract with us, we typically treat only the parent entity as the customer instead of treating each subsidiary or division as a separate customer. However, we count each purchaser of our self-service offering as a unique customer, regardless of other subscriptions such organization may have.
Expanding within our Existing Customer Base
Our business depends, in part, on the degree to which our land-and-expand strategy is successful. Our customers often initially adopt our platform for a specific use case and subsequently increase their adoption as they realize the benefits and flexibility of our platform. We have been successful in expanding our existing customers’ adoption of our platform as demonstrated by our dollar-based net retention rate, which we consider an indicator of our ability to retain and expand revenue from existing customers over time. Our dollar-based net retention rate has fluctuated between approximately 120% and 130% for each of the past eleven quarters through the end of our third quarter of fiscal 2021. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, our dollar-based net retention rate declined a few percentage points below 120%. The decline was driven by the combination of slower than historical expansion in the install base and higher than expected churn. We anticipate that our dollar-based net retention rate may continue to decline and it will take several quarters before we start to see sustained improvement in our dollar-based net retention rate. Our efficient land-and-expand model has helped us accelerate adoption within our largest customers, as evidenced by our customers with over $100,000 of ARR, which was 358, 323, and 234 as of January 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. In addition, we saw growth in customers with greater than $1 million of ARR, which was 31, 25, and 17 as of January 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
We define ARR as the annualized recurring revenue run-rate from all customers that are under contract with us at the end of the period or with which we are negotiating a renewal contract. Given our historical experience of customer renewals, if we are in active discussions for a renewal, we continue to include customers with expired contracts in our ARR until the customer either renews its contract or negotiations terminate without renewal. For certain customers whose revenue may fluctuate from month to month based upon their specific contractual arrangements, we calculate ARR using the annualized monthly recurring revenue, or MRR, run-rate (MRR multiplied by 12). This enables us to calculate our anticipated recurring revenue for all customers based on our packaging and licensing models, which we believe provides a more accurate view of our anticipated recurring revenue.
We calculate our dollar-based net retention rate by first identifying customers, or the Base Customers, in a particular quarter, or the Base Quarter. We then divide the ARR attributable to the Base Customers in the same quarter of the subsequent year, or the Comparison Quarter, by the ARR attributable to those Base Customers in the Base Quarter. Our dollar-based net retention rate in a
particular quarter is obtained by averaging the result from that particular quarter with the corresponding results from each of the prior three quarters.
Continued Investment in Technology Leadership and Innovation
We intend to extend our leadership position by continuing to innovate, bringing new technologies to market, honing best practices, and driving thought leadership. Our success depends, in part, on our ability to sustain innovation and technology leadership in order to maintain a competitive advantage. We expect to continue to invest in research and development to increase our revenue and achieve long-term profitability, and we intend to continue extending the applicability of our platform as well as improving the value of our offerings for our customers. We believe that our platform is highly differentiated and has broad applicability to a wide variety of use cases, and we will continue to invest in developing and enhancing platform features and functionality to further extend the adoption of our platform. Additionally, we will continue to evaluate opportunities to acquire or invest in businesses, offerings, technologies, or talent that we believe could complement or expand our platform, enhance our technical capabilities, or otherwise offer growth opportunities. Once we complete acquisitions, we must successfully integrate and manage these acquisitions to realize their benefits.
International Expansion
We intend to continue to invest in our international operations to grow our business outside of the United States. We generated 16% of our revenue outside the United States in each of fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019. We believe that global demand for Continuous Intelligence and for the functionality of our platform will continue to increase as international businesses undergo digital transformations and adopt cloud-based technologies. We currently have a sales presence throughout Asia-Pacific-Japan, or APJ, and Europe, with sales offices in Sydney, Australia, Tokyo, Japan, and London, United Kingdom, and we further increase our global reach with our over 175 international channel partners. International expansion over the long term represents a significant opportunity and we plan to continue to invest in growing our presence internationally, both through expanding our sales and marketing efforts and leveraging channel and other ecosystem partners.
Acquisition of Jask Labs Inc.
On October 25, 2019, we completed the acquisition of Jask Labs, a privately-held software company that offers a cloud-native security analytics solution. The acquisition brought together our platform, including our cloud SIEM and security compliance solutions, with Jask Labs’ security analytics solution to deliver an integrated, cloud-native security intelligence solution. The aggregate purchase consideration was $55.1 million, of which $11.2 million was paid in cash, $43.3 million was comprised of 3,573,659 shares of common stock, and $0.6 million was comprised of assumed options to purchase 265,075 shares of common stock.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate subscription revenue through the sale of subscriptions to customers that enable them to access our cloud-native platform. Subscription terms are generally one year, but can be three years or longer, and a substantial majority of our contracts are non-cancelable. Subscription revenue is driven by sales of our multi-tiered paid subscriptions, the pricing for which differs based on a variety of factors, including volume of data expected to be ingested, duration of data retention, and breadth of access to our platform features and functionalities. Due to the ease of using our platform, professional services revenue from configuration, implementation, and training services constituted less than 1% of our total revenue for fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue includes all direct costs to deliver and support our platform, including personnel and related costs, third-party hosting fees related to our cloud platform, amortization of internal-use software and acquired developed technology, as well as allocated facilities and IT costs.
As new customers purchase access to our platform and our existing customer base expands their utilization of our platform, we will incur greater cloud hosting costs related to the increased volume of data being hosted. We will continue to invest additional resources in our platform infrastructure and customer support organizations to expand the capabilities of our platform features and ensure that our customers are realizing the full benefit of our platform. The level and timing of investment in these areas could affect our cost of revenue in the future.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit represents revenue less cost of revenue, and gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of revenue. Our gross margin may fluctuate from period to period as our revenue fluctuates, and has been and will continue to be affected by various factors, including the timing and amount of investments to maintain or expand our cloud hosting capability, the continued growth of our platform and customer support teams, increased compensation expenses, as well as amortization of costs associated with capitalized internal-use software and acquired intangible assets. We expect our gross profit to increase and our gross margin to increase modestly over the long term due to the continued growth in the use of our platform and cost efficiencies related to our cloud hosting services, although our gross margins could fluctuate from period to period depending on the interplay between the factors described above.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses. Personnel and related expenses are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, employee benefit costs, payroll taxes, bonuses, sales commissions, travel-related expenses, and stock-based compensation expense, as well as the allocated portion of overhead costs for facilities and IT. Operating expenses also include cloud infrastructure fees and other services related to staging and development efforts for our platform.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs related to research, design, maintenance, and minor enhancements of our platform that are expensed as incurred. These costs consist primarily of personnel and related expenses, including allocated overhead costs, contractor and consulting fees related to the design, development, testing, and enhancement of our platform, and software, hardware, and cloud infrastructure fees for staging and development related to research and development activities necessary to support growth in our employee base and in the adoption of our platform. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase in dollar value as we continue to increase our investments in our platform. However, we anticipate research and development expenses will decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term, although they may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue from period to period depending on the timing of expenses.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses including allocated overhead costs and commissions, costs of general marketing and promotional activities, including free trials of our platform, fees for professional services related to marketing, and software and hardware to support growth in our employee base. Sales commissions earned by our sales force that are considered incremental costs of obtaining a subscription with a customer are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit, which we have determined to be five years. We expect that our sales and marketing expenses will increase in dollar value over the long term, though the dollar value of such expenses may fluctuate in the near term. We believe that sales and marketing expenses will continue to be our largest operating expense for the foreseeable future as we expand our sales and marketing efforts. We expect that our sales and marketing expenses will increase as a percentage of our revenue over the near term, but decrease over the long term, although they may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period depending on the timing of expenses.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses associated with our executive, finance, legal, human resources, information technology and security, and other administrative personnel. In addition, general and administrative expenses include non-personnel costs, such as fees for professional services such as external legal, accounting, and other consulting services, hardware and software costs, certain taxes other than income taxes, and overhead costs not allocated to other departments.
We expect to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and the listing standards of the Nasdaq Global Select Market, and increased expenses for insurance, investor relations, and fees for professional services. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in dollar value as our business grows. However, we expect that our general and administrative expenses will decrease as a percentage of our revenue as our revenue grows over the long term, although they may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period depending on the timing of expenses.
Interest and Other (Expense) Income, Net
Interest and other (expense) income, net primarily consists of interest income and foreign currency transaction gains (losses).
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily consists of interest incurred in connection with borrowings under our revolving line of credit facility.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes in certain foreign and state jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our federal and state net deferred tax assets as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for the periods indicated:
____________
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
(a)See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the incremental stock-based compensation expense related to transfers of our common stock by our current and former employees to existing investors for amounts over the estimated fair value at the date of the transaction.
(b)See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the capitalized stock-based compensation expense related to internal-use software development costs.
(2)Includes amortization of acquired intangible assets as follows:
(3)We recorded sales and marketing expenses for additional compensation and other costs related to the employment status of certain current and former employees of $1.5 million and $4.5 million, during the year ended January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, for additional compensation and other costs related to the employment status of certain current and former employees. Of the aggregate $6.0 million, approximately $4.5 million was paid as part of a settlement agreement in the first quarter of fiscal 2022. For more information, see the section titled “Legal Proceedings.”
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of revenue:
____________
Note: Certain figures may not sum due to rounding.
Comparison of Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020
Revenue
Revenue increased by $47.6 million, or 31%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. This increase included an increase in revenue from our current largest revenue customer, which represented $15.2 million in revenue for fiscal 2021 compared to $10.9 million in fiscal 2020. Excluding the revenue from this customer, the increase in revenue for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 would have been 30%. We estimate that approximately 90% of the increase in revenue was attributable to growth from existing customers, and the remaining approximately 10% was attributable to new customers. In particular, the number of customers with greater than $100,000 of ARR increased to 358 as of January 31, 2021 from 323 as of January 31, 2020.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit, and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue increased by $12.0 million, or 27%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in cost of revenue was primarily due to an $8.0 million increase in third-party hosting fees, other services, and personnel costs related to providing access to and supporting our platform, and a $4.2 million increase in amortization of acquired intangible assets primarily as a result of our acquisition of Jask Labs. Our gross profit increased $35.6 million while gross margin increased 1% primarily as a result of an initiative to optimize our cloud infrastructure costs and platform efficiency.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $17.7 million, or 34%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily driven by a $18.9 million increase in personnel and related expenses associated with fluctuations in headcount, including an increase in allocated overhead costs, of which $7.8 million was related to stock-based compensation expense. This increase in personnel and related costs also included a $4.2 million decrease in capitalized internal-use software. This increase was partially offset by a $0.6 million decrease in events due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, there was a $0.5 million decrease in software, hardware, and cloud infrastructure fees for staging and development as a result of an initiative to optimize our cloud infrastructure costs and platform efficiency.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $2.0 million, or 2%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in sales and marketing expenses was primarily driven by a $9.5 million increase in personnel and related expenses associated with fluctuations in headcount, including an increase in allocated overhead costs, of which $5.7 million was related to stock-based compensation expense. This increase in personnel and related costs was partially offset by a $2.9 million decrease in travel related expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as a non-recurring $3.0 million expense related to compensation and other costs related to the employment status of certain current and former employees recorded during fiscal 2020. In addition, we had a $2.7 million increase related to cloud hosting fees for our customer free trials and customer proofs of value in addition to increased software costs, which was offset by a $3.7 million decrease in third-party public relations, marketing services, and professional services as a result of our annual user conference, Illuminate, being held virtually in fiscal 2021 as well as other decreased spending related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $7.1 million, or 19%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily driven by a $8.0 million increase in personnel and related expenses due to an increase in cost per head and fluctuations in headcount, of which $5.1 million was related to stock-based compensation expense. In addition, insurance, fees and property taxes increased by $2.4 million. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in professional services of $3.8 million, primarily related to the acquisition-related expenses for our acquisition of Jask Labs in the third quarter of fiscal 2020.
Impairment of Capitalized Internal-Use Software
Impairment of capitalized-internal use software was $0 for fiscal 2021 compared to $6.7 million for fiscal 2020. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we determined that certain previously developed internal-use software would no longer be integrated with the Company’s platform due to a change in product strategy after the acquisition of Jask Labs and would no longer be placed into service.
Interest and Other (Expense) Income, Net
Interest and other (expense) income, net decreased by $2.4 million, or 121%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease in interest and other (expense) income, net was primarily driven by a $2.3 million decrease in interest income due to lower interest rates compared to the prior period. Fiscal 2021 also included realized foreign currency losses of $0.4 million and a loss on the fair value of our redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants of $0.3 million.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by $0.6 million for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in interest expense was primarily driven by interest incurred on borrowings under our revolving line of credit facility in fiscal 2021, which was fully repaid in fiscal 2021.
Comparison of Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019
Revenue
Revenue increased by $51.4 million, or 50%, for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. This increase included an increase in revenue from our current largest revenue customer, which represented $10.9 million in revenue for fiscal 2020 compared to $2.1
million in fiscal 2019. Excluding the revenue from this customer, the increase in revenue for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 would have been 42%. We estimate that approximately 90% of the increase in revenue was attributable to growth from existing customers, and the remaining approximately 10% was attributable to new customers. In particular, the number of customers with greater than $100,000 of ARR increased to 323 as of January 31, 2020 from 234 as of January 31, 2019.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit, and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue increased by $15.5 million, or 53%, for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The increase in cost of revenue was primarily due to an increase of $12.7 million in third-party hosting fees and other services related to providing access to and supporting our platform and an increase in amortization of acquired intangible assets of $2.3 million primarily as a result of our acquisition of Jask Labs. Our gross profit increased $35.9 million while gross margin decreased 1% primarily as a result of increased amortization of acquired intangible assets.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $16.2 million, or 45%, for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily driven by a $13.5 million increase in personnel and related expenses directly associated with an increase in headcount, including an increase in allocated overhead costs, net of an increase in capitalized internal-use software of $4.2 million, and an increase of $1.5 million in stock-based compensation related to transfers of our common stock by current employees to existing investors for amounts over the estimated fair value at the date of the transaction. In addition, we had a $2.1 million increase in software, hardware, and cloud infrastructure fees for staging and development to support the growth of the business and related infrastructure.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $35.0 million, or 48%, for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The increase in sales and marketing expenses was primarily driven by a $28.7 million increase in personnel and related expenses directly associated with an increase in headcount, including an increase in allocated overhead costs, $0.7 million in stock-based compensation related to transfers of our common stock by current employees to existing investors for amounts over the estimated fair value at the date of the transaction, and $4.5 million of compensation and other costs related to the employment status of certain current and former employees. In addition, we had an increase of $4.1 million related to advertising, marketing, and promotional activities.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $22.9 million, or 160%, for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily driven by a $13.6 million increase in personnel and related expenses directly associated with an increase in headcount, including an increase of $2.3 million in stock-based compensation related to transfers of our common stock by current and former employees to existing investors for amounts over the estimated fair value at the date of the transaction. In addition, fees for professional services increased by $8.3 million as we leveraged external legal, accounting, and other consulting services to support our growth and public company readiness initiatives, $3.0 million of which was attributed to acquisition-related expenses.
Impairment of Capitalized Internal-Use Software
Impairment of capitalized-internal use software was $6.7 million for fiscal 2020 compared to $0 for fiscal 2019. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we determined that certain previously developed internal-use software would no longer be integrated with the Company’s platform due to a change in product strategy after the acquisition of Jask Labs and would no longer be placed into service.
Interest and Other (Expense) Income, Net
Interest and other (expense) income, net increased by $0.9 million, or 81%, for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The increase in interest and other (expense) income, net was primarily driven by an increase in interest income of $1.3 million from our cash and cash equivalents balance.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our financial information presented in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP financial measures are useful to investors in evaluating our operating performance. We use the following non-GAAP financial measures, collectively, to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes, including the preparation of our annual operating budget and quarterly forecasts, to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies, and to communicate with our board of directors concerning our financial performance. We believe that non-GAAP financial measures, when taken together with the corresponding GAAP financial measures, may be helpful to investors because they provide consistency and comparability with past financial performance and meaningful supplemental information regarding our performance by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of our business, results of operations, or outlook. The non-GAAP financial measures are presented for supplemental informational purposes only, have limitations as analytical tools, and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP and may be different from similarly-titled non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies. In addition, other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate similarly-titled non-GAAP financial measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of our non-GAAP financial measures as tools for comparison. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures, and not to rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business. We use these non-GAAP financial measures as part of our overall assessment of our performance, including the preparation of our annual operating budget and quarterly forecasts, to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies, and to communicate with our board of directors concerning our financial performance.
Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Margin
We define non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP gross margin as gross profit and gross margin, respectively, excluding stock-based compensation expense recorded to cost of revenue and amortization of acquired intangible assets.
Non-GAAP Operating Loss and Non-GAAP Operating Margin
We define non-GAAP operating loss and non-GAAP operating margin as loss from operations and operating margin, respectively, excluding stock-based compensation expense, amortization of acquired intangible assets, acquisition-related expenses, and impairment of capitalized internal-use software.
Non-GAAP Net Loss
We define non-GAAP net loss as loss from operations, excluding stock-based compensation expense, amortization of acquired intangible assets, acquisition-related expenses, and impairment of capitalized internal-use software.
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as cash used in operating activities less purchases of property and equipment and capitalized internal-use software costs. We believe free cash flow is a useful indicator of liquidity that provides our management, board of directors, and investors with information about our future ability to generate or use cash to enhance the strength of our balance sheet and further invest in our business and pursue potential strategic initiatives.
Quarterly Results of Operations Data
The following tables set forth selected unaudited quarterly consolidated results of operations for each of the quarters indicated. The information for each of these quarters has been prepared in accordance with GAAP on the same basis as our audited annual consolidated financial statements and includes, in the opinion of management, all adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring adjustments, necessary for the fair statement of the results of operations for these periods. This data should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These quarterly results are not necessarily indicative of our results of operations to be expected for any future period.
_______________
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
(2)Includes amortization of acquired intangible assets as follows:
(3)During the three months ended April 30, 2020 and three months ended October 31, 2019, we recorded sales and marketing expenses of $1.5 million and $4.5 million, respectively, for additional compensation and other costs related to the employment status of certain current and former employees. Of the aggregate $6.0 million, approximately $4.5 million was paid as part of a settlement agreement in the first quarter of fiscal 2022. For more information, see the section titled “Business-Legal Proceedings.”
All values from the statements of operations, expressed as percentage of revenue, were as follows:
______________
Note: Certain figures may not sum due to rounding.
Quarterly Revenue Trends
Our quarterly revenue increased sequentially in each of the periods presented above due primarily to increases in the number of customers purchasing our subscriptions as well as additional sales to existing customers. We generally experience seasonality based on when we enter into agreements with customers, which has historically been the most frequent in our fourth quarter, and our quarterly results of operations generally fluctuate from quarter to quarter depending on customer buying habits. This seasonality is reflected to a lesser extent, and sometimes is not immediately apparent, in revenue due to the fact that we recognize subscription revenue ratably over the term of the subscription.
Quarterly Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit, and Gross Margin Trends
Our quarterly cost of revenue, gross profit, and gross margins fluctuate based on timing of our investments in our platform infrastructure and customer support personnel to support the growth in our customer base. Subsequent to January 31, 2020, our gross margin has generally increased each quarter primarily as a result of an initiative to optimize our cloud infrastructure costs and platform efficiencies. During the quarter ended January 31, 2020, our gross margin decreased as a result of an increase in third-party hosting fees and other services related to providing access to and supporting our platform and an increase in amortization of acquired intangible assets primarily due to the acquisition of Jask Labs. We will continue to invest in third-party hosting infrastructure and our customer support organizations to expand the capability of our platform and ensure that our customers are realizing the full benefit of our offerings.
Quarterly Operating Expense Trends
In general, our sales and marketing, research and development, and general and administrative expenses have increased over the periods presented above as we increased our headcount to support growth and expansion in the business. Our total operating expenses increased during the three months ended October 31, 2020, due to a cumulative stock-based compensation charge of $10.9 million related to the liquidity event performance-based vesting condition was deemed probable of occurring, for our outstanding RSUs, during the quarter. Our total operating expenses decreased during the three months ended July 31, 2020, primarily as a result of lower overall expenses due to the reduction in headcount and slowdown in events, travel, and marketing spend due to the COVID-19 pandemic. During the three months ended April 30, 2020, we recorded an additional $1.5 million in sales and marketing expenses for compensation and other costs related to the employment status of certain current and former employees. During the three months
ended October 31, 2019, we recorded $4.5 million in sales and marketing expenses for compensation and other costs related to the employment status of certain current and former employees.
During each of the periods presented below, current and former employees made transfers of our common stock for amounts over the estimated fair value at the date of the transaction. We recorded stock-based compensation expense for these transfers as shown in the table below.
Quarterly Non-GAAP Results of Operations Data
The following table provides a reconciliation of non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP gross margin to the most comparable GAAP measures, gross profit and gross margin, respectively, for each of the periods presented. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a description of the non-GAAP measures and their limitations as an analytical tool.
The following tables provide a reconciliation of non-GAAP operating loss and non-GAAP operating margin to the most comparable GAAP measures, operating loss and operating margin, respectively, for each of the periods presented:
The following table provides a reconciliation of non-GAAP net loss to the most comparable GAAP measure, net loss, for each of the periods presented:
The following table provides a reconciliation of free cash flow to the most comparable GAAP measure, cash used in operating activities, for each of the periods presented:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily through subscription revenue from customers accessing our cloud-native platform and the net proceeds of issuances of equity securities. We have incurred losses and generated negative cash flows from operations, as reflected in our accumulated deficit of $397.8 million as of January 31, 2021. In the third quarter of fiscal 2021, we received net proceeds of $342.7 million, after deducting underwriters’ discounts and commissions and offering costs of $31.8 million, including the exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares. As of January 31, 2021, we had $404.1 million in cash and cash equivalents.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents and cash provided by sales of access to our platform will be sufficient to meet our projected operating requirements for at least the next 12 months, despite the uncertainty in the changing market and economic conditions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which may have an impact on our available cash due to customer requests for extended payment terms or better pricing. As a result of our revenue growth plans, both domestically and internationally, we expect that losses and negative cash flows from operations may continue in the foreseeable future. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our subscription growth rate, subscription renewals, billing timing and frequency, pricing changes, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced platform features and functionality, the continued market adoption of our platform, and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and results of operations, the business of our customers, and the economy. We may in the future pursue acquisitions of businesses, technologies, assets, and talent.
In February 2021, we entered into an Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank, or the SVB Agreement. Such SVB Agreement amends and restates the Loan Agreement dated as of January 31, 2016. Under the SVB Agreement, we can borrow up to $50 million. Interest on any drawdown under the revolving line of credit in the SVB Agreement accrues at the prime rate minus a spread rate ranging from 0.25% to 0.75%, as determined by our adjusted quick ratio, subject to either a 3.00% or 2.50% floor depending on the adjusted quick ratio. The SVB Agreement is secured by substantially all of our assets and includes restrictive covenants, in each case subject to certain exceptions, that limit our ability to, among other things: incur debt, grant liens, make acquisitions, suffer changes in control, make investments, make certain dividends or distributions, repurchase or redeem stock, dispose of or transfer assets, and enter into transactions with affiliates. Pursuant to the SVB Agreement, we are also required to maintain a minimum adjusted quick ratio of 1.25 to 1.00. The SVB Agreement also contains customary events of default, upon which
Silicon Valley Bank may declare all or a portion of our outstanding obligations payable to be immediately due and payable. As of January 31, 2021, we did not have any debt balance outstanding.
We typically invoice our subscription customers annually in advance, and in certain cases, we invoice upfront for multi-year contracts. Therefore, a substantial source of our cash is from such prepayments, which are included on our consolidated balance sheets as deferred revenue. Deferred revenue consists of billed fees for our subscriptions, prior to satisfying the criteria for revenue recognition, which are subsequently recognized as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. As of January 31, 2021, future estimated revenue related to performance obligations from non-cancelable contracts that were unsatisfied or partially unsatisfied was $252.3 million, of which we expect to recognize revenue of $151.9 million over the next 12 months, with the remaining balance recognized thereafter. As of January 31, 2021, we had deferred revenue of $106.7 million, of which $102.6 million was recorded as a current liability and is expected to be recognized as revenue within the next 12 months, subject to applicable revenue recognition criteria.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collections from sales of subscriptions to our customers. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for personnel and related expenses, marketing expenses, and third-party hosting and software costs. In the last several years, we have generated negative cash flows from operating activities and have supplemented working capital requirements through net proceeds from equity financings.
Cash used in operating activities for fiscal 2021 of $47.2 million consisted of our net loss of $80.3 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $61.4 million and net cash outflows of $28.2 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of stock-based compensation of $41.0 million, amortization of deferred sales commissions of $11.5 million, and depreciation and amortization of $8.3 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily reflected a $25.8 million increase in deferred sales commissions due to commissions paid on new bookings, a $17.8 million increase in accounts receivable due to new billings outpacing collections during the period and a $6.8 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets related to the timing of payments to vendors and amortization of prior amounts paid. These amounts were partially offset by a $18.0 million increase in deferred revenue resulting from increased billings for subscriptions, a $2.8 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses due to timing of payments to vendors, and a $1.3 million increase in other liabilities for payroll taxes, which were deferred under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act.
Cash used in operating activities for fiscal 2020 of $48.6 million consisted of our net loss of $92.1 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $42.4 million and net cash inflows of $1.1 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of stock-based compensation of $22.0 million, amortization of deferred sales commissions of $8.8 million, impairment of capitalized internal-use software of $6.7 million, and depreciation and amortization of $4.3 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily reflected a $19.9 million increase in deferred revenue resulting from increased billings for subscriptions and a $7.2 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses due to timing of payments to vendors. These amounts were partially offset by a $16.1 million increase in deferred sales commissions due to commissions paid on new bookings and a $9.4 million increase in accounts receivable due to billings outpacing collections during the period.
Cash used in operating activities for fiscal 2019 of $22.1 million consisted of our net loss of $47.8 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $15.9 million and net cash inflows of $9.8 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of amortization of deferred sales commissions of $7.0 million, stock-based compensation of $6.6 million, and depreciation and amortization of $2.0 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily reflected a $21.1 million increase in deferred revenue resulting from increased billings for subscriptions, which was partially offset by a $10.7 million increase in deferred sales commissions due to commissions paid on new bookings.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2021 of $2.3 million consisted of $1.2 million of capitalized internal-use software costs and $1.1 million in purchases of property and equipment related to leasehold improvements and purchases of furniture for our expanded office space and computers for new employees.
Cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2020 of $23.4 million consisted of $15.7 million in cash paid in connection with acquisitions of privately-held companies net of cash and restricted cash acquired, $5.6 million of capitalized internal-use software costs, and $2.1 million in purchases of property and equipment related to leasehold improvements and purchases of furniture and computers for new employees.
Cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2019 of $1.5 million consisted of capitalized internal-use software costs of $1.1 million and $0.5 million in purchases of property and equipment related to leasehold improvements and purchases of furniture and computers for new employees.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for fiscal 2021 of $352.0 million primarily consisted of proceeds from the completion of our IPO of $349.2 million, net of underwriting discounts, and proceeds from common stock option exercises of $7.3 million, partially offset by $4.4 million in payments of deferred offering costs associated with our IPO. We also borrowed and repaid the outstanding balance under the SVB Agreement.
Cash provided by financing activities for fiscal 2020 of $108.1 million consisted of net proceeds from the issuance of Series G redeemable convertible preferred stock of $106.1 million and proceeds from common stock option exercises of $4.1 million, partially offset by $2.0 million in payments of deferred offering costs associated with our IPO.
Cash provided by financing activities for fiscal 2019 of $1.7 million primarily consisted of proceeds from common stock option exercises of $1.8 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at January 31, 2021:
The commitment amounts in the table above are associated with contracts that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum services to be used, fixed, minimum, or variable price provisions, and the approximate timing of the actions under the contracts.
As of January 31, 2021, our unrecognized tax benefits were $4.2 million, all of which are netted against deferred tax assets. At this time, we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments, if any, in individual years due to uncertainties in the timing or outcomes of either actual or anticipated tax audits. As a result, these amounts are not included in the table above.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers, vendors, lessors, business partners, and other parties with respect to certain matters. Some of these indemnification provisions do not provide for a maximum potential amount of future payments we could be obligated to make. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements, and there are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of operations and consolidated statements of comprehensive loss, or consolidated statements of cash flows.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, including entities sometimes referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepared our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, in accordance with GAAP. In preparation of these consolidated financial statements, management is required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities, as of the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the reporting period. These estimates are based on information available as of the date of the financial statements and may involve subjective or significant judgment by management; therefore, actual results could differ from the estimated made by management. We refer to accounting estimates of this type as critical accounting policies and estimates, which are disclosed below.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from contracts with customers using the five-step method described in Note 2 in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We generate revenue through the sale of subscriptions to customers that enable them to access our cloud-native platform. Our subscription arrangements with customers do not provide the customer with the right to take possession of our cloud-native platform at any time and as a result are accounted for as service arrangements. Revenue is recognized when control of these services is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. Subscription terms are generally one year, but can be three years or longer, and the substantial majority of our contracts are non-cancelable. Revenue is recognized ratably over the subscription generally beginning on the date that our platform is made available to a customer. We typically bill for subscriptions annually in advance for subscriptions with terms of one year or more.
We allocate revenue to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. We generally determine standalone selling prices based on a range of actual prices charged to customers. In general, we satisfy the majority of our performance obligations over time as we transfer the promised services to our customers. We review the contract terms and conditions to evaluate the timing and amount of revenue recognition, the related contract balances, and our remaining performance obligations. These evaluations require judgment that could affect the timing and amount of revenue recognized.
Deferred Sales Commissions
Deferred contract costs include sales commissions which are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. Sales commissions for initial contracts are deferred and then amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of benefit, determined to be five years. The period of benefit is estimated by considering factors such as the expected life of our subscription contracts, historical customer attrition rates, technological life of our platform, the impact of competition in our industry, as well as other factors. Amounts anticipated to be recognized within 12 months of the balance sheet date are recorded as deferred sales commissions, current, with the remaining portion recorded as deferred sales commissions, noncurrent, on the consolidated balance sheets. Amortization of deferred contract costs is recorded as sales and marketing expense in the consolidated statements of operations included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based payment awards granted to employees, directors, and non-employees based on the estimated fair values on the date of the grant.
The fair value of options granted and purchase rights granted under the Employee Stock Purchase Plan, or ESPP, is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The fair value of restricted stock units, or RSUs, is estimated on the date of grant based on the fair value of our underlying common stock. Prior to our IPO, the fair value of our common stock for financial reporting purposes was determined considering objective and subjective factors, including valuations from third-party valuation experts, and required judgment to determine the fair value of common stock for financial reporting purposes as of the date of each equity grant or modification.
These assumptions are estimated as follows:
Fair Value. Prior to our IPO, the fair value of common stock underlying the stock options had historically been determined by our Board of Directors, with input from our management. Our Board of Directors previously determined the fair value of the common stock at the time of grant of the options by considering a number of objective and subjective factors. Subsequent to our IPO, the fair value of the underlying common stock is determined by the closing price, on the date of grant, of our common stock, as reported by the Nasdaq.
Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that our stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term assumptions were based on the vesting terms, exercise terms, and contractual lives of these awards.
Volatility. Since we do not have a trading history of our common stock, the expected volatility is based on a calculation using the historical stock information of companies deemed comparable to us, over a period equal to the expected term. We intend to apply this process using the same or similar public companies until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own share price becomes available, or unless circumstances change such that the identified companies are no longer similar to us, in which case, more suitable companies whose share prices are publicly available would be used in the calculation.
Risk-Free Rate. The risk-free rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant corresponding to the expected life of the award.
Dividend Yield. We have not and do not expect to pay cash dividends on our common stock.
We recognize stock-based compensation expense for service-based stock-based awards and our ESPP purchase rights on a straight-line basis over the service period, net of actual forfeitures. We also have certain options and RSUs that have performance-based vesting conditions; stock-based compensation expense for such awards is recognized using an accelerated attribution method from the time the vesting condition is probable through the time the vesting condition has been achieved.
Prior to our IPO, we recognized stock-based compensation expense for RSUs on an accelerated attribution method as the RSUs were subject to service-based and performance-based vesting conditions, which included a liquidity event condition, and in certain cases, the achievement of certain other performance metrics. None of the RSUs would vest unless the liquidity event condition was satisfied. Upon the completion of the IPO, the liquidity event condition was considered probable and we recognized cumulative stock-based compensation expense using the accelerated attribution method related to RSUs that had vested as of the IPO. The remaining unrecognized stock-based compensation expense related to the RSUs will be recognized over the remaining requisite service period. All service-based RSUs granted after after the IPO, under the 2020 stock plan, will not be subject to a liquidity event condition and will be recognized on a straight-line basis over the service period.
We adopted ASU No. 2018-07 effective February 1, 2020, which aligns the accounting for employee and non-employee awards except for inputs to the option pricing model and the attribution of cost. Assumptions used in valuing non-employee stock options are generally consistent with those used for employee stock options with the exception that the expected term is over the contractual life, or 10 years for non-employee stock options. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. As of February 1, 2020, the awards issued to non-employees are no longer subject to periodic adjustments as such awards vest at the end of each reporting period.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may have refinements to our estimates, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for more information about the impact of certain recent accounting pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of some accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act.
As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.