Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and notes to audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure of performance that has limitations and should not be considered as a substitute for net income or cash provided by (used in) operating activities. Please see “Key Measures Used to Evaluate and Assess Our Business” below for a discussion of our use of Adjusted EBITDA in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and a reconciliation to net income (loss) for the periods presented.
Overview
As used in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, the terms “Partnership,” “SUN,” “we,” “us,” or “our” should be understood to refer to Sunoco LP and our consolidated subsidiaries, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
We are a Delaware master limited partnership primarily engaged in the distribution of motor fuels to independent dealers, distributors, and other customers and the distribution of motor fuels to end customers at retail sites operated by commission agents. In addition, we receive lease income through the leasing or subleasing of real estate used in the retail distribution of motor fuels. As of December 31, 2020, we also operated 78 retail stores located in Hawaii and New Jersey.
We are managed by our General Partner. As of February 12, 2021, Energy Transfer Operating, L.P. (“ETO”), a consolidated subsidiary of Energy Transfer LP (“ET”). As of December 31, 2020, ETO owned 100% of the membership interests in our General Partner, 28,463,967 of our common units, which constituted a 28.5% limited partner interest in us, and all of our incentive distribution rights.
We believe we are one of the largest independent motor fuel distributors by gallons in the United States and one of the largest distributors of Chevron, Exxon, and Valero branded motor fuel in the United States. In addition to distributing motor fuel, we also distribute other petroleum products such as propane and lubricating oil.
We purchase motor fuel primarily from independent refiners and major oil companies and distribute it across more than 30 states throughout the East Coast, Midwest, South Central and Southeast regions of the United States, as well as Hawaii, to:
•78 company-owned and operated retail stores;
•539 independently operated commission agent locations where we sell motor fuel to retail customers under commission agent arrangement with such operators;
•6,803 retail stores operated by independent operators, which we refer to as “dealers” or “distributors,” pursuant to long-term distribution agreements; and
•2,476 other commercial customers, including unbranded retail stores, other fuel distributors, school districts, municipalities and other industrial customers.
On January 23, 2018, we sold a portfolio of 1,030 company-operated retail fuel outlets in 19 geographic regions to 7-Eleven.
Our retail stores operate under several brands, including our proprietary brands APlus and Aloha Island Mart, and offer a broad selection of food, beverages, snacks, grocery and non-food merchandise, motor fuels and other services.
Recent Developments and Outlook
The COVID-19 pandemic has created significant volatility, uncertainty and economic disruption. As a provider of critical energy infrastructure, our business has been designated as a “critical business” and our employees as “critical infrastructure workers” pursuant to the Department of Homeland Security Guidance on Essential Critical Infrastructure Workforce(s). As an essential business providing motor fuels, the safety of our employees and the continued operation of our assets are our top priorities and we will continue to operate in accordance with federal and state health guidelines and safety protocols. We have implemented several new policies and provided employee training to help maintain the health and safety of our workforce. The future impact of the outbreak is highly uncertain and we cannot predict the impact on our volume demand, gross profit or collections from customers. We cannot assure you that COVID-19 will not have other material adverse impacts on the Partnership's future results. See Part I. "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for further discussion.
On January 15, 2021, we repurchased the remaining outstanding portion of our 2023 Notes, discussed in the below paragraph.
On November 9, 2020, we completed a private offering of $800 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.500% senior notes due 2029 (the “2029 Notes”). We used the proceeds to fund the repurchase of a portion of our 4.875% senior notes due 2023 (the “2023 Notes”). Approximately $564 million aggregate principal amount, or 56%, of the then-outstanding 2023 Notes were tendered. In connection with our issuance of the 2029 Notes, we entered into a registration rights agreement with the initial purchasers pursuant to which we agreed to complete an offer to exchange the 2029 Notes for an issue of registered notes with terms substantively identical to the 2029 Notes and evidencing the same indebtedness as the 2029 Notes on or before November 9, 2021.
Acquisition
On December 15, 2020, we acquired a terminal in New York for approximately $12 million plus working capital adjustments.
Market and Industry Trends and Outlook
We expect that certain trends and economic or industry-wide factors will continue to affect our business, both in the short-term and long-term. We base our expectations on information currently available to us and assumptions made by us. To the extent our underlying assumptions about or interpretation of available information prove to be incorrect, our actual results may vary materially from our expected results. Read “Item 1A. Risk Factors” included herein for additional information about the risks associated with purchasing our common units.
Seasonality
Our business exhibits some seasonality due to our customers’ increased demand for motor fuel during the late spring and summer months, as compared to the fall and winter months. Travel, recreation, and construction activities typically increase in these months, driving up the demand for motor fuel sales. Our gallons sold are typically somewhat higher in the second and third quarters of our fiscal years due to this seasonality. Results of operations may therefore vary from period to period.
Key Measures Used to Evaluate and Assess Our Business
Management uses a variety of financial measurements to analyze business performance, including the following key measures:
•Motor fuel gallons sold. One of the primary drivers of our business is the total volume of motor fuel sold through our channels. Fuel distribution contracts with our customers generally provide that we distribute motor fuel at a fixed, volume-based profit margin or at an agreed upon level of price support. As a result, gross profit is directly tied to the volume of motor fuel that we distribute. Total motor fuel gross profit dollars earned from the product of gross profit per gallon and motor fuel gallons sold are used by management to evaluate business performance.
•Gross profit per gallon. Gross profit per gallon is calculated as the gross profit on motor fuel (excluding non-cash inventory adjustments) divided by the number of gallons sold, and is typically expressed as cents per gallon. Our gross profit per gallon varies amongst our third-party relationships and is impacted by the availability of certain discounts and rebates from suppliers. Retail gross profit per gallon is heavily impacted by volatile pricing and intense competition from retail stores, supermarkets, club stores and other retail formats, which varies based on the market.
•Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA, as used throughout this document, is defined as earnings before net interest expense, income taxes, depreciation, amortization and accretion expense, allocated non-cash unit-based compensation expense, unrealized gains and losses on commodity derivatives and inventory adjustments, and certain other operating expenses reflected in net income that we do not believe are indicative of ongoing core operations, such as gain or loss on disposal of assets and non-cash impairment charges. Inventory adjustments that are excluded from the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA represent changes in lower of cost or market reserves on the Partnership's inventory. These amounts are unrealized valuation adjustments applied to fuel volumes remaining in inventory at the end of the period.
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure. For a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, read “Key Operating Metrics and Results of Operations” below.
We believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors in evaluating our operating performance because:
•Adjusted EBITDA is used as a performance measure under our revolving credit facility;
•securities analysts and other interested parties use Adjusted EBITDA as a measure of financial performance; and
•our management uses Adjusted EBITDA for internal planning purposes, including aspects of our consolidated operating budget and capital expenditures;
Adjusted EBITDA is not a recognized term under GAAP and does not purport to be an alternative to net income (loss) as a measure of operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and one should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations include:
•it does not reflect interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our revolving credit facility or term loan;
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash requirements for such replacements; and
•as not all companies use identical calculations, our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA reflects amounts for the unconsolidated affiliate based on the same recognition and measurement methods used to record equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliate. Adjusted EBITDA related to unconsolidated affiliate excludes the same items with respect to the unconsolidated affiliate as those excluded from the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA, such as interest, taxes, depreciation, depletion, amortization and other non-cash items. Although these amounts are excluded from Adjusted EBITDA related to unconsolidated affiliate, such exclusion should not be understood to imply that we have control over the operations and resulting revenues and expenses of such affiliate. We do not control our unconsolidated affiliate; therefore, we do not control the earnings or cash flows of such affiliate. The use of Adjusted EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA related to unconsolidated affiliate as an analytical tool should be limited accordingly.
Key Operating Metrics and Results of Operations
The following information is intended to provide investors with a reasonable basis for assessing our historical operations, but should not serve as the only criteria for predicting our future performance.
Key operating metrics set forth below are presented for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, and have been derived from our historical consolidated financial statements.
_______________________________
(1)Excludes depreciation, amortization and accretion.
(2)We define Adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, as described above under “Key Measures Used to Evaluate and Assess Our Business.”
(3)Excludes the impact of inventory adjustments consistent with the definition of Adjusted EBITDA.
The Partnership’s results of operations are discussed on a consolidated basis below. Those results are primarily driven by the fuel distribution and marketing segment, which is the Partnership’s only significant segment. To the extent that results of operations are significantly impacted by discrete items or activities within the All Other segment, such impacts are specifically attributed to the all other segment in the discussion and analysis below.
In the discussion below, the analysis of the Partnership’s primary revenue generating activities are discussed in the analysis of Adjusted EBITDA, and other significant items impacting net income are analyzed separately.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following discussion of results compares the operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA. Total Adjusted EBITDA for 2020 was $739 million, an increase of $74 million from 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to the following changes:
•an increase in the gross profit on motor fuel sales of $32 million, primarily due to a 17.8% increase in gross profit per gallon sold and the receipt of a $13 million make-up payment under the fuel supply agreement with 7-Eleven; partially offset by a 13.4% decrease in gallons sold for 2020 compared to 2019;
•a decrease in operating costs of $54 million. These expenses include other operating expense, general and administrative expense and lease expense. The decrease was primarily due to lower employee costs, maintenance, advertising, credit card fees and utilities, which was partially offset by a $12 million charge for current expected credit losses of our accounts receivable in connection with the financial impact from COVID-19; and
•an increase of $6 million in Adjusted EBITDA related to unconsolidated affiliates, which was attributable to the joint venture on the J.C. Nolan diesel fuel pipeline to West Texas; partially offset by
•a decrease in non motor fuel gross profit and lease income of $18 million, primarily due to reduced credit card transactions and merchandise gross profit related to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
Depreciation, Amortization and Accretion. Depreciation, amortization and accretion was $189 million in 2020, a slight increase of $6 million from 2019 due to additional assets in service.
Interest Expense. Interest expense was $175 million in 2020, a slight increase of $2 million from 2019, primarily attributable to a slight increase in average long-term debt.
Non-Cash Unit-Based Compensation Expense. Non-cash unit-based compensation expense was $14 million in 2020, a slight increase of $1 million from 2019 due to award activity.
Loss on Disposal of Assets and Impairment Charges. Loss on disposal of assets and impairment charges was $2 million in 2020, a decrease of $66 million from 2019. The 2019 amount is primarily attributable to a $47 million write-down on assets held for sale and a $21 million loss on disposal of assets related to our ethanol plant in Fulton, New York.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt of $13 million in 2020 was related to the repurchase of approximately $564 million aggregate principal amount, or 56%, of the Partnership’s outstanding 2023 Notes, pursuant to the previously-disclosed tender offer.
Unrealized Gain (Loss) on Commodity Derivatives. The unrealized gains and losses on our commodity derivatives represent the changes in fair value of our commodity derivatives. The change in unrealized gains and losses between periods is impacted by the notional amounts and commodity price changes on our commodity derivatives. Additional information on commodity derivatives is included in “