Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on August 17, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses.
Our registration statement for our Public Offering became effective on November 24, 2020. On November 30, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 34,500,000 Units, including the issuance of 4,500,000 Units as a result of the underwriter’s exercise in full of its over-allotment option, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of approximately $345.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $19.7 million, inclusive of approximately $12.1 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 9,900,000 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant to our Sponsor, generating additional gross proceeds of $9.9 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Private Placement, and the over-allotment option on November 30, 2020, $345.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement were placed in the Trust Account located in the United States at J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the assets held in the Trust Account as described below.
Our certificate of incorporation provides that, other than the withdrawal of interest to pay franchise and income taxes (less up to $100,000 to pay dissolution expenses), none of the funds held in the Trust Account will be released until the earliest of: (i) the completion of the Initial Business Combination; (ii) the redemption of any shares of Class A common stock included in the Units (the “Public Shares”) sold in the Initial Public Offering that have been properly tendered in connection with a stockholder vote to amend our certificate of incorporation to affect the substance or timing of our obligation to redeem 100% of such Public Shares if we have not consummated an Initial Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or November 30, 2022 (or 27 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or February 28, 2023, if we have executed a letter of intent, agreement in principle or definitive agreement for a business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering) (the “Combination Period”); or (iii) the redemption of 100% of the Public Shares we are unable to complete an Initial Business Combination within the Combination Period. The proceeds deposited in the Trust Account could become subject to the claims of our creditors, if any, which could have priority over the claims of our public stockholders.
Proposed Business Combination
On January 23, 2021, we entered into the Business Combination Agreement with SL Invest I Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“MergerCo1”), SL Invest II LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“MergerCo2”), SL Financial Investor I LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Holdings I”), SL Financial Investor II LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Holdings II”), SL Financial Holdings Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Spartan Sub”), SL Financial LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“OpCo Merger Sub” and collectively with MergerCo1, MergerCo2, Holdings I, Holdings II and the Company, the “Spartan Subsidiaries”), Sunlight Financial LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Sunlight”), FTV-Sunlight, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“FTV Blocker”) and Tiger Co-Invest B Sunlight Blocker, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Tiger Blocker,” and collectively with FTV Blocker, the “Blockers”). Subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the conditions to closing of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement (the “Transactions”), the Transactions will effect a business combination between us and Sunlight. Following the closing of the Transactions (the “Closing”), the combined company will be organized in an “Up-C” structure, meaning that all of the material assets of the combined company will be held by Sunlight, and Spartan’s only material assets will be its equity interests in Sunlight.
The Boards of Directors of each of the Company (acting following consultation with a duly formed transaction committee) and Sunlight have unanimously approved the Transaction. The Transaction will require the approval of the stockholders of the Company and equityholders of Sunlight, the effectiveness of a registration statement to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) in connection with the transaction, satisfaction of the conditions stated in the definitive agreement and other customary closing conditions. The transaction is expected to close in the second quarter of 2021.
Sunlight Support Agreement
In connection with the entry into the Business Combination Agreement, on January 23, 2021, certain members of Sunlight whose approval is sufficient to approve and adopt the Business Combination Agreement and the Transactions on behalf of Sunlight’s members (the “Requisite Sunlight Members”), entered into a support agreement, pursuant to which, among other things, the Requisite Sunlight Members agreed to execute and deliver a written consent approving the Business Combination Agreement and the Transactions within two business days after the effectiveness of the Registration Statement and to vote in favor of the approval and adoption of the Business Combination Agreement and the Transactions.
Founders Stock Agreement
In connection with the entry into the Business Combination Agreement, but effective as of the closing of the Transactions, we and our initial stockholders entered into a Founders Stock Agreement (the “Founders Stock Agreement”), pursuant to which, among other things, subject to and effective immediately prior to the closing of the Transactions, the Sponsor agreed to surrender up to 25% of the Class B common stock held by the Sponsor (at a 1:4 ratio to the percentage, if any, of redemptions by holders of Class A common stock); provided that no such surrender shall occur unless more than 5% of the outstanding shares of Class A common stock are actually redeemed by us.
Amendment to Letter Agreement
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, on January 23, 2021, the Company, the Sponsor and certain other members of our board of directors and/or management team (the “Insiders”) entered into an amendment (the “Letter Agreement Amendment”) to that certain Letter Agreement (the “Existing Letter Agreement”) dated as of November 24, 2020, by and among the Company, our Sponsor and the Insiders, pursuant to which the Sponsor and each Insider will agree, effective as of the closing and subject to certain exceptions, to modify the lock-up restrictions set forth in the Existing Letter Agreement as follows:
(i) 80% of the Class B common stock (including any shares of Class A common stock issued in respect of the conversion of such Class B common stock upon the consummation of a Business Combination (as defined in the Existing Letter Agreement)) held by it, him or her will be restricted from Transfer (as defined in the Letter Agreement Amendment) until the one-year anniversary of the date of the consummation of a Business Combination, or earlier if, subsequent to the consummation of a Business Combination, (a) the last sale price of the Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share for any 20 trading days within a 30-day trading period commencing at least 150 days after the consummation of a Business Combination or (b) the Company consummates a transaction which results in all of the Company’s stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of Common A Common Stock and Class B common stock for cash, securities or other property; and
(ii) 20% of the Class B common stock (including any shares of Class A common stock issued in respect of the conversion of such Class B common stock upon the consummation of a Business Combination) held by it, him or her will be restricted from Transfer until the six-month anniversary of the date of the consummation of a Business Combination, or earlier if, subsequent to the consummation of a Business Combination, (a) the last sale price of the Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share for any 20 trading days within a 30-day trading period ending at least 90 days after the consummation of a Business Combination or (b) the Company consummates a transaction which results in all of the Company’s stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of Common A Common Stock and Class B common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Subscription Agreements
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, on January 23, 2021, we entered into separate subscription agreements (collectively, the “Subscription Agreements”) with a number of investors (collectively, the “Subscribers”), pursuant to which the Subscribers agreed to purchase, and we agreed to sell to the Subscribers, an aggregate of 25,000,000 shares of Class A common stock (the “PIPE Shares”), for a purchase price of $10.00 per share and an aggregate purchase price of $250,000,000, in a private placement (the “PIPE”).
The closing of the sale of the PIPE Shares pursuant to the Subscription Agreements is contingent upon, among other customary closing conditions, the concurrent consummation of the Transactions. The purpose of the PIPE is to raise additional capital for use by the combined company following the closing.
Pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, we agreed that, within 30 calendar days after the consummation of the Transactions, we will file with the SEC (at our sole cost and expense) a registration statement registering the resale of the PIPE Shares (the “PIPE Resale Registration Statement”), and we will use its commercially reasonable efforts to have the PIPE Resale Registration Statement declared effective as soon as practicable after the filing thereof.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2020 related to our formation, the preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of gain on investment (net), dividends and interest held in Trust Account. We have incurred increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from August 17, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $700,000, which consisted of approximately $688,000 in general and administrative expenses and approximately $22,000 of franchise tax expense, which was partially offset by approximately $10,000 net gain on investments held in the Trust Account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $716,000 in our operating bank account, approximately $9,000 of interest income available in the Trust Account to pay for taxes and working capital of approximately $1.6 million. Further, we have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of its acquisition plans.
Through December 31, 2020, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from our Sponsor to pay for certain offering costs in exchange for issuance of the Founder Shares (described below), a loan under a promissory note (the “Note”) of approximately $235,000, and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. We repaid the Note on December 3, 2020. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an Initial Business Combination, our officers, directors and initial stockholders may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
The Company does not have sufficient liquidity to meet its anticipated obligations over the next year from the date of issuance of these financial statements. In connection with the Company's assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity's Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the Company has access to funds from the Sponsor that are sufficient to fund the working capital needs of the Company until the earlier of the consummation of the Business Combination or one year from the date of issuance of these financial statements.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
In August 2020, 11,500,000 shares of the Company’s Class B common stock (the “Founder Shares”) were issued to our Sponsor in exchange for the payment of $25,000 of certain offering costs on our behalf, or approximately $0.002 per share. In October 2020, our Sponsor transferred 50,000 Founder Shares to each of the two independent director nominees at their original purchase price. In November 2020, our Sponsor returned to us at no cost an aggregate of 4,312,500 Founder Shares, which we cancelled. Also in November 2020, we effected a stock dividend on the Class B common stock, (which receipt of such dividends was waived by the independent director nominees) resulting in an aggregate of 8,625,000 shares of Class B common stock outstanding. All shares and associated amounts had been retroactively restated to reflect the share surrender and the stock dividend. Of the 8,625,000 Founder Shares outstanding, up to 1,125,000 shares were subject to forfeiture to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised by the underwriters, so that the Founder Shares would represent 20.0% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering. On November 30, 2020, the underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option; thus, these 1,125,000 shares were no longer subject to forfeiture.
The holders of the Founders Shares agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of the Initial Business Combination or (B) subsequent to the Initial Business Combination, (x) if the reported last sale price of the Company’s Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the Initial Business Combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of our stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 9,900,000 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant to our Sponsor, generating proceeds of $9.9 million.
Each whole Private Placement Warrant is exercisable for one whole share of the Company’s Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the purchase price of the Private Placement Warrants was added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account. If the Initial Business Combination is not completed within the Combination Period, the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants held in the Trust Account will be used to fund the redemption of the Public Shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless. The Private Placement Warrants are non-redeemable and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by the Sponsor or its permitted transferees.
Our Sponsor and our officers and directors agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Private Placement Warrants until 30 days after the completion of the Initial Business Combination.
Related Party Loans
On August 17, 2020, our Sponsor agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to the Note. The Note is non-interest bearing and payable upon the closing date of the Initial Public Offering. We borrowed an aggregate of approximately $235,000 under the Note and repaid the Note on December 3, 2020.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an Initial Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete an Initial Business Combination, we will repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that an Initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of an Initial Business Combination or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Initial Business Combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. To date, we have no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Administrative Support Agreement
Commencing on the date the Units were first listed on the NYSE, we agreed to pay our Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. Upon completion of the Initial Business Combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The initial stockholders and holders of the Private Placement Warrants are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The initial stockholders and holders of the Private Placement Warrants are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that we register such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus to purchase up to 4,500,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option on November 30, 2020.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $6.9 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $12.1 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete an Initial Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement for the Public Offering.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. Our investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these investments are included in net gain from investments held in Trust Account in the statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information, other than for investments in open-ended money market funds with published daily net asset values (“NAV”), in which case the Company uses NAV as a practical expedient to fair value. The NAV on these investments is typically held constant at $1.00 per unit.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Shares of conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020, 32,955,009 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net income per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) applicable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 27,150,000 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted earnings per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted earnings per share is the same as basic earnings per share for the period.
Our statement of operations includes a presentation of income per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per share, basic and diluted for Class A common stock is calculated by dividing the net gain from investments held in the Trust Account of approximately $10,000, net of applicable franchise taxes of approximately $10,000 for the period from August 17, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock outstanding for the period. Net loss per share, basic and diluted for Class B common stock for the period from August 17, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 is calculated by dividing the general and administration expenses of approximately $688,000 and franchise taxes of approximately $11,000, resulting in a net loss of approximately $699,000, by the weighted average number of Class B common stock outstanding for the period.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, that would have a material effect on our financial statements.