Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. The actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Amounts in thousands, except share and per share data
Overview
Sunworks provides PV based power systems for the agricultural, commercial, industrial, public works, and residential markets in California, Nevada, Massachusetts, Oregon, New Jersey and Hawaii. We have direct sales and/or operations personnel in California, Nevada, Massachusetts, and Oregon. Through our operating subsidiaries, we design, arrange financing, integrate, install, and manage systems ranging in size from 2kW (kilowatt) for residential loads to multi MW (megawatt) systems for larger ACI and public works projects. ACI installations have included installations at office buildings, manufacturing plants, warehouses, churches, and agricultural facilities such as farms, wineries, and dairies. Public works installations have included school districts, local municipalities, federal facilities and higher education institutions. The Company provides a full range of installation services to our solar energy customers including design, system engineering, procurement, permitting, construction, grid connection, warranty, system monitoring and maintenance.
We currently operate in one segment based upon our organizational structure and the way in which our operations are managed and evaluated. Approximately 74% of our 2020 revenue was from sales to the ACI and public works markets and approximately 26% of our revenue was from sales to the residential market. Approximately 69% of our 2019 revenue was from sales to the ACI and public works markets and approximately 31% of our revenue was from sales to the residential market.
During the second half of 2020 Sunworks entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger among The Peck Company Holdings, Inc., Peck Mercury, Inc. and Sunworks (the “Merger Agreement”). Significant management time and expense was spent in negotiating, documenting and preparing proxy materials for the special meeting of shareholders (“the Special Meeting”) scheduled for November 12, 2020. In addition to significant management time and effort spent in preparing for the shareholder vote, substantial legal, accounting and consulting costs were incurred.
Due to the failure to obtain a quorum at the Special Meeting, the Special Meeting was convened, but no matters were submitted to a vote of the Company’s shareholders. As a result, the proposal to adopt the Merger Agreement did not receive the affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the shares of the Company’s common stock. The Merger Agreement was therefore not approved by the Company’s shareholders.
As a result of the failure to receive shareholder approval, the Merger Agreement was terminated and the merger contemplated thereby was abandoned.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to impairment of property, plant and equipment, goodwill, deferred tax assets, costs to complete projects, and fair value computation using the Black Scholes option pricing model. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions, such as the trading value of our common stock and estimated future undiscounted cash flows, that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions; however, we believe that our estimates, including those for the above-described items, are reasonable.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates include estimates used to review the Company’s goodwill, impairments and estimations of long-lived assets, revenue recognition on construction contracts recognized over time, allowances for uncollectible accounts, operating lease right-of-use assets and liabilities, warranty reserves, inventory valuation, valuations of non-cash capital stock issuances and the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable in the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues and related costs on construction contracts are recognized as the performance obligations for work are satisfied over time in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Under ASC 606, revenue and associated profit, engineering, procurement and construction (“EPC”) projects for residential and smaller ACI systems that require us to deliver functioning solar power systems are generally completed within two to twelve months from commencement of construction. Construction on larger Public Works and ACI projects may be completed within eighteen to thirty-six months, depending on the size and location. We recognize revenue from EPC services over time as our performance creates or enhances an energy generation asset controlled by the customer.
The cost of materials or equipment will generally be excluded from our recognition of profit, unless specifically produced or manufactured for a project, because such costs are not considered to be a measure of progress. All un-allocable indirect costs and corporate general and administrative costs are charged to the periods as incurred. However, in the event a loss on a contract is foreseen, the Company will recognize the loss in the period it is determined.
Revisions in cost and profit estimates during the course of the contract are reflected in the accounting period in which the facts which require the revision become known. We use an input method based on costs incurred as we believe that this method most accurately reflects our progress toward satisfaction of the performance obligation. Under this method, revenue arising from fixed-price construction contracts is recognized as work is performed based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligations. Changes in job performance, job conditions, and estimated profitability, including those arising from contract penalty provisions, and final contract settlements may result in revisions to costs and income and are recognized in the period in which the revisions are determined.
Contract assets represent revenues recognized in excess of amounts invoiced to customers on contracts in progress. Contract liabilities represent amounts invoiced to customers in excess of revenues recognized on contracts in progress.
Goodwill
The Company accounts for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with ASC 805, “Business Combinations,” where the total purchase price is allocated to the tangible and identified intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The purchase price is allocated using the information currently available, and may be adjusted, up to one year from acquisition date, after obtaining more information regarding, among other things, asset valuations, liabilities assumed and revisions to preliminary estimates. The purchase price in excess of the fair value of the tangible and identified intangible assets acquired less liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill.
The Company retains a valuation consulting firm to test for goodwill impairment in the fourth quarter of each year and whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its fair value and may not be recoverable. In accordance with the Company’s policies, the Company performed a quantitative assessment of goodwill at December 31, 2019, and no impairment was found. As a result of the events and circumstances resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company’s outlook for revenue, profitability and cash flow had deteriorated. Therefore, the Company performed another quantitative assessment of goodwill at March 31, 2020, where it was determined that the carrying value of goodwill exceeded its fair value at March 31, 2020. As a result, the Company recorded an impairment of $4,000. The Company performed another quantitative assessment of goodwill at December 31, 2020 and no additional impairment was found.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company periodically issues stock options to employees and directors. The Company accounts for stock option grants issued and vesting to employees based on the authoritative guidance provided by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) whereas the value of the award is measured on the date of grant and recognized over the vesting period.
The Company accounts for stock grants issued to non-employees in accordance with the authoritative guidance of the FASB whereas the value of the stock compensation is based upon the measurement date as determined at either a) the date at which a performance commitment is reached, or b) at the date at which the necessary performance to earn the equity instruments is complete. Non-employee stock-based compensation charges generally are amortized over the vesting period on a straight-line basis. In certain circumstances where there are no future performance requirements by the non-employee, option grants are immediately vested and the total stock-based compensation charge is recorded in the period of the measurement date.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivables are recorded on contracts for amounts currently due based upon progress billings, as well as retention, which are collectible upon completion of the contracts. Retention receivable is the amount withheld by a customer until a contract is completed. Retention receivables of $392 and $1,027 were included in the balance of trade accounts receivable as of December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
The Company performs ongoing credit evaluation of its customers. Management monitors outstanding receivables based on factors surrounding the credit risk of specific customers, historical trends, age of receivables and other information, and records bad debts using the allowance method. Accounts receivable are presented net of an allowance for doubtful accounts of $253 at December 31, 2020, and $350 at December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, $710 was recorded as bad debt expense compared to $111 in 2019.
Inventory
Inventory is valued at lower of cost or net realizable value determined by the first-in, first-out method. Inventory primarily consists of panels, inverters, batteries and mounting racks and other materials. The Company reviews the cost of inventories against their estimated net realizable value and records write-downs if any inventories have costs in excess of their net realizable values. Inventory is presented net of an allowance of $309 at December 31, 2020 and $50 at December 31, 2019.
Warranty Liability
The Company establishes warranty liability reserves to provide for estimated future expenses as a result of installation, product and performance defects, product recalls and litigation incidental to the Company’s business. Liability estimates are determined based on management’s judgment, considering such factors as historical experience, the likely current cost of corrective action, manufacturers’ and subcontractors’ participation in sharing the cost of corrective action, and consultations with third party experts such as engineers. Solar panel manufacturers currently provide substantial warranties of between ten to twenty five years with full reimbursement to replace and install replacement panels. Inverter manufacturers currently provide warranties covering ten to fifteen years including replacement and installation. The warranty liability for estimated future warranty costs at December 31, 2020 and 2019 is $1,131 and $441, respectively.
Income Taxes
The Company uses the liability method of accounting for income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to financial statements carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carry-forwards. The measurement of deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on provisions of applicable tax law. The measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance based on the amount of tax benefits that, based on available evidence, is not expected to be realized.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic spread globally, including to the United States, which resulted in significant governmental measures being implemented to control the spread of the virus, including quarantines, travel restrictions and business shutdowns. Although we could not predict the scope and severity of COVID-19, these developments and measures adversely affected our business and our results of operation and financial condition, particularly with respect to operations and our ability to complete ongoing installations in a timely manner. COVID-19 also caused a decline in demand of our products and services.
In response to the economic downturn, and the uncertain impact of COVID-19 on our business, we implemented proactive steps to try and protect our business, including but not limited to: as of March 30, 2020, terminating or temporarily laying off 59 employees, representing a 33% reduction from the beginning of the year headcount, reducing an additional 23 employees to part time, and temporarily eliminating salaries for members of our board of directors and our Chief Executive Officer and reducing other management individual’s salaries by at least 50%.
We applied for and received a Payroll Protection Program loan of $2,846 for which we have applied for 100 percent forgiveness. Full-time employee headcount has returned slowly over the remainder of 2020 as installation activity required additional labor. We had 84 active full-time and two part-time employees with another 38 employees on temporary layoff or other leaves of absence as of December 31, 2020.
We instituted remote working for employees and procedures for social distancing and sanitation within offices and among construction teams. Employees were trained in preventative measures. Internal communication procedures were created to provide information regarding possible exposures, isolation procedures, testing and return to work standards for employees and their households.
The extent to which COVID-19 continues to impact our business, operations or financial results depends on future developments, which are uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the duration of the outbreak, new variations of the virus that may emerge or the nature or effectiveness of actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, among others. We cannot presently predict the scope and severity of any potential business shutdowns or disruptions.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
REVENUE AND COST OF REVENUES
For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue declined 36.6% to $37,913 compared to $59,830 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenue decreased for ACI by $10,169 or 35.1% compared to the prior year. The revenue decrease for Public Works was $2,671 or 22.0% compared to the prior year. The revenue decrease for Residential installations was $9,077 or 48.4% compared to 2019. The governmental response to COVID-19 had its greatest impact on residential revenue by limiting customer interaction and slowing the sales process. Closure and reconfiguration of offices for the authorities having jurisdictional approval responsibilities slowed plan reviews, approvals and construction permitting. As our primary third-party sales generator’s sales continued to decline during 2020, Sunworks is reducing its reliance on third-party sales generators and bringing in its own in-house residential sales team to better manage the sales process and customer expectations.
We have also combined our Northern California ACI leadership and operations, thus improving the utilization of construction resources and talent. Combining leadership and oversight of operations in Northern California and having completed older less profitable and problematic projects in 2019 has contributed to the decrease in cost of goods sold as a percentage of revenue to 86.1% for the year 2020 from 88.9% in the prior year. This reduction in cost of goods sold as a percentage of revenue between years was achieved in spite of 36.6% lower revenue and an incremental $749 accrual for warranty-related costs and settlements.
Approximately 74% of our 2020 revenue was from installations for the ACI and public works markets and approximately 26% was from residential system installations. Larger ACI projects take longer to sell, design, engineer, permit and construct than residential projects. Some current projects may take more than a year to complete from the time that the sales agreement is signed, and revenue is fully recognized with the installation and receipt of final inspection documents.
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $5,268 or 13.9% of revenue compared to $6,663 or 11.1% of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gross margin in 2020 was lower than the prior year due to the reduction in revenue for all three business groups, ACI, Public Works and Residential. Compared to 2019, the gross margin percentage improved as redundant overheads were eliminated, there was less rework in engineering design and permits, and more efficient construction activities with fewer jobs performed compared to the prior year.
SELLING AND MARKETING EXPENSES
Selling and marketing (“S&M”) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $2,903 compared to $2,992 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The 3.0% decline in S&M expenses was primarily due to decreases in employee headcount and related costs, commissions, and media advertising expenses on lower revenue compared to the prior year. As a percentage of revenues S&M expenses increased to 7.7% of revenue in 2020 compared to 5.0% in 2019 on 36.6% lower revenue.
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $13,116 compared to $11,222 for the year ended December 31, 2019. As a percentage of revenue, G&A expenses increased to 34.6% of revenue in 2020 compared to 18.8% in 2019. In total dollars, G&A expense increased primarily due to non-recurring incremental legal and transaction related costs of $2,159 related to the proposed merger’s failure to obtain a quorum to receive shareholder approval, $710 in bad debt expense, executive recruiting fees, and increases in Delaware franchise taxes, and sales tax liability accruals.
Operating expenses are expected to be significantly lower in 2021 without the non-recurring charges and continuing efforts to optimize G&A expenses.
GOODWILL IMPAIRMENT
Goodwill impairment recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $4,000 and $0, respectively. The Company retained a valuation consultant to perform quantitative assessments of goodwill at December 31, 2020, March 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, the Company determined that the carrying amount of goodwill did not exceed its fair value and, as a result, no impairment was recorded. At March 31, 2020, primarily as a result of the events and circumstances resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, our outlook for revenue, profitability and cash flow deteriorated. Therefore, we performed a quantitative assessment of goodwill at March 31, 2020. It was determined that the carrying value of goodwill exceeded its fair value at March 31, 2020 and we recorded an impairment of $4,000 during the first quarter of 2020. At December 31, 2019 the quantitative assessment showed that the carrying amount of goodwill did not exceed its fair value and as a result, no impairment was recorded.
STOCK BASED COMPENSATION EXPENSES
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred approximately $147 in non-cash stock compensation costs associated with Restricted Stock Grant Agreements and stock options compared to $434 during the year ended December 31, 2019. The reduction in expense is partially the result of the cessation of any stock-based compensation expense for a restricted stock grant agreement (the “March 2017 RSGA”) effective March 29, 2017 that expired March 29, 2020.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, stock-based compensation of $63 and $250, respectively, is for the March 2017 RSGA grant to our former CEO.
Stock-based compensation, excluding restricted stock grant agreements, related to employee and director options totaled $84 and $184 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION
Depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $337 compared to $353 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased primarily due to certain equipment becoming fully depreciated.
OTHER INCOME/(EXPENSES)
Other income/(expenses) decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $(704) compared to $(848) for the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $714 from $863 for year ended December 31, 2019. Approximately $653 and $780 of the interest expense for the years ended December 2020 and 2019, respectively, was from the Promissory Note Payable entered into in April 2018. The January 2020 prepayment of $1,500 in principal resulted in lower interest expense for the year. The Promissory Note Payable was completely paid off in December 2020.
NET LOSS
The Company had a consolidated net loss of $15,939, including the $4,000 goodwill impairment expense, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a net loss of $9,186 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had $38,991 in cash at December 31, 2020, as compared to $3,154 at December 31, 2019. We believe that the aggregate of our existing cash and cash equivalents along with net proceeds raised in February 2021 from sales of our common stock of $48,937, is sufficient to meet our operating cash requirements and strategic objectives for growth for at least the next year. To satisfy our capital requirements, including acquisitions and ongoing future operations, we may seek to raise additional financing through debt and equity financings.
On January 27, 2021, the Company filed a Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-252475) (the “Registration Statement”), with the SEC. The Registration Statement allows the Company to offer and sell, from time to time in one or more offerings, any combination of common stock, preferred stock, warrants, or units having an aggregate initial offering price not to exceed $100 million. The Registration Statement was declared effective by the SEC on February 3, 2021. Approximately $50 million of the $100 million total is available for future offerings pursuant to the Registration Statement.
As of December 31, 2020, our working capital surplus was $30,890 compared to a working capital surplus of $1,460 at December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $4,337 of cash in operating activities compared to $6,456 used in operating activities for the prior year ended December 31, 2019. The cash used in operating activities was primarily the result of the current year net loss combined with changes in working capital accounts.
Net cash used by investing activities was $26 in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $11 provided by investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2019. The cash used in investing activities was for the purchase of equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $40,163. This is due to net proceeds of $41,406 received from the At the Market offerings, proceeds from a Paycheck Protection Loan of $2,847 partially offset by the repayment of the $3,750 promissory note payable and principal payments on acquisition and equipment debt totaling $340. Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $5,909. The cash was primarily used to provide financial flexibility and to pay principal payments on existing debt. Since January 1, 2021 until February 23, 2021, we sold an additional 3,212,486 Placement Shares resulting in additional net proceeds of approximately $48,937.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues, results of operations, liquidity, or capital expenditures.