ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, which involve risks and uncertainties. Please refer to the section entitled “Forward Looking Statements” at the beginning of this Annual Report immediately prior to Item 1. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to those discussed in Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Executive Overview
Our principal business is the design and manufacture of aluminum wheels for sale to OEMs in North America and Europe and to the aftermarket in Europe. We employ approximately 7,600 full-time employees, operating in eight manufacturing facilities in North America and Europe with a combined annual manufacturing capacity of approximately 20 million wheels. We are one of the largest aluminum wheel suppliers to global OEMs and we believe we are the #1 European aluminum wheel aftermarket manufacturer and supplier. Our OEM aluminum wheels accounted for approximately 91 percent of our sales in 2020 and are primarily sold for factory installation on vehicle models manufactured by BMW (including Mini), Daimler Group (Mercedes-Benz, AMG, Smart), FCA, Ford, GM, Honda, Jaguar-Land Rover, Mazda, Nissan, PSA, Renault, Subaru, Suzuki, Toyota, VW Group (Volkswagen, Audi, SEAT, Skoda, Porsche, Bentley) and Volvo. We also sell aluminum wheels to the European aftermarket under the brands ATS, RIAL, ALUTEC and ANZIO. North America and Europe represent the principal markets for our products, but we have a global presence and diversified customer base consisting of North American, European and Asian OEMs.
Globally, we shipped 15.2 million units in 2020, down from 19.2 million in 2019, a 21.1 percent decrease, which was slightly better than overall industry volume trends. Demand for our products is mainly driven by light-vehicle production levels in North America and Europe, as well as production levels at our key customers and take rates on vehicle wheel programs we serve. North American light-vehicle production in 2020 was 13.0 million vehicles, as compared to 16.3 million vehicles in 2019. In Europe, the light vehicle production in 2020 was 13.6 million vehicles, as compared to 17.8 million vehicles in 2019. Industry production volumes in 2020 were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and uncertainty with respect to the economic effects of the pandemic introduced significant volatility in the financial markets during the year ended December 31, 2020 and continues to have an adverse effect on the automotive industry, including reductions in consumer demand and OEM automotive production.
While navigating through this period of volatility and uncertainty, Superior’s top priorities have been:
•
Ensuring the health and safety of our employees
•
Maintaining the financial health of the Company, and
•
Serving our customers.
To ensure the health and safety of our employees globally and respond to the current industry production environment, we closed production at our North American facilities in early April 2020 and our European facilities in late March 2020. The Company reopened all of its facilities by June 1, 2020, in line with production demand, finished goods levels, and in accordance with local government requirements.
Additionally, we developed and executed a Safe Work Playbook across our footprint. We also instituted a Global Employee Health & Safety (“EH&S”) Steering Team, led by our Director of EH&S, and comprised of our global and regional leaders from Operations and Human Resources. The EH&S Steering Team is responsible for ensuring the Safe Work Playbook leverages global best practices and coordinating the consistent and complete implementation of the policies across our global footprint, including all policies and protocols in compliance with local rules and regulations. We have invested in facility updates to ensure social distancing, including changes in cafeteria layout and practices, transportation services and marked spacing throughout our manufacturing facilities. We have established Personal Protective Equipment levels for each location, based on local requirements, and purchasing controls are in place to ensure adequate supplies. Extended preventative actions were introduced which include no travel without written approval, wearing face masks at all times at our plants, quick testing implementation at our plants, with increased and standard criteria for testing and contact tracing, as well as working from home wherever possible. In the event of a COVID-19 incident, the local COVID-19 response team immediately executes the defined protocols, including isolation of any employee showing symptoms, and conducts traceability
activities to identify and quarantine all potentially exposed individuals. Our management is actively monitoring COVID-19 developments in Europe and North America and met daily throughout much of 2020 to discuss the status of COVID-19 cases and any necessary actions.
Our global unit shipments declined approximately 21.1 percent in 2020, as compared to 2019 primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The decline began in the second quarter of 2020, with unit shipments 92.2 percent and 67.6 percent lower in April and May, respectively, as compared to the same months of 2019. Volumes began to improve in June of 2020, with unit shipments only 12.5 percent lower on a year-over-year basis, as industry production volumes started to recover. The recovery continued in the third quarter with units shipped only 10.1 percent lower, as compared to the third quarter of 2019, and only 2.1 percent lower for the month of September of 2020. In the fourth quarter of 2020, our global unit shipments were essentially flat with the fourth quarter of 2019 as our units shipped in Europe were down 4.2 percent, offset by a 4.0 percent increase in units shipped in North America. As such, our North American volume recovery has been strong, while the European recovery has been slower (refer to the discussion under Results of Operations for further details on year-over-year comparisons and the impact of COVID-19 on our results).
While Superior experienced stronger demand from its customers during each of the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as compared to the second quarter, the Company extended certain cost reduction initiatives through the end of 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, Superior executed temporary and permanent cost savings including furloughs, compensation and benefit reductions, temporary facility closures, deferral of merit increases, reduced travel, and personnel restructurings. The Company also used government subsidies where available. While some of the temporary measures such as the wage reductions were discontinued in the third quarter, other temporary initiatives remained in place through the end of the year and are expected to be in place into 2021. In total, the cost initiatives implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic benefited 2020 by more than $40 million.
The ultimate impact that COVID-19 will have on our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on a number of evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict, including: the duration and scope of the pandemic; the impact of recent resurgences of COVID-19 cases in North America and Europe, the efficacy and distribution of COVID-19 vaccines, governmental, OEMs’, suppliers’, customers’ and individuals’ actions that have been and continue to be taken in response to the pandemic; and the impact of the pandemic on economic activity and actions that continue to be taken in response to such impact by the OEMs’ suppliers and customers.
The following chart shows the comparison of our operational performance in 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
In 2020 sales were lower due to reduced volumes in both North America and Europe attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our 2020 Adjusted EBITDA was lower than 2019 primarily due to lower volumes attributable to the on-going COVID-19 pandemic, including production shutdowns in the second quarter, partially offset by improved product mix, cost saving initiatives implemented during the year, and favorable foreign exchange rates.
The following table is a summary of the Company’s operating results for 2020 and 2019:
Results of Operations
(1)
Value added sales is a key measure that is not calculated according to U.S. GAAP. Refer to Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis, Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section of this Annual Report for a definition of value added sales and a reconciliation of value added sales to net sales, the most comparable U.S. GAAP measure.
(2)
Adjusted EBITDA is a key measure that is not calculated according to U.S. GAAP. Refer to Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis, Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section of this Annual Report for a definition of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of our Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most comparable U.S. GAAP measure.
2020 versus 2019
Shipments
Wheel unit shipments were 15.2 million for 2020, compared to wheel unit shipments of 19.2 million in the prior year, a decrease of 21.1 percent. The decrease occurred in both our European and North American operations and was driven by lower volumes at our key OEM customers due to the on-going COVID-19 pandemic, including production shut-downs in the second quarter of the calendar year.
Net Sales
Net sales for 2020 were $1,100.8 million, compared to net sales of $1,372.5 million for the same period in 2019, a decrease of 19.8 percent. The reduction in net sales was principally driven by lower production volumes and lower aluminum prices in North America and Europe related to the on-going COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by improved product mix comprised of larger diameter wheels and premium finishes in both regions and favorable Euro foreign exchange.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales were $1,035.1 million in 2020, compared to $1,256.4 million in the prior year period. The decrease in cost of sales was principally due to lower production volumes and lower aluminum prices in North America and Europe related to the on-going COVID-19 pandemic, as well as lower utility expenses, reduced headcount and operating expenses, the use of European government subsidies and the rationalization of the Company’s North American manufacturing footprint in the prior year.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for 2020 were $52.4 million, or 4.8 percent of net sales, compared to $63.9 million, or 4.7 percent of net sales for the same period in 2019. The decrease is primarily due to reduced employee compensation related to both temporary and permanent cost savings initiatives, as well as reduced discretionary spending and travel expenses.
Impairment of Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Intangibles
In the fourth quarter of 2019, we recognized a goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment charge of $102.2 million relating to our European reporting unit. In the first quarter of 2020, we recognized an additional goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment charge of $193.6 million relating to our European reporting unit (refer to Note 9, “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report.)
Net Interest Expense
Net interest expense for 2020 was $45.4 million, compared to interest expense of $47.0 million in 2019. The reduction in interest expense was primarily due to both early extinguishment and principal repayments during 2019 and 2020, as well as lower Term Loan Facility interest rates in 2020. This was partially offset by incremental interest expenses due to the Company’s drawings on its European and North American revolvers in 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense was $2.8 million in 2020, compared to other income of $4.0 million in 2019. The decline in other income in 2020 was primarily driven by a $3.7 million gain on early extinguishment of a portion of the Notes recognized in 2019, $1.6 million of expense related to an increase in the fair value of the preferred stock embedded derivative liabilities recognized in 2020 and higher foreign exchange losses in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Income Tax Provision
The income tax provision for 2020 was $14.9 million on a pre-tax loss of $228.7 million, representing an effective tax rate of (6.5) percent. The effective tax rate was lower than the statutory rate primarily due to the effects of the goodwill impairment in Germany and the recognition of a valuation allowance on deferred tax assets, offset by a favorable split of jurisdictional pre-tax income. The income tax provision for 2019 was $3.4 million on a pre-tax loss of $93.0 million, representing an effective income tax rate of (3.7) percent.
Net Loss
Net loss in 2020 was $243.6 million, or a loss per diluted share of $10.81, compared to net loss of $96.5 million, or a loss per diluted share of $5.10 in 2019.
Segment Sales and Income from Operations
North America
In 2020, net sales of our North America segment decreased 21.9 percent, compared to 2019, primarily due to a 21.2 percent decrease in volumes, which was principally attributable to the on-going COVID-19 pandemic, including a production shut-down during the second quarter of the year and lower aluminum prices, partially offset by improved product mix comprised of larger diameter wheels and premium wheel finishes. U.S. and Mexico sales as a percentage of North American total sales were approximately 5.1 percent and 94.9 percent, respectively, during 2020, which compares to 14.8 percent and 85.2 percent for 2019. The change in North American sales by country is due to discontinuing manufacturing activities at our Fayetteville, Arkansas location in the fourth quarter of 2019. North American segment income from operations for the year ended 2020 was lower than the prior year period, due to reduced volumes at our key North American OEM customers, partially offset by favorable product mix, utilities savings associated with plant investments made in 2019 to use electricity from a competitively priced market and temporary and permanent cost reductions including furloughs, hourly and salary wage and benefit reductions, idling of our manufacturing facilities in April and May, reduced travel and personnel restructuring, as well as the rationalization of the North American manufacturing footprint in the prior year.
Europe
In 2020, net sales of our European segment decreased 17.6 percent, compared to 2019, primarily due to a 20.9 percent decrease in volume, which was principally attributable to the on-going COVID-19 pandemic, including a production shut-down during the second quarter of the calendar year and lower aluminum prices, partially offset by improved product mix comprised of higher diameter wheels and premium wheel finishes and favorable Euro foreign exchange. Sales in Germany and Poland as a percentage of total European segment sales were approximately 38.6 percent and 61.4 percent, respectively, during 2020, which compares to 36.8 percent and 63.2 percent for 2019. European segment income from operations for the year ended 2020 was lower than the prior year period primarily due to a goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment charge of $193.6 million in 2020 and lower volumes related to key European OEM customers, partially offset by favorable mix and temporary and permanent cost reductions, including second quarter facility closures, usage of government subsidies in both Poland and Germany, deferral of merit increases, reduced travel and personnel restructurings.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents totaled $152.4 million, as compared to $77.9 million at December 31, 2019. Our sources of liquidity primarily include cash and cash equivalents, cash provided by operating activities, borrowings under available debt facilities, factoring arrangements for trade receivables and, from time to time, other external sources of funds. Working capital (current assets minus current liabilities) and our current ratio (current assets divided by current liabilities) were $152.5 million and 1.7:1, respectively, at December 31, 2020, versus $163.1 million and 1.9:1 at December 31, 2019.
Our working capital requirements, investing activities and cash dividend payments have historically been funded from internally generated funds, debt facilities and cash and cash equivalents, and we believe these sources will continue to meet our long-term requirements, as well as our currently anticipated short-term needs. Capital expenditures consist of expenditures related to improving production quality and efficiency and extending the useful lives of existing property, plant and equipment (“existing” business), as well as expenditures related to new product offerings and expanded capacity for existing products (“new” business). Over time, capital
expenditures have consisted of roughly equal components of new and existing business, the most significant of which in recent years has been our investment in physical vapor deposition (PVD) technology which went into production in 2019.
In connection with the acquisition of our European operations, we entered into several debt and equity financing arrangements during 2017. On March 22, 2017, we entered into a USD Senior Secured Credit facility (“USD SSCF”) consisting of a $400.0 million Senior Secured Term Loan Facility (“Term Loan Facility”) and a $160.0 million Revolving Credit Facility (“Revolving Credit Facility”). On May 22, 2017, we issued 150,000 shares of redeemable preferred stock for $150.0 million. On June 15, 2017, we issued €250.0 million original principal amount of 6% Senior Notes due June 15, 2025 (“Notes”). As a part of the acquisition, we also assumed $70.7 million of outstanding debt, including a €30.0 million European Revolving Credit Facility (“EUR SSCF”) (subsequently increased to €45.0 million during the second quarter of 2019). On January 31, 2020, the available borrowing limit of the EUR SSCF was increased from €45.0 million to €60.0 million. All other terms of the EUR SSCF remained unchanged. In the fourth quarter of 2019, the European operations entered into equipment loan agreements totaling $13.4 million (€12.0 million). During the first quarter of 2020, the Company drew down on these equipment loans and the outstanding balance was $13.0 million as of December 31, 2020.
With the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and the ensuing economic uncertainty, the Company drew down on its USD SSCF and EUR SSCF revolving credit facilities to provide sufficient liquidity during the production shutdown and resumption of operations until we were able to scale production volumes and restore profitability and positive free cash flow. As of March 31, 2020, the Company had borrowings outstanding under these facilities of $207.9 million. Beginning in March 2020, the Company took swift action to reduce costs, including temporary facility closures, salary reductions, layoffs, furloughs, personnel restructurings, deferral of merit increases and reduced selected employee benefits across our global workforce in accordance with local laws and regulations. In the third quarter of 2020, our sales volume returned to levels comparable to 2019, with quarterly sales 9.9 percent lower than 2019 and only 2.0 percent lower for the month of September. In addition, we restored profitability with net income of $11.1 million, generated cash flow from operating activities of $99.6 million and fully repaid the borrowings under the USD SSCF and EUR SSCF revolving credit facilities during the third quarter of 2020. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the recovery continued with sales of $337.7 million, increasing $27.4 million or 8.8 percent over the same period of 2019, cash flow from operating activities of $57.6 million, and income from operations of $17.5 million, an increase of $7.7 million over the same period of 2019 (excluding the $102.2 million goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment charge recorded in the fourth quarter of 2019).
Both of our revolving credit facilities mature in May 2022. The Company has no other significant funded debt obligations until May 2024. Superior expects, at this time, to remain compliant with the terms of all of its debt facilities.
Balances outstanding under the Term Loan Facility, Notes, and equipment loans as of December 31, 2020 were $349.2 million, $266.9 million, and $23.7 million, respectively. The balance of the redeemable preferred stock was $179.4 million as of December 31, 2020. Our liquidity totaled $380.9 million at December 31, 2020, including cash on hand of $152.4 million and available unused commitments under credit facilities of $228.5 million.
The following table summarizes the cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities as reflected in the consolidated statements of cash flows.
2020 versus 2019
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $150.1 million in 2020, as compared to $162.8 million in 2019. The decrease in cash flow provided by operating activities was primarily driven by second quarter losses attributable to production shutdowns at our key North American and European OEM customers. This was partially offset by higher year-over-year reductions in net working capital. Inventory decreases were primarily due to lower production volumes in 2020 from COVID-19 related shutdowns as well as improved inventory management, and the increases in accounts payable were primarily due to improved payment terms negotiated with certain of our critical suppliers.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $44.2 million in 2020, as compared to $54.7 million in 2019. The decrease in investing activities was driven by the 2020 reduction in capital expenditures to align with industry production volumes, partially offset by the sale of certain assets in the second quarter of 2019.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities in 2020 was $37.1 million, as compared to $76.6 million in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to lower 2020 debt repayments, proceeds from capital equipment loans in the first quarter 2020 and the elimination of the common stock dividend in the third quarter of 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no significant off-balance sheet arrangements other than factoring of $96.6 million of our trade receivables.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
In this Annual Report, we discuss two important measures that are not calculated according to U.S. GAAP, value added sales and Adjusted EBITDA.
Value added sales is a key measure that is not calculated according to U.S. GAAP. In the discussion of operating results, we provide information regarding value added sales. Value added sales represents net sales less the value of aluminum and services provided by outsourced service providers (“OSPs”) that are included in net sales. As discussed further below, arrangements with our customers allow us to pass on changes in aluminum prices; therefore, fluctuations in underlying aluminum prices generally do not directly impact our profitability over time. However, value added sales is worthy of being highlighted for the benefit of users of our financial statements as it allows users of the financial statements to consider our net sales information both with and without the aluminum and OSP cost components thereof. Management utilizes value added sales as a key metric to determine growth of the Company because it eliminates the volatility of aluminum prices.
Adjusted EBITDA is a key measure that is not calculated according to U.S. GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as earnings before interest income and expense, income taxes, depreciation, amortization, restructuring charges and other closure costs and impairments of long-lived assets and investments, changes in the fair value of the redeemable preferred stock embedded derivative liability, acquisition and integration and certain hiring and separation related costs, proxy contest fees, gains associated with early debt extinguishment, and accounts receivable factoring fees. We use Adjusted EBITDA as an important indicator of the operating performance of our business. Adjusted EBITDA is used in our internal forecasts and models when establishing internal operating budgets, supplementing the financial results and forecasts reported to our Board of Directors and evaluating short-term and long-term trends in our operations. We believe the Adjusted EBITDA financial measure assists in providing a more complete understanding of our underlying operational measures to manage our business, to evaluate our performance compared to prior periods and the marketplace and to establish operational goals. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information provided in accordance with U.S. GAAP. This non-GAAP financial measure may not be computed in the same manner as similarly titled measures used by other companies.
The following table reconciles our net income, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, to our Adjusted EBITDA:
(1)
In 2020, we incurred charges of approximately $11.6 million of restructuring costs primarily comprised of on-going fixed costs associated with our Fayetteville, Arkansas facility and relocation and installation costs of repurposed machinery. Additionally, we incurred $4.1 million of restructuring costs in connection with exiting the automotive racing market segment, as well as $1.5 million of certain hiring and separation costs, $1.4 million of accounts receivable factoring fees, and $0.6 million of other costs.
(2)
In 2019, we incurred approximately $5.4 million of Fayetteville restructuring costs (excluding $7.6 million of accelerated depreciation), $4.8 million of certain hiring and separation costs, $3.7 million of gains on extinguishment of debt, and $1.8 million of machinery and equipment relocation costs from Fayetteville to other Superior sites, $1.7 million of acquisition and integration costs, and $1.0 million of accounts receivable factoring fees.
(3)
The change in the fair value is mainly driven by the change in our stock price during the respective periods.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Accounting estimates are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements. These estimates require the use of judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses in the periods presented. We believe the accounting estimates employed are appropriate and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, due to the inherent uncertainties in developing estimates actual results could differ from the original estimates, requiring adjustments to these balances in future periods (refer to Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report for our significant accounting policies related to our critical accounting estimates).
Revenue Recognition - Sales of our products and related costs are recognized when control transfers to the customer, generally upon shipment. Tooling reimbursement revenues, related to initial tooling reimbursed by our customers, are deferred and recognized over the expected life of the wheel program on a straight-line basis. A portion of our selling prices to OEM customers is attributable to the aluminum content of our wheels. Our selling prices are adjusted for changes in the current aluminum market based upon specified aluminum price indices during specific pricing periods, as agreed with our customers. Our selling prices also incorporate a wheel weight price component which is based on customer product specifications. Weights are monitored, and prices are adjusted as variations arise. Customer contract prices are generally adjusted quarterly to incorporate these price adjustments. Price adjustments due to production efficiencies are generally recognized as and when negotiated with customers.
Fair Value Measurements - The Company applies fair value accounting for all financial assets and liabilities and non-financial assets and liabilities that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis, while other assets and liabilities are measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis, such as when we have an asset impairment. Fair value is estimated by applying the following hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value into three levels and bases the categorization within the hierarchy upon the lowest level of input that is available and significant to the fair value measurement:
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 - Observable inputs other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.
Level 3 - Inputs that are generally unobservable and typically reflect management’s estimate of assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability.
Our derivatives are over-the-counter customized derivative transactions and are not exchange traded. We estimate the fair value of these instruments using industry-standard valuation models such as discounted cash flow. These models project future cash flows and discount the future amounts to a present value using market-based expectations for interest rates, foreign exchange rates, commodity prices and the contractual terms of the derivative instruments. The discount rate used is the relevant interbank deposit rate (e.g., LIBOR) plus an adjustment for non-performance risk.
Impairment of Goodwill - Goodwill is not amortized but is instead evaluated for impairment annually at the end of the fiscal year, or more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that impairment may be more likely than not. As of December 31, 2020, there was no goodwill associated with our acquired European operations due to the impairment charges taken in 2019 and the first quarter of 2020.
At March 31, 2020, the impact of the COVID-19 developments and uncertainty with respect to the economic effects of the pandemic had introduced significant volatility in the financial markets and was having, and continues to have, a widespread adverse effect on the automotive industry, including reductions in both consumer demand and OEM automotive production. In response, our key customers temporarily closed nearly all production facilities in Europe and North America (our primary markets) during the quarter ended March 31, 2020. As a result, we concluded that an interim test of our goodwill was required. More specifically, the Company concluded that the following events and circumstances, in the aggregate, indicated that it was more likely than not that the carrying value of our European reporting unit exceeded its fair value at March 31, 2020: (1) our European reporting unit’s carrying value was effectively set to fair value at December 31, 2019, due to the $102.2 million impairment charges to goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles, (2) lower forecasted 2020 industry production volumes for Western and Central Europe, including those for our primary European customers, due to OEM shutdowns to mitigate COVID-19 spread and subsequent reduced production levels over the remainder of the year, as compared to our prior production forecasts (including estimates used in our 2019 assessment), and (3) the volatility in financial markets that both increased European interest rates due to rising credit spreads and risk premiums and lowered median European automotive market multiples. Based on the results of our quantitative analysis, we recognized a non-cash goodwill impairment charge equal to the remaining goodwill balance of $182.6 million since the carrying value exceeded the fair value of the European reporting unit by more than the amount of the goodwill balance at March 31, 2020. This impairment was recognized at March 31, 2020 as a separate charge (together with the indefinite-lived intangible asset trade name) included in loss from operations.
We utilized both an income and a market approach, weighted 75 percent and 25 percent respectively, to determine the fair value of the European reporting unit as part of our goodwill impairment assessment. The income approach is based on projected debt-free cash flow, which is discounted to the present value using discount factors that consider the timing and risk of cash flows. The discount rate used is the weighted average of an estimated cost of equity and of debt (“weighted average cost of capital”). The weighted average cost of capital is adjusted as necessary to reflect risk associated with the business of the European reporting unit. Financial projections are based on estimated production volumes, product prices and expenses, including raw material cost, wages, energy and other expenses. Other significant assumptions include terminal value cash flow and growth rates, future capital expenditures and changes in future working capital requirements. The market approach is based on the observed ratios of enterprise value to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) of comparable, publicly traded companies. The market approach fair value is determined by multiplying historical and anticipated financial metrics of the European reporting unit by the EBITDA pricing multiples derived from comparable, publicly traded companies.
At March 31, 2020, we determined that the carrying value of the European reporting unit exceeded its fair value by an amount greater than the remaining goodwill balance. The decline in fair value was primarily due to significantly lower market multiples and increased discount rates, as well as further declines in forecasted industry production volumes in Western and Central Europe as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and consequent economic instability. Forecasted revenues, EBITDA and cash flow for the European reporting unit also declined as compared to the prior year long-range plan due to lower forecasted industry production volumes which adversely impacted fair value under both the income and market approaches. Significant assumptions used under the income approach included a weighted average cost of capital (WACC) of 12.0 percent and a long-term growth rate of 1.5 percent, as compared to 10.0 percent and 2.0 percent, respectively, used in the 2019 assessment. In determining the WACC, management considered the level of risk inherent in the cash flow projections and current market conditions, including the significant increase in credit spreads and systemic market and Company specific risk premiums. The decline in the fair value under the market approach is attributable to the decline in the average EBITDA market multiple (4.9X EBITDA in 2020, 5.7X EBITDA in 2019) and lower forecasted EBITDA, as compared to the 2019 assessment. The use of these unobservable inputs results in classification of the fair value estimate as a Level 3 measurement in the fair value hierarchy. A considerable amount of management judgment and assumptions are required in performing the
quantitative impairment test, principally related to determining the fair value of the reporting unit. While the Company believes its judgments and assumptions are reasonable, different assumptions could change the estimated fair value (refer to Note 9, “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report for further discussion of asset impairments).
Impairment of Intangible Assets - Intangible assets include both finite and indefinite-lived intangible assets. Finite-lived intangible assets consist of brand names, technology and customer relationships. Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives (since the pattern in which the asset will be consumed cannot be reliably determined). Indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized but are instead evaluated for impairment annually at the end of the fiscal year, or more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that impairment may be more likely than not. Indefinite-lived intangible assets, excluding goodwill, consist of trade names associated with our aftermarket business. In the first quarter of 2020, we recognized a non-cash impairment charge of $11.0 million related to our aftermarket trade name indefinite-lived intangible asset which was primarily attributable to a further decline in forecasted aftermarket revenues and a decline in associated profitability. As a result, there were no indefinite-lived intangible assets associated with our European operations as of December 31, 2020 (refer to Note 9, “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report for further discussion of asset impairments).
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets - Management evaluates the recoverability and estimated remaining lives of long-lived assets whenever facts and circumstances suggest that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable or the useful life has changed. An impairment loss occurs when the carrying value of the long-lived assets exceeds the undiscounted cash flows expected to be realized from the use and eventual disposition of those assets. Fair value is determined primarily by discounting the estimated expected cash flows. If the carrying amount of a long-lived asset group is considered impaired, a loss is recorded based on the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds fair value. The North American and European reporting units are separately tested for impairment on an asset group basis.
Retirement Plans - Subject to certain vesting requirements, our unfunded retirement plan generally provides for a benefit based on final average compensation, which becomes payable on the employee’s death or upon attaining age 65, if retired. The net periodic pension cost and related benefit obligations are based on, among other things, assumptions of the discount rate and the mortality of the participants. The net periodic pension costs and related obligations are measured using actuarial techniques and assumptions (refer to Note 16, “Retirement Plans” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report for a description of these assumptions).
The following information illustrates the sensitivity to a change in certain assumptions of our unfunded retirement plans as of December 31, 2020. They also may not be additive, so the impact of changing multiple factors simultaneously cannot be calculated by combining the individual sensitivities shown.
The effect of the indicated increase (decrease) in selected factors is shown below (in thousands):
Valuation of Deferred Tax Assets - The ability to realize deferred tax assets depends on the ability to generate sufficient taxable income in the future. A valuation allowance is provided for deferred income tax assets when, in our judgment, based upon currently available information and other factors, it is more likely than not that all or a portion of such deferred income tax assets will not be realized. The assessment regarding whether a valuation allowance is required or should be adjusted is based on an evaluation of possible sources of taxable income and considers all available positive and negative evidence factors. Our accounting for the valuation of deferred tax assets represents our best estimate of future events. Changes in our current estimates, due to unanticipated market conditions, governmental legislative actions or events, could have a material effect on our ability to utilize deferred tax assets. At December 31, 2020 total deferred tax assets were $90.7 million and valuation allowances against those deferred tax assets were $46.5 million (refer to Note 14, “Income Taxes” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report for additional information).