ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto, appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, some of the information in this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations and involving risk and uncertainties. For example, statements regarding our expectations as to our plans and strategy for our business, future financial performance, expense levels, and liquidity sources are forward-looking statements. Our actual results and the timing of those events could differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements because of many factors, including those set forth under the "Risk Factors" section and elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on developing and commercializing products for the treatment of central nervous system (CNS) diseases. Our diverse neuroscience portfolio includes approved treatments for epilepsy, migraine, hypomobility in Parkinson’s Disease (PD), cervical dystonia, and chronic sialorrhea. We are developing a broad range of novel CNS product candidates including new potential treatments for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), hypomobility in Parkinson’s disease, epilepsy, depression, and rare CNS disorders.
On April 21, 2020, the Company entered into a Development and Option Agreement (Development Agreement) with Navitor Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Navitor). Under the terms of the Development Agreement, the Company and Navitor will jointly conduct a Phase II clinical program for NV-5138 (mTORC1 activator) (SPN-820) in treatment-resistant depression (TRD). Initiation of Phase II clinical program is targeted in the fourth quarter of 2021.
On April 28, 2020, the Company entered into a Sale and Purchase Agreement with US WorldMeds Partners, LLC to acquire the CNS portfolio of USWM Enterprises, LLC (USWM Enterprises) (USWM Acquisition). With the acquisition,
completed on June 9, 2020, the Company added three established commercial products and a product candidate in late-stage development to its portfolio.
We have a portfolio of commercial products and product candidates.
Commercial Products
•Trokendi XR (topiramate) is the first once-daily extended release topiramate product indicated for the treatment of epilepsy in the United States (U.S.) market. It is also indicated for the prophylaxis of migraine headache.
•Oxtellar XR (oxcarbazepine) is indicated as therapy of partial onset seizures in adults and children 6 years to 17 years of age and is the first once-daily extended release oxcarbazepine product indicated for the treatment of epilepsy in the U.S.
•APOKYN (apomorphine hydrochloride injection) is a product indicated for the acute, intermittent treatment of hypomobility or “off” episodes (“end-of-dose wearing off” and unpredictable “on-off” episodes) in patients with advanced PD.
•XADAGO (safinamide) is a once-daily product indicated as adjunctive treatment to levodopa/carbidopa in patients with Parkinson’s disease experiencing “off” episodes.
•MYOBLOC (rimabotulinumtoxinB) is a product indicated for the treatment of cervical dystonia and sialorrhea in adults, and it is the only Type B toxin available on the market.
Product Candidates
•SPN-812 (viloxazine hydrochloride), a novel non-stimulant product candidate for the treatment of ADHD.
•SPN-830 (Apomorphine Infusion Pump) is a late-stage drug/device combination product candidate for the continuous prevention of “off” episodes in PD.
•SPN-817, a novel product candidate for the treatment of severe epilepsy.
•SPN-820 is a first-in-class, orally active small molecule that directly activates brain mTORC1 and is a novel product candidate for treatment resistant depression.
Operational Highlights
SPN-812 - Novel non-stimulant for the treatment of ADHD in children and adults
•In February 2021, we received notice from the FDA that the NDA resubmission for SPN-812 for the treatment of ADHD in pediatric patients is considered a Class I resubmission, thereby assigning a timeline of two months for review by the FDA and establishing a new Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) target action date in early April 2021. We are preparing for the commercial launch of SPN-812 for the treatment of ADHD in pediatric patients in the second quarter of 2021, if approved by the FDA.
•In December 2020, we announced positive results from a Phase III trial in adult patients with ADHD. Assuming approval for pediatric patients, we plan to submit a supplemental NDA (sNDA) to the FDA for SPN-812 in adults in the second half of 2021.
SPN-830 (Apomorphine infusion pump) - Continuous treatment of motor fluctuations (“on-off” episodes) in PD
•We are scheduled to meet with the FDA in March 2021 in a Type A meeting to discuss the contents of the Refusal to File (RTF) letter it received in November 2020 regarding its NDA for SPN-830. In the letter, the FDA requested certain documents and reports to be submitted in support of the application. We believe additional testing of the device will be necessary to support the SPN-830 NDA resubmission. We plan to resubmit the SPN-830 NDA after completing discussions with the FDA and the required activities for filing.
SPN-820 - Novel first-in-class activator of mTORC1
•Development activities are ongoing, including a multiple-ascending dose study in healthy volunteers, with the goal of initiating a Phase II clinical program in treatment-resistant depression by the end of 2021.
We expect to incur significant research and development expenses related to the continued development of each of our product candidates from 2020 through FDA approval or until the program terminates. See Part I, Item I-Business for a complete description of our product and product candidates and development programs.
Intellectual property portfolio
We continue to expand our intellectual property portfolio to provide additional protection for our technologies, products, and product candidates. See Part I, Item I-Business, Intellectual Property, and Exclusivity, for a complete description of our intellectual property position.
COVID-19 Impact
In March 2020, we began to observe the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the U.S and globally and the impact it may have on our business operations and our financial results. The macroeconomic impacts of COVID-19 are significant and continue to evolve, as exhibited by, among other things, a rise in unemployment, changes in consumer behavior, and market volatility.
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business remains uncertain and subject to change. We are closely monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business operations and have assessed the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our consolidated financial statements. Although the COVID-19 pandemic has not significantly impacted our consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020, it may have a future impact, especially if the severity worsens, the duration lengthens, or the nature of the effects changes.
The effects of the pandemic may vary significantly across different aspects of our business operations. We do not and cannot yet know the full extent of the potential impact on our execution of clinical trials, new product launches, including SPN-812, our manufacturing and supply chain, or related impacts on our business or financial condition. These effects could include the adverse impact on research and development activities as a result of a disruption in clinical projects; adverse impact on selling and marketing efforts as a result of temporarily halting in-person interactions by our sales force with healthcare providers; adverse impact on net product sales as a result of decreased new prescriptions due to fewer patient visits to physicians to begin treatment; potential changes in payor segment mix; increased use of co-pay programs due to rising unemployment; and potential future disruption to our supply chain and manufacturing operations.
These effects could have a material impact on the Company’s liquidity, cash flows, capital resources, and business operations. Financial effects could include impairment of intangible and long-lived assets, increased sales deductions that could adversely impact our net product sales, and cash collections and adjustments for market volatility for items subject to fair value measurement, such as marketable securities. See “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on risk factors that could impact our business and our results.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, except for the effects already cited, there has been no material impact on our operations, liquidity, and financial position due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect to continue to generate positive cash flows and to meet our short-term liquidity needs.
Critical Accounting Policies and the Use of Estimates
The significant accounting policies and basis of presentation for our consolidated financial statements are described in Part II, Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with the U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP), requiring us to make estimates, judgments, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and other related disclosures. Some judgments can be subjective and complex, and therefore, actual results could differ materially from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the judgments, estimates, and assumptions associated with the following critical accounting policies have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements:
•Revenue recognition;
•Business combination accounting and valuation of acquired assets, including goodwill and intangible assets;
•Valuation of contingent consideration;
•Inventories produced in preparation of product launches; and
•Income taxes.
Revenue Recognition
Our principal source of revenue is product sales. Revenue from product sales is recognized when physical control of our products is transferred to our customers, who are primarily pharmaceutical wholesalers, specialty pharmacies, and distributors. Product sales are recorded net of various forms of variable consideration, including: estimated rebates; sales discounts; and an estimated liability for future product returns (collectively, “sales deductions”).
The variability in the net transaction price for our products arises primarily from the aforementioned sales deductions. Significant judgment is required in estimating certain sales deductions. In making these estimates, we consider: historical experience; product price increases; current contractual arrangements under applicable payor programs; unbilled claims; processing time lags for claims; inventory levels in the wholesale, specialty pharmacy, and retail distribution channel; and product life cycle. We adjust our estimates at the earlier of when the most likely amount of consideration we expect to receive changes, or when the consideration becomes fixed. Variable consideration on product sales is only recognized when it is probable that a significant reversal will not occur. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, we adjust our estimates in the period identified. These adjustments could materially affect net product sales and earnings in the period in which the adjustment(s) is recorded. Refer to Part II, Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for discussion on each of the different sales deductions.
Business Combination Accounting and Valuation of Acquired Assets, Including Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The Company completed the USWM Acquisition on June 9, 2020, and accounted for the transaction as a business combination. To determine whether the acquisition should be accounted for as a business combination or as an asset acquisition, the Company made certain judgments regarding whether the acquired set of activities and assets met the definition of a business. Significant judgment is required in assessing whether the acquired processes or activities, along with their inputs, would be substantive to constitute a business, as defined by U.S. GAAP.
As of December 31, 2020, the total estimated purchase price was $380.3 million and the preliminary estimate of fair value of the acquired intangible assets at the acquisition date was $355 million, of which $123 million was estimated fair value of the IPR&D asset and the remaining $232 million is fair value of the acquired definite-lived intangible assets. We also have recorded a preliminary estimate of $77.9 million goodwill at the acquisition date related to the business combination. When identifiable intangible assets, including in-process research and development (IPR&D) asset, are acquired, we determine the fair values of the assets as of the acquisition date. An income approach, which generally relies upon projected cash flow models, was used in estimating the fair value of the acquired intangible assets. Some of the more significant inputs and assumptions used in the intangible asset valuation include: the timing and probability of success of clinical events or regulatory approvals for the IPR&D asset; the estimated future cash flows from product sales resulting from approved products and IPR&D asset; the timing and projection of costs and expenses, including costs to complete the IPR&D asset; tax rates; and discount rates.
During the measurement period, if we obtain new information regarding facts and circumstances that existed as of the Closing Date that, if known, would have resulted in revised estimates of fair values of acquired assets, assumed liabilities or contingent consideration, the Company will accordingly revise its estimates of fair values and purchase price allocation.
Intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized but are tested for impairment at least annually or when indicators of impairment are identified. Our annual evaluation is generally based on an assessment of qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not the fair value of the asset is less than its carrying amount. Significant judgment is required in assessing the qualitative factors. If the Company is unable to conclude that the indefinite intangible asset is not impaired during its qualitative assessment, the Company will perform a quantitative assessment by estimating the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset and comparing the fair value to the carrying amount. Estimating fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible assets require the use of significant estimates and assumptions. We rely upon cash flow projections attributable to the indefinite-lived intangible asset in estimating the fair value. Some of the more significant inputs and assumptions in estimating fair value are the same inputs and assumptions described above for estimating fair value of the acquired intangible assets.
Intangible assets with definite useful lives are amortized over their estimated useful lives and reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. When performing our impairment assessment for definite-lived intangible assets, we rely upon cash flow projections attributable to the asset group to determine if the carrying value of the asset group is recoverable, on an undiscounted cash flow basis. If the carrying value of a definite lived intangible asset is not recoverable, we will recognize impairment in the amount by which the carrying value of the asset exceeds its fair value. Some of the more significant inputs and assumptions in estimating fair value are the same inputs and assumptions described above for estimating fair value of the acquired intangible assets.
Changes to assumptions used in the cash flow projections could result in an impairment. Impairments will be recorded within the impairment of intangible assets in our consolidated statements of earnings.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired in a business combination and is not amortized. Goodwill is subject to impairment testing at least annually or more often if and when events or circumstances indicate goodwill may be impaired. We are organized and operate as a single reporting unit, and therefore the goodwill impairment test is performed using our overall market value compared to our book value of net assets at the reporting unit level.
Valuation of Contingent Consideration
We record contingent consideration resulting from a business combination at its fair value on the acquisition date. As of December 31, 2020, we recorded $76.7 million of contingent consideration liability. Some of the more significant inputs and assumptions used in determining the fair value of the contingent consideration include: probability and timing of milestone achievements, such as the probability and timing of obtaining regulatory approval; estimated amount and timing of projected revenues from the Products; and discount rates.
A contingent consideration liability arose in connection with the USWM Acquisition, which was accounted for as a business combination. During the measurement period, if we obtain new information regarding facts and circumstances that existed as of the Closing Date that, if known, would have resulted in revised estimates of fair values of acquired assets, assumed liabilities or contingent consideration, the Company will accordingly revise its estimates of fair values and purchase price allocation. In addition, on a quarterly basis, we revalue the contingent consideration liability and record increases or decreases in their fair value as an adjustment to operating earnings.
Changes to the contingent consideration liability can result from adjustments to discount rates, accretion of the discount rates due to the passage of time, changes in our estimates of the timing of achievement the milestones which includes both regulatory and developmental and commercial milestones, changes in the probability of certain clinical events or changes in the assumed probability associated with regulatory approval. The assumptions related to determining the fair value of contingent consideration include a significant amount of judgment, and any changes in the underlying estimates could have a material impact on the amount of contingent consideration expense recorded and, therefore, our results of operations in any given period.
Inventories Produced in Preparation of Product Launches
We capitalize inventories produced in preparation for product launches when future commercialization of a product is probable and when a future economic benefit is expected to be realized. The determination to capitalize is based on the particular facts and circumstances relating to the product. Capitalization of such inventory begins when we determine that (i) positive clinical trial results have been obtained in order to support regulatory approval; (ii) uncertainties regarding regulatory approval have been significantly reduced; and (iii) it is probable that these capitalized costs will provide future economic benefit, in excess of capitalized costs.
As of December 31, 2020, we capitalized $19.1 million of pre-launch inventory for SPN-812. In assessing and making the determination to capitalize inventory prior to product launch, we are required to use significant judgments and assumptions to evaluate and consider a number of factors, including: the product candidate’s current status in the regulatory approval process; results from the related pivotal clinical trial; results from meetings with relevant regulatory agencies prior to the filing of regulatory applications; historical experience; as well as potential impediments to approval; such as product safety or efficacy; commercialization potential; and market trends.
We estimate a range of likely commercial prices based on our comparable commercial products. We consider the product candidate’s stability data for all pre-approval production to date to determine whether there is an adequate expected shelf life for the capitalized pre-launch production costs. We also consider the likely selling price to determine if there is a sufficient profit margin to fully recover the cost of the inventory.
We periodically analyze our pre-launch inventory levels to identify inventory that may expire prior to expected sale or has a cost basis in excess of its estimated realizable value and write-down such inventories as appropriate. In addition, our products are subject to strict quality control and monitoring, which we perform throughout the manufacturing process. If certain batches or units of a product no longer meet quality specifications or become obsolete due to expiration, we record a charge to write down such unmarketable inventory to its estimated realizable value.
Income taxes
We utilize the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial reporting and tax reporting bases. These differences are measured using enacted tax rates and laws that are expected to be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. If our estimate of the tax effect of reversing temporary differences is not reflective of actual outcomes, is modified to reflect new developments or interpretations of the tax law, revised to incorporate new accounting principles or changes in the expected timing or manner of the reversal, our results of operations could be materially impacted.
A valuation allowance is established for deferred tax assets for which it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We periodically evaluate the likelihood of the realization of deferred tax assets and reduce the carrying amount of these deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance to the extent we believe a portion will not be realized based on all available evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies, results of recent operations, and our historical earnings experience by taxing jurisdiction. Significant judgment is required in making this assessment and, to the extent future expectations change, we would assess the recoverability of our deferred tax assets at that time. If we determine that the deferred tax assets are not realizable in a future period, we will record adjustments to income tax expense in that period, and such adjustments may be material.
Uncertain tax positions, for which management's assessment is more than a 50% probability that the position will be sustained upon examination by a taxing authority based upon its technical merits, are subjected to certain recognition and measurement criteria. Significant judgment is required in making this assessment, and, therefore, we re-evaluate uncertain tax positions and consider various factors, including, but not limited to, changes in tax law, the measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in tax returns, and changes in facts or circumstances related to a tax position. We adjust the level of the liability to reflect any subsequent changes in the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding the uncertain positions. Our estimates for unrecognized tax benefits may be subject to material adjustments until matters are resolved with taxing authorities or statutes expire. If our estimates are not representative of actual outcomes, our results of operations could be materially impacted.
Results of Operations
In this section, we discuss the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, includes a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018, in Part II,
Item 7 - Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Revenues
Our primary source of revenue is from the sale of our commercial products. The table below lists our net product sales by product and royalty revenues from our collaborative licensing arrangements (dollars in thousands):
Net Product Sales
The $126.0 million and 33% increase in net product sales for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to the inclusion of $91.0 million in net product sales, consequent to the completion of the USWM acquisition on June 9, 2020. The combined annual growth of Trokendi XR and Oxtellar XR was $35.0 million or 9% as compared to 2019.
Trokendi XR net product sales increased by 8% in 2020 as compared to 2019. This increase was attributable to the favorable impact of the price increase taken in January 2020, coupled with favorable improvements in sales deductions that offset a decline in unit demand. Oxtellar XR net product sales increased by 12% in 2020 as compared to 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to the favorable impact of both unit demand and a price increase in January 2020.
Sales deductions and related accruals
We record accrued product rebates and accrued product returns as current liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets under Accrued product returns and rebates. We record sales discounts as a valuation allowance against Accounts receivable on the consolidated balance sheets. The outstanding amounts are affected by changes in gross sales, the provision for net product sales deductions, and the timing of payments/credits.
The following table provides a summary of activities with respect to accrued product returns and rebates for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
The total provision for sales deductions on gross product sales increased by $63.5 million, or approximately 16.8%, from $378.4 million in 2019 to $441.8 million in 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to the year over year increase in the provision for product rebates, from $306.5 million in 2019 to $350.1 million in 2020.
The year over year increase in the provision for product rebates of $43.5 million was primarily attributable to greater utilization of our patient co-pay programs and higher per patient payments under both Medicaid and commercial managed care programs.
The provision for product returns of $23.9 million in 2020 increased from $10.7 million in 2019. The increase is primarily due to unfavorable actual returns experienced in the first quarter of 2020 for discontinued Trokendi XR commercial blister pack configurations, for which all production and distribution ceased in 2017.
The provision for sales discounts increased by $6.8 million, from $61.1 million in 2019 to $67.9 million in 2020. The increase is due to impact of price increase.
Adjustments related to prior year sales were $13.8 million, which included the $10.7 million aforementioned adjustment for discontinued Trokendi XR configuration, against $509.4 million of net product sales in 2020 and $0.4 million against $383.4 million of net product sales in 2019.
Royalty Revenue
Royalty revenue includes royalties from the following products (dollars in thousands):
(1) Royalty from net product sales of Mydayis, a product of Takeda Pharmaceuticals Company Ltd.
(2) Noncash royalty revenue pursuant to an agreement with Healthcare Royalty Partners III, L.P. (HC Royalty). HC Royalty receives royalty payments from United Therapeutics Corporation (United Therapeutics), based on net product sales of United Therapeutics’ product Orenitram.
Royalty revenue increased by approximately $1.7 million, or 18%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to increased product sales of Orenitram.
Cost of Goods Sold
The following table provides information regarding our cost of goods sold for the years indicated (dollars in thousands):
Cost of goods sold includes the cost of royalties; cost of materials, including active pharmaceutical ingredients (API); and cost to manufacture, including tableting, packaging, personnel, overhead, stability testing, and distribution. Cost of good sold increased by $35.8 million to $52.5 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to the inclusion of the cost of goods sold of the acquired products from the USWM Acquisition. Royalty payments associated with APOKYN and XADAGO made up the majority of this cost increase. Inventory and cost of goods sold associated with the acquired inventory balances for USWM Acquisition products were subject to a purchase accounting step-up in fair market value. Refer to Part II, Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 3, USWM Acquisition, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of the USWM Acquisition.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table provides information regarding our research and development (R&D) expenses for the years indicated (dollars in thousands):
(1) Direct costs, which include personnel costs and related benefits, are recorded on a project-by-project basis. Many of our R&D costs are not attributable to any individual project because we share resources across several development projects. Indirect costs that support a number of our R&D activities are recorded in the aggregate, including stock-based compensation.
(2) R&D program terminated in 2020.
(3) On April 21, 2020, we entered into a Development and Option Agreement (Development Agreement) with Navitor Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Navitor). Under the terms of the Development Agreement, the Company and Navitor will jointly conduct a Phase II clinical program for NV-5138 (SPN-820) in treatment-resistant depression (TRD).
R&D expenses increased by $6.9 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. This increase consists of a $10 million option fee paid in conjunction with the Navitor collaboration for SPN-820, a reduction of direct project costs of $4.5 million, and an increase in indirect project costs of $1.4 million.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expense
The table below provides information regarding our selling, general, and administrative (SG&A) expenses for the years indicated (dollars in thousands):
Selling and Marketing Expense
Selling and marketing expenses increased by $24.8 million in 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to increased marketing expenses and professional consulting spend related to the commercial products, including the acquired commercial products from the USWM Acquisition and preparations for the launch of SPN-812.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses increased by $22.7 million in 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. The change was primarily due to an increase in business development expenses, including $12.5 million of acquisition-related transaction cost and post-acquisition integration costs.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
The following table provides information regarding the amortization expense for intangible assets during the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Amortization of intangible assets increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the amortization of the definite-lived intangible assets acquired in the USWM Acquisition.
Contingent Consideration Expense
The following table provides information regarding the contingent consideration expense during the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Contingent consideration expense recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $1.9 million reflects the periodic fair value remeasurement of the contingent milestones payable to USWM in connection with the closing of the USWM Acquisition in June 2020. The expense recognized in 2020 is from the increase in the fair value of the contingent consideration liabilities, which was primarily due to the changes made in the assumptions on the expected timing of the achievement of milestones and changes to the estimate of projected revenues that did not qualify as measurement period adjustments.
During 2020, the Company recorded a measurement period adjustment of $40.9 million, which was recorded against goodwill and therefore did not have an impact on the results of operations in 2020. These measurement period adjustments were based on new information obtained by the Company regarding the facts and circumstances that existed as of the Closing Date of June 9, 2020. Refer to Note 3, USWM Acquisition in Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data in this report.
Other (Expense) Income
The following table provides the components of other (expense) income during the years indicated (dollars in thousands):
Interest income includes primarily interest earned from cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities holdings of $16.0 million and $21.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The year over year decrease in interest income, $2.9 million, was primarily due to decreased marketable securities holdings, mainly resulting from cash outlays for transaction related costs pertaining to the USWM Acquisition purchase price consideration plus the investment in Navitor and option fee paid to Navitor related to the NV-5138 (SPN-820) program license agreement.
Both the interest expense related to the 2023 Notes issued in March 2018 and noncash interest expense related to our nonrecourse royalty liability generally remained unchanged from 2019 to 2020.
Income Tax Expense
The following table provides information regarding our income tax expense during the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
The increase in our income tax expense was primarily due to year over year increase in earnings. The increase in the effective tax rate is primarily due to the favorable impact to the 2019 effective tax rate of a decrease in our uncertain tax position reserve because of the expiring statute of limitations.
Net Earnings
The following table provides information regarding our net earnings during the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
The increase in net earnings was primarily due to increased net product sales generated from our commercial products, offset by period over period increased operating expenses, including transaction costs related to the USWM Acquisition.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations primarily with cash generated from product sales, supplemented by revenues from royalty and licensing arrangements, as well as proceeds from the sale of equity and debt securities. Continued cash generation is highly dependent on the success of our commercial products, Trokendi XR, Oxtellar XR, APOKYN, MYOBLOC, and XADAGO, as well as the success of our product candidates if approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
While we expect continued profitability in future years, we anticipate there may be significant variability from year to year in the level of our profits, particularly as we move forward with the anticipated commercial launch of SPN-812, assuming FDA approval, and the likely unfavorable impact of the upcoming loss of patent exclusivity for Trokendi XR in January 2023.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities, and cash received from product sales will be sufficient to finance ongoing operations, develop and launch our new products, and fund label expansions for existing products. To continue to grow our business over the long-term, we plan to commit substantial resources to: product development and clinical trials of product candidates; business development, including acquisitions and product in-licensing; and supportive functions such as compliance, finance, management of our intellectual property portfolio, information technology systems, and personnel. In each case, spending would be commensurate with the growth and needs of the business.
We may, from time to time, consider raising additional capital through: new collaborative arrangements; strategic alliances; additional equity and/or debt financings; or financing from other sources, especially in conjunction with opportunistic business development initiatives. We will continue to actively manage our capital structure and to consider all financing opportunities that could strengthen our long-term financial profile. Any such capital raises may or may not be similar to transactions in which we have engaged in the past. There can be no assurance that any such financing opportunities will be available on acceptable terms, if at all.
Financial Condition
Cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities, long term marketable securities, working capital, convertible notes, and total stockholder’s equity as of the periods presented below are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Total cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities, and long term marketable securities decreased in 2020 by $166.0 million to $772.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Transaction related uses of capital equaled $331.9 million, consisting of $298.5 million USWM Acquisition purchase price consideration, $8.4 million acquisition-related transaction costs, $15 million investment in Navitor and $10 million option fee paid to Navitor related to the NV-5138 (SPN-820) program license agreement. Net cash generated from operations of $138.4 million and net proceeds from the sale and maturity of marketable securities sales offset the transaction related outlays in 2020.
Working capital increased in 2020 as compared to 2019 by $73.3 million, primarily driven by increased operating earnings, reduced by incremental cash absorbed by operations in 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding principal on the 0.625% Convertible Senior Notes due 2023 (2023 Notes) was $402.5 million. No 2023 Notes were converted as of December 31, 2020. Contemporaneous with the issuance of the 2023 Notes, the Company also entered into separate convertible note hedge transactions (collectively, the Convertible Note Hedge Transactions), issuing 402,500 convertible note hedge options. The Convertible Note Hedge Transactions are expected to reduce the potential dilution of the Company's common stock upon conversion of the 2023 Notes. Concurrently with entering into the Convertible Note Hedge Transactions, the Company also entered into separate warrant transactions, issuing a total of 6,783,939 warrants (the Warrant Transactions). See Note 9, Convertible Senior Notes Due 2023 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of the 2023 Notes and our other indebtedness.
Stockholders’ equity increased in 2020 as compared to 2019 by $149.4 million, primarily due to net earnings of $127.0 million, issuance of common stock of $4.4 million, and share-based compensation of $16.6 million.
Summary of Cash Flows
The following table summarizes the major sources and uses of cash for the periods set forth below (dollars in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities is comprised of two components: cash provided by operating earnings; and cash provided by (used in) changes in working capital. The net cash provided by operating activities, $138.4 million, was primarily driven by increased operating earnings, reduced by incremental cash absorbed by increased working capital.
Cash utilized in working capital reflects the timing impacts of cash collections on receivables and settlement of payables, as described below.
The changes in cashflows related to operating assets and liabilities are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $123.2 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $157.9 million in 2019 to $34.7 million in 2020. The change in 2020 primarily reflects the sale of marketable securities of $378.4 million in 2020, offset by outlays for the USWM Acquisition of $298.5 million, the equity investment in Navitor of $15.0 million and the purchase of marketable securities of $95.9 million. Purchases of marketable securities of $409.7 million in 2019 resulted from investment of excess cash in long-term marketable securities.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased to $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $3.9 million provided in the same period in 2019. This year over year change is primarily attributable to cash outflows from finance lease activity partially offset by the increase in proceeds from the issuance of common stock
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our non-cancellable long-term contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020, except as noted below (dollars in thousands):
(1) Relates to the 2023 Notes (see Note 6, Convertible Senior Notes due 2023, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.)
(2) Our commitments for operating leases relate to our leases of fleet vehicles and the lease of the current headquarters office and laboratory space, as of December 31, 2020.
(3) As part of the USWM Acquisition, the Company assumed the remaining commitments of USWM Enterprises and its subsidiaries. Under the contract manufacturing agreement with Merz for the manufacture and supply of MYOBLOC, NeuroBloc and NerBloc (finished products), the Company has an annual minimum purchase quantity requirement of finished products amounting to an estimated €3.0 million. In addition, the existing license and distribution agreement for XADAGO requires an annual minimum promotional spend to support the marketing of XADAGO for the first five years of the agreement. As of December 31, 2020, the remaining contractual obligation is $3.7 million for the period from June 2021 to July 2022. (See Note 3, USWM Acquisition, for further discussion on the USWM Acquisition and Note 10, Leases, for further discussion on the finance lease related to the Merz Agreement, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report).
(4) This table does not include the following:
•contingent consideration milestones payable related to the USWM Acquisition. (See Note 3, USWM Acquisition, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for further discussion on the USWM Acquisition).
•any milestone payments which may become payable to third parties under license agreements or contractual agreements regarding our clinical trials, or those which may become payable upon achieving sales and developmental milestones per contractual agreements, as the timing, and likelihood of such payments are not known.
•any royalty payments to third parties as the amounts, timing and likelihood of such payments are not known.
•contracts that are entered into in the ordinary course of business which are not material in the aggregate in any period presented above.
•agreements related to product sales deduction liabilities for our commercial products.
•obligations from the Development Agreement with Navitor. In April 2020, the Company entered into the Development Agreement with Navitor. The Company can terminate the Development Agreement upon 30 days’ notice. Under the terms of the Development Agreement, the Company and Navitor will jointly conduct a Phase II clinical program for NV-5138 (SPN-820) for treatment-resistant depression. The Company will bear all of Phase I and Phase II development costs incurred by either party, up to a maximum of $50 million. In addition, the Company will incur certain other research and development support costs.
•liabilities related to uncertain tax positions. Due to uncertainties in the timing of potential tax audits, the timing and the amounts associated with the resolution of these positions is uncertain. As such, we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate regarding the timing of payments beyond 12 months.
•nonrecourse liability as of December 31, 2020. We are contractually obligated to pay to HC Royalty all royalty payments earned by us under a licensing agreement with United Therapeutics for Orenitram. Although we have recorded a liability of $18.7 million as of December 31, 2020, related to this obligation, it is a non-recourse liability for which we have no obligation to make any cash payments to HC Royalty under any circumstances. Accordingly, this obligation has no impact on our liquidity at any time, hence the non-recourse liability has not been included in the table above.
We have also entered into a purchase and sale agreement with Rune HealthCare Limited (Rune), where we obtained the exclusive worldwide rights to a product concept from Rune. There are no future milestone payments owing to Rune under this agreement. If we receive approval to market and sell any products based on the Rune product concept for SPN-809, we will be obligated to pay royalties at a low single digit percentage rate on worldwide net product sales.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not currently have, nor have we ever had, any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or for other contractually narrow or limited purposes. In addition, we do not engage in trading activities involving non-exchange traded contracts.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of new accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.