item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. See “Forward-looking Statements” for a discussion of the uncertainties and assumptions associated with these statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below.
Overview
We develop eco-friendly “green” solutions for the food industry. Our solutions are developed to improve the food safety and shelf life of fresh produce. We do this by controlling human and plant pathogens, thereby reducing spoilage, and in turn, reducing food loss.
Our products are based on a proprietary blend of food acids which have a synergistic effect when combined with certain types of oxidizing agent-based sanitizers and fungicides at low concentrations. Our green products are capable of cleaning, sanitizing and controlling pathogens on fresh produce with the goal of making them safer for human consumption and extending their shelf life by reducing their decay. One of the main advantages of our products is that our active ingredients do not leave any toxicological residues on the fresh produce we treat. In contrary, by forming a temporary protective shield around the fresh produce we treat, our products make it difficult for pathogens to develop and potentially provide protection which also reduces cross-contamination.
Components of Results of Operation
Revenues and Cost of Revenues
Our total revenue consists of products and our cost of revenues consists of cost of products.
The following table discloses the breakdown of revenues and costs of revenues:
Operating Expenses
Our current operating expenses consist of three components - research and development expenses, selling and marketing expenses and general and administrative expenses.
Research and Development Expenses, net
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and related personnel expenses, share base compensation, professional fees and other related research and development expenses such as field tests.
The following table discloses the breakdown of research and development expenses:
We expect that our research and development expenses will increase as we continue to develop our products and services, field trials and recruit additional research and development employees.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries and related expenses, share based compensation and other expenses.
The following table discloses the breakdown of selling and marketing expenses:
We expect that our selling and marketing expenses will increase as we continue to increase our selling and marketing efforts including commercial validation pilots and recruit additional employees or contractor to support our selling and marketing efforts in our targeted geographical areas.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of professional services, share based compensation and other non-personnel related expenses.
The following table discloses the breakdown of general and administrative expenses:
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, together with the changes in those items in dollars:
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $232,274, an increase of $56,451, or 32%, compared to total revenues of $175,823 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is mainly a result of the Company’s sales of its new products, which the Company commenced in the fourth quarter of 2020.
We do not have backlogs or firm commitments from our customers for our products. Our sales might deteriorate if we fail to achieve commercial success or obtain regulatory approval of any of our products.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales consists primarily of salaries, materials, transportation and overhead costs of manufacturing our products. Cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $43,405, a decrease of $101,143, or 70%, compared to total cost of revenues of $144,548 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is mainly a result of the decrease in salaries and related expenses, due to the fact that some of our employee are currently on a temporary leave without pay (furlough), due to the effects of COVID-19 on our business, and a decrease in the overall cost of materials, mainly as a result of inventory elimination made in 2019, due to our efforts to deploy our new solutions.
Gross Profit
Gross loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $188,869, an increase of $157,594, or 504%, compared to gross profit of $31,275 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is mainly a result of the increase in revenues and the decrease in cost of revenues, as detailed above.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of salaries and related expenses, share base compensation, consulting fees, service providers’ costs, related materials and overhead expenses. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $417,000, a decrease of $198,623, or 32%, compared to total research and development expenses of $615,623 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is mainly attributable to: (1) the decrease in professional fees, share based compensation and in payroll; and (2) the decrease in expenses associated with international travel and field trials which have been postponed due to COVID-19.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for selling and marketing personnel, travel related expenses and services providers. Selling and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $51,105, a decrease of $290,954, or 85%, compared to total selling and marketing expenses of $342,058 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is mainly attributable to the decrease in payroll expenses and service providers used in relation to selling and marketing activities mainly associated with the termination of the employment of our former Vice President of Sales in February 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related expenses including share based compensation and other non-personnel related expenses such as legal expenses and directors and insurance costs. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1,070,109, an increase of $65,210, or 6%, compared to total general and administrative expenses of $1,004,899 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is mainly a result of the increase in share-based compensation to our service providers and directors offset partially by a decrease in professional fees.
Financing Expenses, Net
Financing expenses, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $270,393, an increase of $226,985, or 523%, compared to total financing expenses of $43,408 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is mainly a result of compensation expenses related to the exchange of our convertible loans as well as accrued interest and amortization expenses related to such convertible loans.
Total Comprehensive Loss
As a result of the foregoing, our total comprehensive loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,593,139, compared to $1,971,417 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $378,278, or 19%.
Impact of COVID-19
The global spread of COVID-19 led many countries, including the United States, Europe and Israel (where we maintain material operations), to impose stringent limitations on movement, gatherings, transit of passengers and goods and to close the borders between countries. The responses of governments have notably impacted many economies as well as capital markets worldwide.
Based on guidelines provided by the Israeli Government, employers (including us) are required to prepare and increase as much as possible the capacity and arrangement for employees to work remotely. In that regard, and in compliance with all applicable Israeli rules and guidelines, our offices have remained closed since the middle of March 2020, and all of our employees currently work remotely. In addition, as of the date of this Annual Report, some of our employees are on a temporary leave without pay (furlough), including our Chief Technology Officer, and we have postponed some of our planned field tests due to the current restriction on international travels. However, we did experience any material impact on our financial condition and results of operations due to COVID-19, and we do not expect to experience any material impact on our overall liquidity positions and outlook as a result of the outbreak. Nevertheless, it is not possible at this time to estimate the full impact that the COVID-19 pandemic, the continued spread of COVID-19, and any additional measures taken by governments, health officials or by us in response to such spread, could have on our business results of operations and financial condition.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We describe our significant accounting policies more fully in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. We believe that the accounting policy described in Note 2 is critical in order to fully understand and evaluate our financial condition and results of operations.
We prepare our financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. At the time of the preparation of the financial statements, our management is required to use estimates, evaluations and assumptions which affect the application of the accounting policy and the amounts reported for assets, obligations, income and expenses. Any estimates and assumptions are continually reviewed. The changes to the accounting estimates are credited during the period in which the change to the estimate is made.
Going Concern Uncertainty
The development and commercialization of our product will require substantial expenditures. We have not yet generated any material revenues and have incurred substantial accumulated deficit and negative operating cash flows. We currently have no sources of recurring revenue and are therefore dependent upon external sources for financing our operations. There can be no assurance that we will succeed in obtaining the necessary financing to continue our operations. As a result, our independent registered public accounting firm has expressed substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Stock-based Compensation
Employees and other service providers of the Company may receive benefits by way of stock-based compensation settled with company options exercised for shares of our Common Stock. The cost of transactions with employees settled with capital instruments is measured based on the fair value of the capital instruments on the granting date. The fair value is determined using an accepted options pricing model. The model is based on share price, grant date and on assumptions regarding expected volatility, expected lifespan, expected dividend, and a no risk interest rate.
The cost of the transactions settled with capital instruments is recognized in profit or loss together with a corresponding increase in the equity over the period in which the performance and/or service takes place, and ending on the date on which the relevant employees are entitled to the benefits (the “Vesting Period”). The aggregate expense recognized for transactions settled with capital instruments at the end of each reporting date and until the Vesting Period reflects the degree to which the Vesting Period has expired and our best estimate regarding the number of warrants that have ultimately vested. The expense or income in profit or loss reflects the change of the aggregate expense recognized as of the end of the reported period.
Convertible Loans
The Company entered into a series of convertible loan agreements with certain lenders to sell convertible promissory notes containing conversion feature. The conversion feature is considered embedded derivative instruments, and is to be recorded at their fair value as its fair value can be separated from the convertible loan and its conversion is independent of the underlying note value. The Company recorded finance expenses in respect of the convertible component in the convertible loan in the excess amount of the convertible component fair value over the face loan amount. The conversion liability is then marked to market each reporting period with the resulting gains or losses shown in the statements of operations.
The Company was using a third-party appraiser to estimate the fair value of the convertible component.
We selected the Black-Scholes-Merton (“Black-Scholes”), as our option pricing model to estimate the fair value of our options awards. The option-pricing model requires a number of assumptions:
Expected dividend yield - The expected dividend yield assumption is based on our historical experience and expectation of no future dividend payouts. We have historically not paid cash dividends and have no foreseeable plans to pay cash dividends in the future.
Volatility - Since the Company is not traded on any stock exchange market, quoted prices of our shares are unavailable. In case of insufficient historical data for a company, the expected volatility is based on similar companies’ stock volatility.
Risk free interest rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the yield of governmental bonds with equivalent terms.
Contractual term - An option’s contractual term is the amount of time the holder has to exercise the option, per the contract.
Share price - The share price is determined according to the last known closing price of the share of our Common Stock at the grant date.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate funds to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations, and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. Significant factors in the management of liquidity are funds generated by operations, levels of accounts receivable and accounts payable and capital expenditures. Since our inception through December 31, 2020, we have funded our operations principally with approximately $11,867,746 (net of issuance expenses) from the issuance of shares of shares of our Common Stock, options and loans.
The table below presents our cash flows for the periods indicated:
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $242,900, as compared to $290,815 as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had a negative working capital of $290,062, as compared to a negative working capital of $199,212 as of December 31, 2019. The decrease in our cash balance is mainly attributable to our net loss described above and payments to account payables offset by our equity financing and convertible loans.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $798,740 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $1,244,772 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $9,065 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to net cash used in investing activities of $81,655 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is mainly attributable to the decrease in short term bank deposits in banking institutions and proceeds from investment in unconsolidated entity.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $741,760 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $1,177,436 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is mainly the result of a decrease in equity financing and proceeds from convertible loans.
Financial Arrangements
Since our inception, we have financed our operation primarily through proceeds from sales of our shares of Common Stock, convertible loan agreements and grants from the IAA.
During December 2019, January 2020 and March 2020 we entered into a series of convertible loan agreements (the “December 2019 CLAs,” and each a “December 2019 CLA”) with third parties and certain existing shareholders (the “December 2019 Lenders”), pursuant to which the December 2019 Lenders agreed to provide the Company loans in the aggregate amount of $514,000 and in exchange the Company issued to the December 2019 Lenders (i) convertible promissory notes (the “December 2019 Notes”) and (ii) warrants with an exercise price of $8.40.
According to the terms of the December 2019 CLA, the December 2019 Notes bear interest at a rate of 5% per annum and the loan amount represented by the December 2019 Notes will be repaid to the December 2019 Lenders according to the following schedule: (i) the principal amount represented by the December 2019 Notes to be repaid in twenty four equal monthly installments, commencing on the twenty fifth month following the closing of each December 2019 CLA and (ii) the interest accrued on the loan amount to be paid in two bi-annual installments, commencing on the first anniversary of the first payment of the principal amount.
According to the terms of the December 2019 CLA, the outstanding loan amount matures on the earlier of (i) the third anniversary of each December 2019 CLA or (ii) a deemed liquidation event (as defined therein), and the December 2019 Lenders may convert all or any portion of the December 2019 Notes at any time prior to the one-year anniversary of each issuance into shares of Common Stock at a conversion price of $8.40 per share.
On June 24, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “June 2020 SPA”) with the December 2019 Lenders in connection with the sale and issuance of 67,369 units, at a purchase price of $7.63 per unit. Each unit consists of: (i) one share of the Company’s Common Stock; and (ii) one warrant to purchase one share of Common Stock with an exercise price of $8.40. In connection with the June 2020 SPA, the Company issued to the December 2019 Lenders an aggregate of 67,369 shares of Common Stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 67,369 shares of Common Stock. The shares of Common Stock were issued on July 2, 2020.
Simultaneous with and conditioned upon the execution of the June 2020 SPA, the Company and each of the December 2019 Lenders, agreed to effectively cancel the December 2019 CLA and the equity securities issued thereunder. In connection therewith, each of the December 2019 Lenders, voluntarily waived any right to receive interest that accrued thereupon pursuant to the December 2019 CLAs.
On September 23, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “September 2020 SPA”) with Medigus Ltd. (“Medigus”) in connection with the sale and issuance of 13,107 units, at a purchase price of $7.63 per unit, and for an aggregate purchase price of $100,000. Each unit consists of: (i) one share of Common Stock and (ii) one warrant to purchase one share of Common Stock with an exercise price of $1.20. In connection with the September 2020 SPA, the Company issued to Medigus an aggregate of 13,107 shares of Common Stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 13,107 shares of Common Stock. Furthermore, the September 2020 SPA contemplates an additional investment by Medigus not to exceed $25,000 (the “Additional Investment”), which investment shall be triggered following the parties’ initiation of a proof of concept procedure to test the effectiveness of the Company’s sanitizers and its residual effects against different pathogens. In consideration for the Additional Investment, the Company has agreed to issue an additional 3,277 units at a purchase price of $7.63, which units shall contain the same composition of securities as described in the aforementioned description of the September 2020 SPA.
During September 2020, we entered into a series of convertible loan agreements (each a “September 2020 CLA”) with certain lenders (the “September 2020 Lenders”), to sell convertible promissory notes with an aggregate principal amount of $125,000 (the “September 2020 Notes”). The September 2020 Notes will bear interest at a rate of 5% per annum. The outstanding loan amount will mature on the earlier of (i) the third anniversary of each September 2020 CLA or (ii) a deemed liquidation event (as defined therein). The loan amount represented by the September 2020 Notes will be repaid to the September 2020 Lenders according to the following schedule: (i) the principal amount represented by the September 2020 Notes will be repaid in four bi-annual installments, commencing on the first anniversary following the closing of each September 2020 CLA, and (ii) the interest accrued on the loan amount will be paid in two bi-annual installments, commencing on the first anniversary of the first payment of that principal amount. The September 2020 Lenders may convert all or any portion of the September 2020 Notes into shares of Common Stock at any time prior to the closing of an underwritten public offering (the “Mandatory Conversion Event”), at a conversion price of $7.63 per share. In addition, the September 2020 Notes will be automatically converted into shares of Common stock immediately prior to a Mandatory Conversion Event, at a conversion price as shall be determined in connection with the Mandatory Conversion Event.
During October 2020, we entered into a series of convertible loan agreements (each a “October 2020 CLA”) with certain lenders (the “October 2020 Lenders”), to sell convertible promissory notes with an aggregate principal amount of $100,000 (the “October 2020 Notes”). The October 2020 Notes will bear interest at a rate of 5% per annum. The outstanding loan amount will mature on the earlier of (i) the third anniversary of each October 2020 CLA or (ii) a deemed liquidation event (as defined therein). The loan amount represented by the October 2020 Notes will be repaid to the October 2020Lenders according to the following schedule: (i) the principal amount represented by the notes will be repaid in four bi-annual installments, commencing on the first anniversary following the closing of each October 2020 CLA, and (ii) the interest accrued on the loan amount will be paid in two bi-annual installments, commencing on the first anniversary of the first payment of that principal amount. The October 2020 Notes will be automatically converted into shares of Common stock immediately prior to a Mandatory Conversion Event, at a conversion price as shall be determined in connection with the Mandatory Conversion Event. In addition, the October 2020 Lenders may convert all or any portion of the notes into shares of Common Stock at any time prior to a Mandatory Conversion Event, at a conversion price of $7.63 per share.
During January 2021, we entered into a series of convertible loan agreements (each a “January 2021 CLA”) with certain lenders (the “January 2021 Lenders”), to sell convertible promissory notes with an aggregate principal amount of $274,000 (the “January 2021 Notes”). The January 2021 Notes bear interest at a rate of 5% per annum. The outstanding loan amount matures on the earlier of (i) the third anniversary of each January 2021 CLA or (ii) a deemed liquidation event (as defined therein). The loan amount represented by the January 2021 Notes will be repaid to the January 2021 Lenders according to the following schedule: (i) the principal amount represented by the notes will be repaid in four bi-annual installments, commencing on the first anniversary following the closing of each January 2021 CLA, and (ii) the interest accrued on the loan amount will be paid in two bi-annual installments, commencing on the first anniversary of the first payment of that principal amount. The January 2021 Notes will be automatically converted into shares of Common stock immediately prior to a Mandatory Conversion Event, at a conversion price as shall be determined in connection with the Mandatory Conversion Event. In addition, the January 2021 Lenders may convert all or any portion of the notes into shares of Common Stock at any time prior to a Mandatory Conversion Event, at a conversion price of $7.63 per share.
As part of the September 2020 CLAs, the October 2020 CLAs and the January 2021 CLAs, we entered into a registration rights agreement with each of the September 2020 Lenders, October 2020 Lenders and the January 2021 Lenders, whereby each of such lenders received piggyback registration rights for the shares issuable upon conversion of the September 2020 Notes, October 2020 Notes and the January 2021 Notes to shares of Common Stock.
Current Outlook
We have financed our operations to date primarily through proceeds from sales of our shares of Common Stock. We have incurred losses and generated negative cash flows from operations since inception in 2009. Most of our revenues are currently generated in U.S. dollars from the sale of our products and services.
As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents were $242,900. We expect that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our current operations until June 2021. In addition, our operating plans may change as a result of many factors that may currently be unknown to us, and we may need to seek additional funds sooner than planned. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the progress and costs of our studies and other research and development activities;
● the costs of manufacturing our products;
● the costs and timing of obtaining regulatory approval for our products;
● the costs of filing, prosecuting, enforcing and defending patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
● the potential costs of contracting with third parties to provide marketing and distribution services for us or for building such capacities internally; and
● the magnitude of our general and administrative expenses.
Until we can generate significant recurring revenues and profit, we expect to satisfy our future cash needs through debt or equity financings. We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available to us when needed, on acceptable terms, if at all. If funds are not available, we may be required to delay, reduce the scope of, or eliminate research or development plans for, or commercialization efforts with respect to our products and services. This may raise substantial doubts about our ability to continue as a going concern.
In its report on our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, our independent registered public accounting firm included an explanatory paragraph stating that our recurring losses from operations since inception and our need for additional funding to finance our operations raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not currently have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020:
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
We are exposed to market risks in the ordinary course of our business. Market risk represents the risk of loss that may impact our financial position due to adverse changes in financial market prices and rates. Our current investment policy is to invest available cash in bank deposits with banks that have a credit rating of at least A-minus. Accordingly, some of our cash and cash equivalents is held in deposits that bear interest. Given the current low rates of interest we receive, we will not be adversely affected if such rates are reduced. Our market risk exposure is primarily a result of foreign currency exchange rates, which is discussed in detail in the following paragraph.
Impact of Inflation and Currency Fluctuations
Our functional currency and reporting currency is the U.S. dollar. We incur some of our expenses in other currencies. As a result, we are exposed to the risk that the rate of inflation in countries in which we are active other than the United States will exceed the rate of devaluation of such countries’ currencies in relation to the dollar or that the timing of any such devaluation will lag behind inflation in such countries. To date, we have been affected by changes in the rate of inflation or the exchange rates of other countries’ currencies compared to the dollar, and we cannot assure you that we will not be adversely affected in the future.
The annual rate of inflation in Israel decreased by 0.7% in 2020 and 0.6% in 2019. The New Israeli Shekel (NIS) revaluated against the U.S. dollar and decreased by approximately 7% in 2020 and 8% in 2019.