Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Business Overview
The aviation and aerospace industries as well as markets for the Company’s consumer products continually face evolving challenges on a global basis. The operations of the Company can be affected by the trends of the economy, including interest rates, income tax laws, government regulation, legislation, and other factors. In addition, uncertainties in today’s global economy, competition from expanding manufacturing capabilities and technical sophistication of low-cost developing countries and emerging markets, currency policies in relation to the U.S. dollar of some major foreign exporting countries, the effect of terrorism, difficulty in predicting defense and other government appropriations, the vitality of the commercial aviation industry and its ability to purchase new aircraft, the willingness and ability of the Company’s customers to fund long-term purchase programs, volatile market demand and the continued market acceptance of the Company’s advanced technology and cutlery products make it difficult to predict the impact on future financial results.
Both the ATG and CPG markets are sensitive to domestic and foreign economic conditions and policies, which may create volatility in operating results from period to period. For example, the airline industry is sensitive to fuel price increases and economic conditions. These factors directly impact the demand for aircraft production as well as the amount of repair and overhaul required on in-service aircraft.
The Company’s suppliers are also subject to all the pressures and volatility being generated by the current global economic conditions. Any interruption of the Company’s continuous flow of material and product parts that are required for the manufacture of the Company’s products could adversely impact the Company’s ability to meet the Company’s customers’ delivery requirements. Consistent with the evolving requirements of the aerospace industry, companies are increasingly being requested to operate under long-term agreements with their customers on the basis of fixed prices, targeted year to year price reductions and/or year to year price adjustments predicated on mutually agreed indices and/or a combination of some or all of the above described pricing arrangements and/or otherwise. Therefore, productivity improvements and cost containment strategies are continuously sought within the Company’s concept of continuous improvement. The Company’s products are labor intensive and as such productivity improvements are expected to have positive effects on the Company’s operating results. However, increased costs for raw material, purchased parts and/or labor will have the reverse effect. Therefore, there are strong incentives to continuously improve productivity and to contain/reduce costs.
If any adverse economic events reduce the number of Airliners and/or Aircraft being produced by the Company’s relevant prime contractors, the negative effects of that reduction will in turn flow down through the supply chain. Also, certain major manufacturers have successfully imposed extended payment terms to their suppliers. At times, these extended payment terms are not available to the Company when purchasing raw material such as aluminum, magnetic material, steel and/or other product support items and services. If the Company’s customers delay their payments until after the extended due date or fail to pay, it could adversely impact the Company’s operating results.
Maximizing the Company’s operations requires continued dedicated performances from the Company’s key and other personnel. In the Company’s markets and business arenas there is substantial competition for the services of the highest performing individuals. Competitors, customers and other companies who may have interest in the Company’s most experienced and educated/highly trained personnel (i.e., managerial, engineering and accounting/administrative) are a continuing consequence of the Company’s history of successful operational performance. Any unplanned replacement of such personnel may require the hiring of new personnel on an expedited basis (provided they are available) and may temporarily interrupt the Company’s operations and efforts for continuous improvement.
Management Discussion
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, approximately 82% and 88%, respectively, of the Company’s consolidated revenues were derived from the ATG sale of product to a small base of customers. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, approximately 18% and 12% of the Company’s consolidated revenues were derived from the CPG sale of product to a large base of retail customers. There was a decrease in revenue in 2020 from 2019 of approximately $7,737,000 at the ATG and an increase in revenue of approximately $2,309,000 in shipments at the CPG.
The Company’s commercial business is affected by such factors as uncertainties in today’s global economy, global competition, the vitality and ability of the commercial aviation industry to purchase new aircraft, the effects and threats of terrorism, market demand and acceptance both for the Company’s products and its customers’ products which incorporate Company made components.
The ATG engages its business development efforts in its primary markets and is broadening its activities to include new domestic and foreign markets that are consistent with its core competencies. We believe our business remains particularly well positioned in the strong commercial aircraft market driven by the replacement of older aircraft with more fuel efficient alternatives and the increasing demand for air travel in emerging markets. Although the ATG backlog continues to be strong, actual scheduled shipments may be delayed/changed as a function of the Company’s customers’ final delivery determinations based on changes in the global economy and other factors.
The CPG continues to diversify its revenue streams with new commercial channels, including the addition of national retailers, international accounts, and a direct-to-consumer business line, in response to recent and ongoing reductions in military spending.
The ATG and CPG continue to respond to U.S. government procurement requests for quotes. New product development activities are ongoing along with the acquisition and development of new product lines.
See also Note 11, Business Segments, of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information concerning business segment operating results.
Outlook for 2021
In 2021, we will continue to execute our long-term strategy as we align and focus our resources to increase growth and profitability while addressing known and unknown factors in an ever-changing global environment.
Impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has been, and continues to be, an unprecedented disruption in the economy and has negatively impacted, and may continue to negatively impact, the Company’s business and results. The COVID-19 pandemic and accompanying economic disruption have caused delays and declines in the placement of customer orders. Accordingly, the Company experienced declines in revenue for the most recently completed fourth quarter compared to the same period of the prior fiscal year. This trend may continue in the near-term and possibly longer, including, without limitation, if the pandemic increases in size and scope, its duration is prolonged or among other matters related thereto, governmental actions, including, without limitation, business restrictions are imposed. In response to the economic and business disruption, the Company has taken actions to reduce costs and spending across the organization. The Company continues to actively monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and may take further actions, including those that may alter business operations, if required by federal, state or local authorities or otherwise determined to be advisable by management.
The Company is focused on ensuring ample liquidity to meet its business needs. To that end, during April 2020, the Company received a loan under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) in the aggregate principal amount of $4 million. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for additional information regarding the Company’s credit facility and the PPP loan.
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, significant uncertainty exists concerning the magnitude of the impact and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic. Factors arising from the COVID-19 pandemic that have impacted, or may negatively impact, the Company’s business and results, including sales and gross margin, include, but are not limited to: the Company’s ability to procure materials from suppliers or to meet delivery requirements and commitments to our customers; limitations on the ability of the Company’s employees to perform their work due to impacts caused by the pandemic or local, state, or federal orders that restrict the Company’s operations or the operations of its customers, or require that the employees be quarantined; limitations on the ability of carriers to deliver products to the Company’s facilities and customers; limitations on the ability or desire of the Company’s customers to conduct their business, purchase products and services and pay for purchases on a timely basis or at all; and decreased demand for products and services.
The situation surrounding COVID-19 remains fluid. The Company is unable to determine or predict the nature, duration, or scope of the overall impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on the Company’s business, results of operations, liquidity, or financial condition, as such impact will depend on future developments, including the severity and duration of the pandemic and government and other actions taken in response thereto, all of which are highly uncertain. Further, even after the COVID-19 pandemic subsides, the Company may continue to experience adverse impacts to its business as a result of, among other things, any economic impact that has occurred or may occur in the future and changes in customer or supplier behavior.
Results of Operations
The following table compares the Company’s consolidated statements of income data for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 ($000’s omitted).
Revenue
The Company’s consolidated revenues from operations decreased approximately $5,428,000 or (9.8)% for the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019. This is due to an increase at the CPG of approximately $2,309,000 or 34.2% offset by a decrease at the ATG of approximately $7,737,000 or (15.9)%.
The consolidated revenue decrease for the twelve month period ended in December 31, 2020 when compared to the same twelve month period ended December 31, 2019 is attributable to a decrease in units shipped at the ATG of approximately $8,445,000 offset by an increase in price/mix of units shipped of approximately $708,000. Additionally, there was an increase in shipments at the CPG of approximately $2,384,000 slightly offset by a decrease of approximately $75,000 in price/mix of units shipped as compared to the same period ended December 31, 2019.
Gross Margin
The Company’s consolidated gross margins from operations decreased approximately $3,886,000 or (32.0)% for the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019.
Gross margin decreased in the twelve month period due to lower units shipped at the ATG of approximately $2,192,000 and an increase in costs per units shipped including the underutilization of production resources of approximately $3,353,000 as compared to the same period in 2019. This has been partially offset by an increase in gross margins at the CPG due to an increase in units shipped of approximately $393,000 and an improvement in utilization of production resources of approximately $1,266,000 in costs per units shipped in as compared to the same period in 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) decreased approximately $885,000 or (10.0)% for the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease is primarily driven by the CPG due to lower media advertising, sales support, commissions, travel, and trade show expenses of approximately $941,000 and a net increase of approximately $56,000 in all other SG&A expenditures for the ATG and CPG for the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased approximately $55,000 or 44.0% primarily due to the line of credit and Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP Loan”) at the ATG for the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. See also Note 5, Long-Term Debt, of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information on long-term debt.
Income Taxes
The Company’s effective tax rate for operations was (61.3)% in 2020 and 21.5% in 2019. The effective tax rate in both years reflects federal and state income taxes, permanent non-deductible expenditures, the deduction for foreign-derived intangible income (FDII), and the federal tax credit for research and development expenditures. The decrease in the effective tax rate between 2019 and 2020 is a result of an increase in the ratio of tax benefits to net income before taxes. See also Note 7, Income Taxes, of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for information concerning income taxes.
Net Income
Income from operations decreased approximately $2,347,000 or (95.9)% when comparing the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020 to the same period in 2019 as net income at the ATG was lower by approximately $4,770,000 while the net loss at the CPG decreased by approximately $2,423,000. This consolidated decrease is primarily the result of decreases in revenue partially offset by decreases in SG&A costs as discussed earlier.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s primary liquidity and capital expenditure requirements relate to working capital needs; primarily inventory, accounts receivable, accounts payable, and principal payments on debt. At December 31, 2020, the Company had working capital of approximately $31,074,000 ($27,659,000 - December 2019) of which approximately $5,935,000 ($2,029,000 - December 2019) was comprised of cash. The increase in working capital is primarily attributable to an increase in inventory with a decrease of accounts payable at the ATG offset by a reduction in accounts receivable at the ATG due to lower shipments. The push out of orders related to the COVID-19 pandemic has contributed to a build-up of finished goods and other inventories at the ATG during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The Company continues to focus on inventory management in light of this period of uncertainty with respect to short and long-term industry demand.
The Company generated approximately $826,000 in cash from operations during the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a usage of cash of approximately $620,000 during the same period in 2019. Cash was generated primarily through adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash of approximately $1,846,000 and reduction in accounts receivable of approximately $5,696,000. The primary use of cash for the Company’s operating activities for the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020 include working capital requirements, mainly an increase in inventories and a decrease in accounts payable of approximately $3,538,000 and $2,859,000, respectively. All other operating accounts were a net used amount of approximately $319,000.
The Company’s primary use of cash in its investing activities in the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020 are for building improvements and capital equipment of approximately $729,000 primarily for production requirements at the ATG.
The Company’s primary providing of cash in its financing activities in the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020 include proceeds from the line of credit and PPP Loan of approximately $750,000 and $4,000,000, respectively, partially offset by approximately $547,000 of principal payments on long-term debt, approximately $294,000 of principal payments on equipment financing obligations and approximately $100,000 for the purchase of treasury shares.
The COVID-19 pandemic could impact our liquidity. Lower production schedules, possible inability of our customers to make timely payments to us, and similar factors could lower cash generated from operations and adversely affect our financial position.
As of March 20, 2020, the Company increased its line of credit from $4,000,000 to $6,000,000. As of July 31, 2020, the Company extended the line of credit to expire December 31, 2022. As of July 31, 2020, the interest rate is a rate per year equal to the bank’s prime rate or Libor plus 2.15%. In addition, the Company is required to pay a commitment fee of 0.25% on the unused portion of the line of credit. There was $3,750,000 balance outstanding at December 31, 2020 and $3,000,000 balance at December 31, 2019.
The Company has an equipment loan facility in the amount of $1,000,000 available until July 9, 2021. This line is non-revolving and non-renewable. The loan term for the equipment covered by the agreement is 60 months. Monthly payments are fixed for the term of each funding based upon the Lender’s lease pricing in effect at the time of such funding. There is nothing outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and at December 31, 2019.
On April 21, 2020, the Company executed a promissory note (the “Note”) in the amount of $4,000,000 as part of the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP Loan”) administered by the Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) and authorized under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the CARES Act”). The PPP Loan is being made through the Bank of America, NA (the “Lender”). The term of the PPP Loan is two years with an annual interest rate of 1.00%. Payments of principal and interest on the PPP Loan will be deferred until the SBA remits the loan forgiveness amount to the Lender. Payments on any unforgiven amounts will begin on the date on which loan forgiveness is determined or 10 months after the end of the borrower’s covered period if forgiveness is not requested. Commencing one month after the expiration of the deferral period, the Company is required to pay the Lender the principal amount outstanding on the PPP Loan in equal monthly payments of principal and interest.
At the time of application, the Company determined that the loan was necessary in order to secure the Company’s ability to meet its obligations in the face of potential disruptions in its business operations and the potential inability of its customers to pay their accounts when due. As of December 31, 2020, the Company incurred payroll costs and other eligible qualifying expenses within the 24-week covered period after receipt of the PPP loan, that the Company believes to be consistent with the terms of the PPP Loan. No assurance can be given that we will obtain forgiveness of the PPP Loan in whole or in part.
The Company believes its cash generating capability and financial condition, together with available credit facilities will be adequate to meet our future operating, investing and financing needs.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
Not applicable.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company prepares its consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). As such, the Company is required to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions that the Company believes are reasonable based upon the information available. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions. Note 1, Business Description and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the accompanying consolidated financial statements includes a summary of the significant accounting policies used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.