Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains statements relating to our expectations, projections, beliefs, and prospects, which are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. In some cases you can identify these statements by forward-looking words, such as “believe,” “will,” “may,” “estimate,” “continue,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “should,” “might”, “plan,” “expect,” “predict,” “could,” “potentially” or the negative of these terms or similar expressions. You should read these statements carefully because they may discuss future expectations, contain projections of future results of operations or financial condition, or state other “forward-looking” information. These forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such a difference include, but are not limited to, those discussed in this report in Part I, Item 1A - “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this report. Forward-looking statements are based on our management’s beliefs and assumptions and on information currently available to our management. These statements, like all statements in this report, speak only as of their date, and we undertake no obligation to update or revise these statements in light of future developments. We caution investors that our business and financial performance are subject to substantial risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a medical device company focused on developing and commercializing products intended to transform the way calcified cardiovascular disease is treated. We aim to establish a new standard of care for medical device treatment of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease through our differentiated and proprietary local delivery of sonic pressure waves for the treatment of calcified plaque, which we refer to as intravascular lithotripsy (“IVL”). Our IVL system (our “IVL System”), which leverages our IVL technology (our “IVL Technology”), is a minimally invasive, easy-to-use, and safe way to significantly improve patient outcomes. We are currently selling the following products in a number of countries around the world where we have applicable regulatory approvals:
Products for the Treatment of Peripheral Artery Disease (“PAD”):
•
Our Shockwave M5 IVL catheter (“M5 catheter”), which was CE-Marked in April 2018 and cleared by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) in July 2018 for use in our IVL System for the treatment of PAD.
•
The second version of our Shockwave S4 IVL catheter (“S4 catheter”), for the treatment of below the knee PAD, which was cleared by the FDA in August 2019, and accepted by our EU notified body in May 2020.
Product for the Treatment of Coronary Artery Disease (“CAD”):
•
Our Shockwave C2 IVL catheter (“C2 catheter”) was CE-Marked in June 2018 and cleared by the FDA in February 2021 for use in our IVL System for the treatment of CAD.
We also have ongoing clinical programs across several products and indications, which, if successful, will allow us to expand commercialization of our products into new geographies and indications. Importantly, in October 2020, we announced the results of our DISRUPT CAD III global study. The data from DISRUPT CAD III supported our pre-market application (“PMA”) in the United States for our C2 catheters, and is intended to support a Shonin submission in Japan for our C2 catheters. In addition, we began enrollment in the DISRUPT CAD IV Japan study in 2019 and completed enrollment in April 2020. We anticipate submitting CAD III and CAD IV data to support Shonin approval, with subsequent Japan launch planned for the first half of 2022, subject to applicable regulatory approvals.
The first two indications we are targeting with our IVL System are PAD, the narrowing or blockage of vessels that carry blood from the heart to the extremities, and CAD, the narrowing or blockage of the arteries that supply blood to the heart. In the future, we see significant opportunity in the potential treatment of aortic stenosis, a condition where the heart’s aortic valve becomes increasingly calcified with age, causing it to narrow and obstruct blood flow from the heart.
We have adapted the use of lithotripsy to the cardiovascular field with the aim of creating what we believe can become the safest, most effective means of addressing the growing challenge of cardiovascular calcification. Lithotripsy has been used to successfully treat kidney stones (deposits of hardened calcium) for over 30 years. By integrating lithotripsy into a device that resembles a standard balloon catheter, physicians can prepare, deliver, and treat calcified lesions using a familiar
form factor, without disruption to their standard procedural workflow. Our differentiated IVL System works by delivering shockwaves through the entire depth of the artery wall, modifying calcium in the medial layer of the artery, not just at the superficial most intimal layer. The shockwaves crack this calcium and enable the stenotic artery to expand at low pressures, thereby minimizing complications inherent to traditional balloon dilations, such as dissections or tears. Preparing the vessel with IVL facilitates optimal outcomes with other therapies, including stents and drug-eluting technologies. Using IVL also avoids complications associated with atherectomy devices such as dissection, perforation, and embolism. When followed by an anti-proliferative therapy such as a drug-coated balloons or drug-eluting stents, the micro-fractures may enable better drug penetration into the arterial wall and improve drug uptake, thereby improving the effectiveness of the combination treatment.
We market our products to hospitals whose interventional cardiologists, vascular surgeons and interventional radiologists treat patients with PAD and CAD. We have dedicated meaningful resources to establish a direct sales capability in the United States, Germany, Austria and Switzerland, which we have complemented with distributors actively selling our products in over 50 countries in North and South America, Europe, the Middle East, Asia, Africa and Australia/New Zealand. We are actively expanding our international field presence through new distributors, as well as additional sales and clinical personnel. In addition, we are adding new U.S. sales territories.
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we generated product revenue of $67.8 million, $42.9 million and $12.3 million, respectively, and a $65.7 million, $51.8 million and $41.2 million loss from operations, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, 45%, 47% and 43%, respectively, of our product revenue was generated from customers located outside of the United States. Our sales outside of the United States are denominated principally in Euros. As a result, we have foreign exchange exposure. We have not entered into any material foreign currency hedging contracts, although we may do so in the future.
Since inception, we have incurred significant net losses and expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. To date, our principal sources of liquidity have been the net proceeds we received through the sale of our common stock in our initial public offering, private sales of equity securities and payments received from customers using our products. As of December 31, 2020, we had $202.4 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and an accumulated deficit of $243.7 million.
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
The global COVID-19 pandemic presents significant risks to us and has had, and continues to have, far reaching impacts on our business, operations, and financial results and condition, directly and indirectly, including, without limitation, impacts on: the health of our management and employees; our manufacturing, distribution, marketing and sales operations; our research and development activities, including clinical activities; and customer and patient behaviors.
Access to many hospitals and other customer sites continues to be restricted to essential personnel, which negatively impacts our ability to promote the use of our products with physicians. Additionally, many hospitals and other therapeutic centers have in the past suspended, and may suspend or continue to suspend in the future, many elective procedures, resulting in a reduced volume of procedures using our products. Our customer behavior is impacted by the prevalence of COVID-19 and changes in the infection rates in the locations where our customers are located.
Quarantines, shelter-in-place and similar government orders have also impacted and may continue to impact, our third-party manufacturers and suppliers, and could in turn adversely impact the availability or cost of materials, which could disrupt our supply chain.
We have taken a variety of steps to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, while attempting to minimize business disruption. Essential staff in manufacturing and limited support functions have continued to work from our Santa Clara headquarters following appropriate hygiene and social distancing protocols. To reduce the risk to our employees and their families from potential exposure to COVID-19, all other staff in our Santa Clara headquarters have been required to work from home. We have restricted non-essential travel to protect the health and safety of our employees and customers.
We are continuing to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our employees and customers and on the markets in which we operate, and will take further actions that we consider prudent to address the COVID-19 pandemic, while ensuring that we can support our customers and continue to develop our products.
The ultimate extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on us remains highly uncertain and will depend on future developments and factors that continue to evolve, including the ability of various regions to effectively manage COVID-19,
the extent of the continuing resurgence of COVID-19, the efficacy and extent of distribution of vaccines, and the impact of mutations of COVID-19. Most of these developments and factors are outside of our control and could exist for an extended period of time even after the pandemic might end.
Public Offerings of Common Stock
On March 11, 2019, we closed on our initial public offering (“IPO”) of 6,555,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $17.00 per share, which included the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option to purchase 855,000 additional shares of our common stock. We raised a total of $111.4 million in gross proceeds from the IPO, or approximately $99.9 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriters’ discounts and commissions of $7.1 million and offering costs of $4.4 million. Concurrent with the IPO, we issued 588,235 shares of common stock in a private placement (the “Private Placement”) for net proceeds of $10.0 million.
On November 15, 2019, we completed a follow-on offering of 2,854,048 shares of our common stock, including 372,267 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise of their option to purchase additional shares at a public offering price of $36.25 per share. Upon completion of our follow-on offering, we received net proceeds of $96.7 million, after deducting underwriters’ discounts and commissions and offering expenses. On June 19, 2020, we completed an offering of 1,955,000 shares of our common stock, including 255,000 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise of their option to purchase additional shares at a public offering price of $45.75 per share. Upon completion of the June 2020 offering, we received net proceeds of $83.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
Factors Affecting Our Business
There are a number of factors that have impacted, and we believe will continue to impact, our results of operations and growth. These factors include:
•
Market acceptance. The growth of our business depends on our ability to gain broader acceptance of our current products by continuing to make physicians and other hospital staff aware of the benefits of our products to generate increased demand and frequency of use, and thus increase sales to our hospital customers. Our ability to grow our business will also depend on our ability to expand our customer base in existing or new target end markets. Although we are attempting to increase the number of patients treated with procedures that use our products through our established relationships and focused sales efforts, we cannot provide assurance that our efforts will increase the use of our products.
•
Regulatory approvals/clearances and timing and efficiency of new product introductions. We must successfully obtain timely approvals or clearances and introduce new products that gain acceptance with physicians, ensuring adequate supply while avoiding excess inventory of older products and resulting inventory write-downs or write-offs. For our sales to grow, we will also need to obtain regulatory clearance or approval of our other pipeline products in the United States and in international markets. In addition, as we introduce new products, we expect to build our inventory of components and finished goods in advance of sales, which may cause quarterly fluctuations in our results of operations.
•
Sales force size and effectiveness. The rate at which we grow our sales force and the speed at which newly hired salespeople become effective can impact our revenue growth or our costs incurred in anticipation of such growth. We intend to continue to make significant investments in our sales and marketing organization by increasing the number of U.S. sales representatives and expanding our international marketing programs to help facilitate further adoption among existing hospital accounts as well as broaden awareness of our products to new hospital accounts.
•
Competition. Our industry is intensely competitive and, in particular, we compete with a number of large, well-capitalized companies. We must continue to successfully compete in light of our competitors’ existing and future products and related pricing and their resources to successfully market to the physicians who use our products.
•
Reimbursement. The level of reimbursement from third-party payors for procedures performed using our products could have a substantial impact on the prices we are able to charge for our products and how widely our products are accepted. The level at which reimbursement is set for procedures using our products, and any increase in reimbursement for procedures using our products, will depend substantially on our ability to generate clinical evidence, to gain advocacy in the respective physician societies and to work with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and payors.
•
Clinical results. Publications of clinical results by us, our competitors and other third parties can have a significant influence on whether, and the degree to which, our products are used by physicians and the procedures and treatments those physicians choose to administer for a given condition.
•
Product and Geographic Mix; Timing. Our financial results, including our gross margins, may fluctuate from period to period based on the timing of customer orders or medical procedures, the number of available selling days in a particular period, which can be impacted by a number of factors, such as holidays or days of severe inclement weather in a particular geography, the mix of products sold and the geographic mix of where products are sold. In particular, our distributors for international sales receive a distribution margin on sales of our IVL catheters, which affects our gross margin.
•
Seasonality. We have experienced some seasonality during summer months, which we believe is attributable to the postponement of elective surgeries for summer vacation plans of physicians and patients. We also anticipate that we may in the future experience some seasonal slowing of demand for our products in our fourth quarters due to year-end clinical treatment patterns, such as the postponement of elective surgeries during the holiday period. We expect these seasonal factors to become more pronounced in the future as our business grows.
In addition, we have experienced and expect to continue to experience meaningful variability in our quarterly revenue and gross profit/loss as a result of a number of factors, including, but not limited to: inventory write-offs and write-downs; costs, benefits and timing of new product introductions; the availability and cost of components and raw materials; and fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. Additionally, we experience quarters in which operating expenses, in particular research and development expenses, fluctuate depending on the stage and timing of product development.
While these factors may present significant opportunities for us, they also pose significant risks and challenges that we must address.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Product revenue
Product revenue is primarily from the sale of our IVL catheters.
We sell our products to hospitals, primarily through direct sales representatives, as well as through distributors in selected international markets. For products sold through direct sales representatives, control is transferred upon delivery to customers. For products sold to distributors internationally and certain customers that purchase stocking orders in the United States, control is transferred upon shipment or delivery to the customer’s named location, based on the contractual shipping terms. Additionally, a portion of our revenue is generated through a consignment model under which inventory is maintained at hospitals. For consignment inventory, control is transferred at the time the catheters are consumed in a procedure.
Cost of product revenue
Cost of product revenue consists primarily of costs of components for use in our products, the materials and labor that are used to produce our products, the manufacturing overhead that directly supports production and the depreciation relating to the equipment used in our IVL System that we provide to our hospital customers, often on a cost-free loan basis to facilitate the use of our IVL catheters in their procedures. We depreciate equipment over a three-year period. We expect cost of product revenue to increase in absolute terms as our revenue grows.
Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, primarily production volumes, the cost of direct materials, product mix, geographic mix, discounting practices, manufacturing costs, product yields, headcount and cost-reduction strategies. We expect our gross margin percentage to increase over the long term to the extent we are successful in increasing our sales volume and are therefore able to leverage our fixed costs. We intend to use our design, engineering and manufacturing capabilities to further advance and improve the efficiency of our manufacturing processes, which, if successful, we believe will reduce costs and enable us to increase our gross margin percentage. While we expect gross margin percentage to increase over the long term, it will likely fluctuate from quarter to quarter as we continue to introduce new products and adopt new manufacturing processes and technologies.
Research and development expenses
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses consist of applicable personnel, consulting, materials and clinical trial expenses. R&D expenses include:
•
certain personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, bonus, travel and stock-based compensation;
•
cost of clinical studies to support new products and product enhancements, including expenses for clinical research organizations (“CROs”) and site payments;
•
materials and supplies used for internal R&D and clinical activities;
•
allocated overhead including facilities and information technology expenses; and
•
cost of outside consultants who assist with technology development, regulatory affairs, clinical affairs and quality assurance.
R&D costs are expensed as incurred. In the future, we expect R&D expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to develop new products, enhance existing products and technologies and perform activities related to obtaining additional regulatory approval.
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, sales commissions, travel and stock-based compensation. Other sales and marketing expenses include marketing and promotional activities, including trade shows and market research, and cost of outside consultants. We expect to continue to grow our sales force and increase marketing efforts as we continue commercializing products based on our IVL Technology.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, bonus, travel and stock-based compensation. Other general and administrative expenses include professional services fees, including legal, audit and tax fees, insurance costs, cost of outside consultants and employee recruiting and training costs. Moreover, we expect to incur additional expenses associated with operating as a public company, including legal, accounting, insurance, exchange listing and SEC compliance and investor relations.
Interest expense
Interest expense consists of interest on our debt and amortization of associated debt discount. In February 2018, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank for a term loan and a revolving line of credit. In June 2018 and December 2018, we drew an aggregate of $15.0 million in borrowings under the term loan facility.
On February 11, 2020, we entered into the First Amendment (the “Amended Credit Facility”) to the Loan and Security Agreement, to refinance the 2018 term loan. The Amendment provided us with a supplemental term loan in the amount of $16.5 million. After repayment of the outstanding amount of the term loan, we received net proceeds of $3.3 million, which reflects an additional $4.3 million in principal as of the date of the modification less the final balloon payment fee of $1.0 million. In addition, the Amendment terminated our revolving line of credit. As of December 31, 2020, we had $16.6 million outstanding under the Amended Credit Facility.
Other income, net
Other income consists primarily of interest earned on our cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Income tax provision
Income tax provision consists primarily of income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We have a full valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, including net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits related primarily to R&D.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Product revenue. Product revenue increased by $24.9 million, or 58%, from $42.9 million in 2019 to $67.8 million in 2020, driven primarily by peripheral and coronary product revenues, as further described below.
The following table represents our product revenue based on product line:
Peripheral product revenue increased by $15.7 million, or 60% from $26.3 million in 2019 to $42.0 million in 2020. The change was due to an increase in purchase volume of our M5 and S4 IVL catheters within the United States and internationally.
Coronary product revenue increased by $9.0 million, or 57% from $15.6 million in 2019 to $24.6 million in 2020. The change was due to an increase in purchase volume of our C2 IVL catheter. All coronary product revenue was international for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Other product revenue increased by $0.2 million, or 23% from $1.0 million in 2019 to $1.2 million in 2020. The change was due to an increase in the purchase volume of our IVL generators and other accessories within the United States and internationally.
We sold to a greater number of customers in the United States and to a greater number of distributors internationally in 2020 compared to 2019. Product revenue, classified by the major geographic areas in which our products are shipped, was $37.1 million within the United States and $30.7 million for all other countries in 2020 compared to $22.7 million within the United States and $20.2 million for all other countries in 2019.
Cost of product revenue and gross margin percentage. Cost of product revenue increased by $3.8 million, or 22%, from $17.2 million in 2019 to $21.0 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to growth in sales volume. Gross margin percentage improved to 69.0% in 2020, compared to 60.0% in 2019. This change in gross margin percentage was primarily due to lower fixed costs per unit from increased production volume of our IVL catheters and increased manufacturing efficiencies from improvements to operations and production.
Research and development expenses. The following table summarizes our R&D expenses incurred during the periods presented:
R&D expenses increased by $4.1 million, or 12%, from $32.9 million in 2019 to $36.9 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $3.8 million increase in compensation and personnel-related costs due to an increase in head count to support quality assurance functions. There was also a $0.9 million increase in other R&D costs primarily driven by an increase in software license expense related to R&D, a $0.9 million increase in materials and supplies, a $0.7 million increase in facilities and other allocated costs due to increased rent and building expenditures and a $0.4 million increase for outside consultants. These increases were partially offset by a $2.7 million decrease in clinical-related costs primarily due to the completion of patient enrollment for the current clinical trials.
Sales and marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses increased by $21.1 million, or 69%, from $30.6 million in 2019 to $51.7 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $17.0 million increase in compensation and personnel-related costs, which included a $4.7 million increase in commission expense, as a result of a higher head count and increased revenue for the year-ended December 31, 2020. Marketing and promotional expenses increased by $1.4 million to support the continued commercialization of our products. There was also a $0.9 million increase due to facilities and other allocated costs, due to increased rent and building expenditures, a $0.8 million increase due to consulting and general corporate expenses, a $0.7 million increase in materials and supplies, and a $0.3 million increase due to recruiting and training fees.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses increased by $9.8 million, or 69%, from $14.1 million in 2019 to $23.9 million in 2020. The change was primarily due to a $4.8 million increase in compensation and personnel-related costs due to an increase in head count, $4.2 million increase in consulting, professional services and general corporate expenses, and a $0.8 million increase in recruiting, training, and facilities.
Interest expense. Interest expense increased by $0.3 million, or 28%, from $0.9 million in 2019 to $1.2 million in 2020. The increase in interest expense was primarily due to increased loan principal amount to $16.5 million after the Company entered into the Amended Credit Facility in February 2020.
Change in fair value of warrant liability. The change in fair value of warrant liability was $0.6 million in 2019 due to the common stock warrants which were exercised in April 2019.
Other income, net. Other income, net decreased by $1.1 million, or 46%, from $2.3 million in 2019 to $1.3 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in the interest rate environment compared to the prior year.
Income tax provision. The income tax provision increased by $18,000, or 29%, from $62,000 in 2019 to $80,000 in 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase in foreign income tax expense.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 12, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of liquidity
To date, our principal sources of liquidity have been the net proceeds we received through the sales of our common stock in our public offerings, private sales of our equity securities, payments received from customers using our products and to a lesser extent proceeds from our debt financings. On March 11, 2019, we completed our initial public offering, including the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option, selling 6,555,000 shares of our common stock at $17.00 per share. Upon completion of our initial public offering, we received net proceeds of $99.9 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. Concurrent with the initial public offering, we issued 588,235 shares of common stock in our Private Placement for net proceeds of $10.0 million. On November 15, 2019, we completed a follow-on offering of 2,854,048 shares of our common stock, including 372,267 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise of their option to purchase additional shares at a public offering price of $36.25 per share. Upon completion of our follow-on offering, we received net proceeds of $96.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. On June 19, 2020, we completed an offering of 1,955,000 shares of our common stock, including 255,000 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise of their option to purchase additional shares at a public offering price of $45.75 per share. Upon completion of the June 2020 offering, we received net proceeds of $83.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
We have a number of ongoing clinical trials, and expect to continue to make substantial investments in these trials and in additional clinical trials that are designed to provide clinical evidence of the safety and efficacy of our products. We intend to continue to make significant investments in our sales and marketing organization by increasing the number of U.S. sales representatives and expanding our international marketing programs to help facilitate further adoption among existing hospital accounts and physicians as well as broaden awareness of our products to new hospitals. We also expect to continue to make investments in R&D, regulatory affairs, and clinical studies to develop future generations of products based on our IVL Technology, support regulatory submissions, and demonstrate the clinical efficacy of our products. Moreover, we expect to continue to incur expenses associated with operating as a public company, including legal, accounting, insurance, exchange listing and SEC compliance, investor relations and other expenses. Because of these and other factors, we expect to continue to incur substantial net losses and negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the cost, timing and results of our clinical trials and regulatory reviews;
•
the cost and timing of establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities;
•
the terms and timing of any other collaborative, licensing and other arrangements that we may establish including any contract manufacturing arrangements;
•
the volume of product sales and the timing of receipt of the corresponding sales proceeds;
•
the degree of success we experience in commercializing our products;
•
the emergence of competing or complementary technologies;
•
the cost of preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights; and
•
the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products or technologies, although we currently have no commitments or agreements relating to any of these types of transactions.
We believe that our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2020 will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months from the date the audited consolidated financial statements are filed with the SEC. As of December 31, 2020, we had $202.4 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and an accumulated deficit of $243.7 million.
Debt obligations
Loan and Security Agreement. In February 2018, we entered into our Loan and Security Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank (the “Loan and Security Agreement”). The terms of the Loan and Security Agreement included a term loan of $15.0 million and a revolving line of credit of $2.0 million. The term loan was available in two tranches, of which the first tranche of $10.0 million was drawn down in June 2018 and the second tranche of $5.0 million was drawn down in December 2018. In connection with the execution of the Loan and Security Agreement, we issued Silicon Valley Bank a warrant to purchase 34,440 shares of our common stock, with a term of ten years. In April 2019 this warrant was net exercised into 29,887 shares of common stock.
On February 11, 2020, we entered into the Amended Credit Facility to the Loan and Security Agreement (the “Amended Credit Facility”), to refinance our existing term loan. The Amended Credit Facility provided us with a supplemental term loan in the amount of $16.5 million. After repayment of the outstanding amount of the term loan, we received net proceeds of $3.3 million, which reflects an additional $4.3 million in principal as of the date of the modification less the final balloon payment fee of $1.0 million. In addition, the Amended Credit Facility terminated our revolving line of credit of $2.0 million and the termination fee of less than $0.1 million was waived.
The principal amount outstanding under the supplemental term loan accrues interest, payable monthly in arrears, at a floating per annum rate equal to the greater of (A) the Wall Street Journal prime rate minus 1.25% and (B) 3.50% (3.50% as of December 31, 2020). No principal payments are due on the supplemental term loan until June 30, 2021; provided that such interest only period shall be extended to December 31, 2021 if we achieve specified revenue milestones and shall be extended further to June 30, 2022 if we achieve specified revenue and regulatory milestones, as described in Note 7 (the date that such interest only period ends, the “Amortization Date”).
Following the Amortization Date, the principal amount of the supplemental term loan shall be due in equal monthly installments through the maturity date, December 1, 2023. There is also a final payment equal to 9.5% of the original principal amount of the supplemental term loan, or $1.6 million, due at maturity (or any earlier date of optional pre-payment or acceleration of principal due to an event of default). We may, at our option, prepay the supplemental term loan in full, subject to an additional prepayment fee ranging between 0% and 3% of the original principal amount of the supplemental term loan. The prepayment fee would also be due and payable in the event of an acceleration of the principal amount of the supplemental term loan due to an event of default.
The supplemental term loan is secured by all of our assets, excluding intellectual property and certain other assets. The supplemental term loan is subject to customary affirmative and restrictive covenants, including with respect to our ability to enter into fundamental transactions, incur additional indebtedness, grant liens, pay any dividend or make any distributions to stockholders, make investments and merge or consolidate with any other person or engage in transactions with affiliates, but is not subject to any financial covenants.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating activities
In 2020, cash used in operating activities was $71.2 million, attributable to a net loss of $65.7 million and a net change in our net operating assets and liabilities of $20.3 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $14.8 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $10.4 million in stock-based compensation, $1.9 million in depreciation and amortization, $1.5 million in amortization of right-of-use assets, $0.6 million in amortization of debt issuance costs, $0.3 million in accretion of discount on available-for-sale securities and $0.2 million of a loss due to the write down of fixed assets. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $17.1 million increase in inventory and $4.3 million increase in accounts receivable due to an increase in sales, a $0.5 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, a $0.3 million increase in other assets, a $1.4 million decrease in accounts payable and a $0.8 million decrease in lease liabilities. These changes were partially offset by a $4.0 million increase in accrued and other current liabilities resulting primarily from the expansion in our operating activities, leasehold improvements associated with our Santa Clara office and laboratory premises, accrued bonuses and commissions.
In 2019, cash used in operating activities was $48.1 million, attributable to a net loss of $51.1 million and a net change in our net operating assets and liabilities of $3.5 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $6.5 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $3.6 million in stock-based compensation, $1.3 million in depreciation and amortization, $0.9 million in amortization of right-of-use assets, $0.6 million in the change in fair value of our warrant liability, $0.4 million in amortization of debt issuance costs and $0.1 million of a loss due to the write down of fixed assets, partially offset by $0.5 million in accretion of discount on available-for-sale securities. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $6.8 million increase in inventory and $4.5 million increase in accounts receivable due to an increase in sales, a $0.8 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets and a $1.0 million decrease in lease liabilities. These changes were partially offset by a $9.6 million increase in accrued and other current liabilities and accounts payable resulting primarily from the expansion in our operating activities and accrued bonuses and commissions.
Investing activities
In 2020, cash used in investing activities was $107.5 million, attributable to the purchase of available-for-sale securities of $168.0 million and the purchase of property and equipment of $11.5 million, partially offset by proceeds from the maturity of available-for-sale investments of $72.0 million.
In 2019, cash used in investing activities was $59.5 million, attributable to the purchase of available-for-sale securities of $119.5 million and the purchase of property and equipment of $3.8 million, partially offset by proceeds from the maturity of available-for-sale investments of $63.8 million.
Financing activities
In 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $90.0 million, attributable to $83.4 million from the public offering of our common stock, $3.3 million from borrowings under the Amended Credit Facility, proceeds of $4.3 million from stock option exercise and proceeds of $1.8 million from issuance of shares under our employee stock purchase plan. These changes were offset by payment of taxes withheld on net settled vesting of restricted stock of $1.4 million, principal payments on our term loan of $1.1 million and payment of offering costs of $0.2 million.
In 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $208.1 million, attributable to net proceeds of $100.5 million received in the IPO in March 2019, net proceeds of $96.9 million from our follow-on offering in November 2019, net proceeds of $10.0 million from the concurrent Private Placement in March 2019, and proceeds of $2.2 million from stock option exercises and $0.1 million from warrant exercises. These changes were offset by payments on our term loan of $1.7 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
In December 2019, we entered into a lease for office and laboratory space in two buildings located in Santa Clara, California. The lease term for the first building began in December 2019 and the lease term for the second building will begin in September 2022. Operating lease obligations in the above table includes lease payments for both buildings.
(2)
Consists of our debt obligations under the Amended Credit Facility.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented, we did not have, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue recognition
We sell our products to hospitals, primarily through direct sales representatives, as well as through distributors in selected international markets. For products sold through direct sales representatives, control is transferred upon delivery to customers. For products sold to distributors internationally and certain customers that purchase stocking orders in the United States, control is transferred upon shipment or delivery to the customer’s named location, based on the contractual shipping terms. Additionally, a significant portion of our revenue is generated through a consignment model under which inventory is maintained at hospitals. For consignment inventory, control is transferred at the time the catheters are consumed in a procedure.
Under agreements with our customers, we may provide for the use of an IVL generator and connector cable at no charge to facilitate the use of our IVL catheters. These agreements do not contain contractually enforceable minimum commitments and are generally cancellable by either party with 30 days’ notice.
Accrued research and development costs
We accrue liabilities for estimated costs of R&D activities conducted by our third-party service providers, which include the conduct of preclinical and clinical studies. We record the estimated costs of R&D activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced, and include these costs in accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet and within R&D expense on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
We accrue for these costs based on factors, such as estimates of the work completed and budget provided and in accordance with agreements established with our third-party service providers. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued liabilities balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued liabilities. We have not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred since our inception.
Accounts receivable - allowance for doubtful accounts
We are exposed to credit losses through our receivables from customers. Our expected loss allowance methodology for receivables is developed using our historical collection experience, current and future economic market conditions and a review of the current aging status and financial condition of our customers. Specific allowance amounts are established to record the appropriate allowance for customers that have an identified risk of default. General allowance amounts are established based upon our assessment of expected credit losses for our receivables by aging category. Balances are written off when they are ultimately determined to be uncollectible. As of March 31, 2020, we considered the current and expected future economic and market conditions surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic and increased the overall reserve for credit losses by $0.2 million in response to an assessment of the evolving credit environment under the COVID-19 pandemic. We continued to monitor our customer collections and credit risk, however, no additional material changes to the allowance for doubtful accounts, subsequent to March 31, 2020, were recorded for the year-ended December 31, 2020. We will continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 pandemic and we may need to make further adjustments to this estimate in future periods.
Inventories - expiration and existence risk
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost, computed on a first-in, first-out basis, or net realizable value. We produce our IVL catheters at our facilities in Santa Clara, California. At the time of manufacture, our IVL catheters generally have a two-year shelf life prior to expiration. We maintain finished goods inventory at our facilities in California, with our sales representatives, with our third-party logistics provider in the Netherlands, and on consignment at hospital locations. Each reporting period, we update provisions for excess and obsolete inventory based on our estimates of forecast demand and, where applicable, product expiration. As of March 31, 2020, we considered the current and expected future economic and market conditions surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic and increased the provision for excess and obsolete inventory by $0.2 million in response to an assessment of the evolving market environment under the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 31, 2020, the substantial majority of our finished goods inventory had expiration dates in 2022 or later. We considered the current and expected future economic and market conditions surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, however, no additional material reserve, subsequent to March 31, 2020, was required for the year-ended December 31, 2020.We will continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 pandemic and we may need to make further adjustments to this estimate in future periods.
The existence of physical inventory is verified through ongoing cycle counts, periodic physical counts of inventory with our sales representatives and consigned at hospital locations, and full physical counts at the end of the year at our facilities in California and significant third-party locations. For significant locations not counted at the end of the year, we reserved for estimated inventory losses that have likely occurred since the last physical inventory date to cost of product revenue. Historically, such reserve due to physical inventory shrinkage has not been material.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing under Part II, Item 8 for a discussion of new accounting standards updates that may impact us.