ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially and adversely from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements. Please see the sections entitled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and "Risk Factors" above for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements.
Overview
SolarWinds is a leading provider of information technology, or IT, infrastructure management software. Our products give organizations worldwide, regardless of type, size or IT infrastructure complexity, the power to monitor and manage the performance of their IT environments, whether on-premises in the cloud, or in hybrid models. We combine powerful, scalable, affordable, easy to use products with a high-velocity, low-touch sales model to grow our business while also generating significant cash flow.
We offer a broad portfolio of infrastructure location-agnostic products to monitor and manage network, systems, desktop, application, storage, database, website infrastructures and IT service desks. We intend to continue to innovate and invest in areas of product development that bring new products to market and enhance the functionality, ease of use and integration of our current products. We believe this will strengthen the overall value proposition of our products in any IT environment.
Cyber Incident
On December 14, 2020, we announced that we had been the victim of a cyberattack on our Orion Software Platform and internal systems, or the “Cyber Incident.” Together with outside security professionals and other third parties, we are conducting investigations into the Cyber Incident which are on-going.
Our investigations to date revealed that as part of this attack, malicious code, or Sunburst, was injected into builds of our Orion Software Platform that we released between March 2020 and June 2020. If present and activated in a customer’s IT environment, Sunburst could potentially allow an attacker to compromise the server on which the Orion Software Platform was installed. We have not located Sunburst in any of our more than seventy non-Orion products and tools.
We released remediations for the versions of our Orion Software Platform known to be affected by Sunburst and have taken and continue to take extensive efforts to support and protect our customers. In addition, we shared our proprietary code with industry researchers to enable them to validate a “kill-switch” that is believed to have rendered Sunburst inert.
The Orion Software Platform is installed “on-premises” within customers’ IT environments, so we are unable to determine with specificity the number of customers that installed an affected version or that were compromised as a result of Sunburst. We believe the actual number of customers that could have installed an affected version of the Orion Software Platform to be fewer than 18,000. Based on our discussions with customers and our investigations into the nature and function of Sunburst and the tradecraft of the threat actor, we believe the number of organizations which were exploited by the threat actors through Sunburst to be substantially fewer than the number of customers that may have installed an affected version of the Orion Platform.
It has been widely reported that, due to its nature, sophistication and operational security, this “supply-chain” cyberattack was part of a broader nation-state level cyber operation designed to target public and private sector organizations. As of the date hereof, we have not independently attributed the Cyber Incident to any specific threat actor.
Through our investigations into the Cyber Incident, we hope to understand it better, apply our findings to further adapt and enhance our security measures across our systems and our software development and build environments and share our findings and adaptations with our customers, government officials and the technology industry more broadly to help them better understand and protect against these types of attacks in the future. We refer to these adaptations and enhancements as “Secure by Design.”
As described below, we have incurred and expect to incur significant costs related to the Cyber Incident. We are also party to lawsuits and the subject of governmental investigations related to the Cyber Incident. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors - Risks Related to the Cyber Incident and Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding these lawsuits and investigations.
Expenses
Through December 31, 2020, we recorded $3.5 million of pretax expenses related to the Cyber Incident. We have included $0.1 million of these expenses in cost of recurring revenue, $0.3 million in sales and marketing expense and $3.2 million in general and administrative expense in our consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. Expenses include costs to investigate and remediate the Cyber Incident, and legal and other professional services related thereto, and consulting services being provided to customers at no charge, all of which were expensed as incurred.
Litigation, Claims and Government Investigations
As a result of the Cyber Incident, we are subject to numerous lawsuits and investigations or inquiries as described in Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. While we will incur costs and other expenses associated with these proceedings and investigations, it is not possible to estimate the amount of any loss or range of possible loss that might result from adverse judgments, settlements, penalties or other resolutions of such proceedings and investigations based on the early stage thereof, the fact that alleged damages have not been specified, the uncertainty as to the certification of a class or classes and the size of any certified class, as applicable, and the lack of resolution on significant factual and legal issues. We will continue to evaluate information as it becomes known and will record an estimate for losses at the time or times when it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss is reasonably estimable.
Future Costs
We expect to incur significant legal and other professional services costs and expenses associated with the Cyber Incident in future periods. We expect to recognize these expenses as services are received. Costs related to the Cyber Incident that will be incurred in future periods will include increased expenses associated with ongoing and any new claims, investigations and inquiries, as well as increased expenses and capital investments related to our “Secure By Design” initiatives, increased customer support activities and other related matters. We expect to incur increased expenses for insurance, finance, compliance activities, and to meet increased legal and regulatory requirements. We are also providing, at our cost, free third-party support services to customers related to the Cyber Incident. Although the ultimate magnitude and timing of expenses or other impacts to our business or reputation related to the Cyber Incident are uncertain, they could be significant.
Insurance Coverage
We maintain $15 million of cybersecurity insurance coverage to limit our exposure to losses such as those related to the Cyber Incident. Although our policy contains standard exclusions, we expect that a significant portion of the incremental expenses related to the remediation of and response to the Cyber Incident will be covered by insurance. Insurance reimbursements will also be treated as adjusting items, and the timing of recognizing insurance reimbursements may differ from the timing of recognizing the associated expenses.
Impacts of COVID-19
The impact from the rapidly changing market and economic conditions due to the COVID-19 pandemic on our business is uncertain. We initially responded to the COVID-19 pandemic by executing our business continuity plan and transitioning nearly all of our workforce to a remote working environment to prioritize the safety of our personnel. Substantially all of our workforce is currently working remotely. Due to the nature of our business, at this time, we have seen an impact on our financial results, including a decline in license revenue and increase in loss provision for accounts receivable, but do not expect to experience a significant impact on our financial results due to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, we are unable to predict with a level of precision the longer term impact it may have on our business, results of operations and financial condition due to numerous uncertainties, including the duration of the pandemic, actions that may be taken by governmental authorities in response to the pandemic, its impact to the business of our customers and their end-customers and other factors identified in “Risk Factors” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to our business, consolidated results of operations and financial condition.
Potential Spin-Off of MSP Business
On August 6, 2020, we announced that our board of directors has authorized management to explore a potential spin-off of our MSP business into a newly created and separately traded public company, and on December 9, 2020, we announced that we confidentially submitted with the SEC a Form 10 registration statement with respect to the potential spin-off. If completed, the standalone entity would provide cloud-based software solutions for MSPs, enabling them to support digital transformation and growth within SMEs. SolarWinds would retain our Core IT Management business focused primarily on selling software and cloud-based services to corporate IT organizations. We believe that, if completed, the potential spin-off would allow each company to more effectively pursue its distinct operating priorities, strategies and capital allocation policies, while also
allowing stockholders to separately evaluate and value the companies based on their distinct markets, strategies and performance. If we proceed with the spin-off, it would be intended to be structured as a tax-free, pro-rata distribution to all SolarWinds stockholders as of a record date to be determined by the board of directors of SolarWinds. If completed, upon effectiveness of the transaction, SolarWinds stockholders would own shares of both companies. Completion of any spin-off would be subject to various conditions, including final approval of our board of directors, and there can be no assurance that the potential spin-off will be completed in the manner described above, or at all. If we proceed with the spin-off, we currently are targeting to complete the transaction in the second quarter of 2021.
We have incurred and expect to incur significant costs in connection with exploring the potential spin-off transaction of our MSP business into a newly created and separately traded public company. Spin-off exploration costs include legal, accounting and advisory fees, implementation and integration costs, duplicative costs for subscriptions and information technology systems, employee and contractor costs and other incremental separation costs related to the potential spin-off of the MSP business. The potential MSP spin-off transaction results in operating expenses that would not otherwise have been incurred by us in the normal course of our organic business operations. Spin-off exploration costs incurred were $12.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect to incur additional spin-off exploration costs in future periods.
Financial Highlights
Our approach, which we call the “SolarWinds Model,” is based on our commitment to building a business that is focused on growth and profitability. Below are our key financial highlights for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenue
Our total revenue was $1.02 billion and $932.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our non-GAAP total revenue, which excludes the impact of purchase accounting, was $1.02 billion and $938.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Recurring revenue, which consists of subscription and maintenance revenue, represented approximately 86% of our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 82% for the year ended December 31, 2019. We have increased our recurring revenue as a result of the growth in our subscription sales and the continued growth of our maintenance revenue.
Our Core IT Management products are targeted for ITOps, DevOps, and IT security Professionals and provide hybrid IT performance management with a deep visibility into applications, databases, IT infrastructures, and the full IT stack, while remaining infrastructure-location agnostic. Core IT Management product revenue was $716.8 million and $669.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our MSP products enable MSPs to deploy, manage, and secure technologies for their SME end customers, as well as and more efficiently manage their own businesses. MSP product revenue was $302.5 million and $263.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We use Subscription Annual Recurring Revenue, or Subscription ARR, and Total Annual Recurring Revenue, or Total ARR, to evaluate the results of our recurring revenue model. Subscription ARR represents the annualized recurring value of all active subscription contracts at the end of a reporting period. As of December 31, 2020, Subscription ARR was $435.1 million, up from $371.6 million as of December 31, 2019. Total ARR represents the sum of Subscription ARR and the annualized value of all maintenance contracts related to perpetual licenses active at the end of a reporting period. As of December 31, 2020, Total ARR was $959.7 million, up from $845.1 million as of December 31, 2019, reflecting an increase of 13.6%.
As of December 31, 2020, we had over 320,000 customers. We have a broad and diverse customer base that is not concentrated in any segment or vertical industry. We define customers as individuals or entities that have purchased one or more of our products under a unique customer identification number since our inception for our perpetual license products and individuals or entities that have an active subscription for at least one of our subscription products. Each unique customer identification number constitutes a separate customer regardless of the amount purchased. We may have multiple purchasers of our products within a single organization, each of which may be assigned a unique customer identification number and deemed a separate customer.
The SolarWinds Model allows us to both sell to a broad group of potential customers and close large transactions with significant customers. We increased our customer base by over 20,000 new customers in 2020 organically and through acquisitions. While some customers may spend as little as $100 with us over a twelve-month period, we had 1,057 customers who had spent more than $100,000 with us for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 897 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We expect that the continued growth in the use of public and private clouds, increased outsourcing of IT management services to MSPs and cross-selling of subscription products into our existing customer base could result in an increase in our
subscription revenue. We believe this increase, coupled with continued growth in maintenance revenue, could cause our recurring revenue to increase as a percentage of total revenue over time.
Our license revenue has declined as a percentage of total revenue primarily due to the higher growth of our recurring revenue and represented approximately 14% of our total revenue in 2020. We believe we have the potential to grow license revenue over time as we continue to invest in international sales growth, new product development and enhancements and increased productivity and efficiency of our sales and marketing operations.
Profitability
We have grown while maintaining high levels of operating efficiency. Our net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $158.5 million compared to $18.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net income for the period includes the impact of a discrete tax benefit of $138.2 million recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to an intra-group transfer of certain of our intellectual property rights. For additional discussion about our income taxes, see Note 15. Income Taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our Adjusted EBITDA was $489.7 million and $453.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash Flow
We have built our business to generate strong cash flow over the long term. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, cash flows from operations were $389.1 million and $299.9 million, respectively. During those periods, our cash flows from operations were reduced by cash payments for interest on our long-term debt of $67.2 million and $100.5 million, respectively and cash payments for income taxes of $54.6 million and $48.0 million, respectively.
Cyber Incident
The Cyber Incident is expected to negatively impact revenue, profitability and cash flows in 2021 and beyond. Certain of our customers have, and others may, defer renewals or cancel subscriptions which would have a negative impact on our revenue. In addition, we expect to incur significant expenses associated with the Cyber Incident in future periods, primarily related to legal proceedings and regulatory investigations, increased expenses and capital investments associated with our “Secure By Design” initiatives, increased customer support activities and other related matters, and increased costs and expenses for insurance, compliance activities, and to meet increased legal and regulatory requirements. See Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information related to the legal proceedings and governmental investigations related to the Cyber Incident. While we will incur costs and other expenses associated with these proceedings and investigations, it is not possible to estimate the amount of any loss or range of possible loss that might result from adverse judgments, settlements, penalties or other resolutions of such proceedings and investigations based on the early stage thereof, the fact that alleged damages have not been specified, the uncertainty as to the certification of a class or classes and the size of any certified class, as applicable, and the lack of resolution on significant factual and legal issues.
Acquisitions
SentryOne
In October 2020, we acquired SQL Sentry Holdings, LLC, or SentryOne, a leading technology provider of database performance monitoring and DataOps solutions for approximately $145.1 million. We funded the transaction with cash on hand. The SentryOne offering complements our existing on-premises and cloud-native database management offerings to serve the full needs of the mid-market and better serve larger organizations. The addition of the SentryOne products to the SolarWinds portfolio also amplifies the depth and breadth of support SolarWinds can offer for Microsoft and Microsoft Azure environments.
See Note 3. Acquisitions in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion of our acquisition of SentryOne.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue consists of recurring revenue and perpetual license revenue.
•Recurring Revenue. The significant majority of our revenue is recurring and consists of subscription and maintenance revenue.
•Subscription Revenue. We primarily derive subscription revenue from fees received for subscriptions to our SaaS offerings, and to a lesser extent, our time-based license arrangements. Subscription revenue includes sales of our MSP products as well as our cloud infrastructure, application performance management and IT service management, or ITSM products. We generally recognize revenue ratably over the subscription term once the service is made available to the customer or when we have the right to invoice for services performed. We generally invoice subscription agreements monthly based on usage or in advance over the subscription period on either a monthly or annual basis. Our subscription revenue grows as customers add new subscription products, upgrade the capacity level of their existing subscription products or increase the usage of their subscription products. Our revenue from MSP products increases with the addition of end customers served by our MSP customers, the proliferation of devices managed by those MSPs and the expansion of products used by those MSPs to manage end customers’ IT infrastructures.
•Maintenance Revenue. We derive maintenance revenue from the sale of maintenance services associated with our perpetual license products. Perpetual license customers pay for maintenance services based on the products they have purchased. We recognize maintenance revenue ratably on a daily basis over the contract period. Our maintenance revenue grows when we renew existing maintenance contracts and add new perpetual license customers, and as existing customers add new products. In addition, we typically implement annual price increases for our maintenance services. Customers typically renew their maintenance contracts at our standard list maintenance renewal pricing for their applicable products. We generally invoice maintenance contracts annually in advance.
•License Revenue. We derive license revenue from sales of perpetual licenses of our on-premises network, systems, storage and database management products to new and existing customers. We include one year of maintenance services as part of our customers’ initial license purchase. License revenue is recognized at a point in time upon delivery of the electronic license key. We allocate revenue to the license component based upon our estimated standalone selling prices, which is derived by evaluating our historical pricing and discounting practices in observable bundled transactions.
In April 2020, we launched subscription pricing options for certain of our network, systems and database management products that have historically been sold as perpetual licenses. The new on-premises subscription option gives customers additional flexibility when purchasing our products. The on-premises subscription offerings are time-based revenue arrangements recognized at a point in time upon delivery of the software and support is recognized ratably over the contract period. On-premises subscription offerings are recorded in subscription revenue in our consolidated statement of operations. We plan to continue to sell perpetual licenses for these products and not require customers to transition to a subscription pricing model. The subscription pricing option may impact the mix of license and recurring revenue, but this impact is difficult to predict at this time due to uncertainty regarding the level of customer adoption of the new subscription pricing options. We expect a gradual shift in the mix between license and recurring revenue in each quarter as new customers purchase these on-premises subscription offerings.
Cost of Revenue
•Cost of Recurring Revenue. Cost of recurring revenue consists of technical support personnel costs, royalty fees, public cloud infrastructure and hosting fees and an allocation of overhead costs for our subscription revenue and maintenance services. Allocated costs consist of certain facilities, depreciation, benefits and IT costs allocated based on headcount.
•Amortization of Acquired Technologies. Amortization of acquired technologies primarily consists of amortization related to capitalized costs of technologies acquired in connection with the take private transaction in 2016, or Take Private, and to a lesser extent, acquired technologies from our other acquisitions.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consists of sales and marketing, research and development and general and administrative expenses as well as amortization of acquired intangibles. Personnel costs are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, sales commissions, stock-based compensation and an allocation of overhead costs based on headcount. The total number of employees as of December 31, 2020 was 3,340, as compared to 3,251 as of December 31, 2019. Our stock-based compensation expense has increased due to equity awards granted to our employees and directors and
we intend to continue to grant equity awards which will result in additional stock-based compensation expense in future periods. In addition, our stock-based compensation expense increased during 2020 due to modifications to certain stock awards to amend award terms and eliminate performance vesting conditions applicable to such awards. Our travel costs declined in 2020 due to COVID-19 and we expect this to continue for the duration of the pandemic.
•Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of related personnel costs, including our sales, marketing and maintenance renewal and subscription retention teams. Sales and marketing expenses also includes the cost of digital marketing programs such as paid search, search engine optimization and management, website maintenance and design. We expect to continue to hire personnel globally to drive new sales and maintenance renewals.
•Research and Development. Research and development expenses primarily consist of related personnel costs. We expect to continue to grow our research and development organization, particularly internationally.
•General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel costs for our executive, finance, legal, human resources and other administrative personnel, general restructuring charges and other acquisition and spin-off exploration costs, professional fees and other general corporate expenses.
•Amortization of Acquired Intangibles. We amortize to operating expenses the capitalized costs of intangible assets acquired in connection with the Take Private and our other acquisitions.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) primarily consists of interest expense and gains (losses) resulting from changes in exchange rates on foreign currency denominated accounts. We expect interest expense to decrease as we repay indebtedness.
Foreign Currency
As a global company, we face exposure to adverse movements in foreign currency exchange rates. Fluctuations in foreign currencies impact the amount of total assets, liabilities, revenue, operating expenses and cash flows that we report for our foreign subsidiaries upon the translation of these amounts into U.S. dollars. See “