ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes. Our discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth in the Risk Factors, Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Business sections in this report. We use words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expects,” “intend,” “plan,” “will” and variations of these words and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements.
COVID-19 Considerations
We are subject to risks related to public health crises such as the global pandemic associated with COVID-19. Our Pharmaceutical Development segment has seen a reduction in its productivity as well as delays in receiving some of its needed supplies as a direct result of the pandemic and the impact on key vendors. This slow-down is likely to continue in the near term until such time as certain restrictions that have been imposed on us and our suppliers are lifted. Such events may result in business disruption and reduced revenues, any of which could materially affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Please refer to Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, for additional information on risk factors related to the pandemic or other risks that could impact our business and results of operations.
Overview
We have organized our operations into two segments: Finance Receivables and Pharmaceutical Development. These segments reflect the way we evaluate our business performance and manage our operations. Please refer to Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements, Notes 1 and 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding segment information.
Finance Receivables Segment
In our Finance Receivables segment, we evaluate and invest in a broad range of healthcare related companies and products with innovative intellectual property, including the biotechnology, medical device, medical diagnostics and related tools, animal health and pharmaceutical industries (together “life science”) by tailoring financial solutions to the needs of our business partners.
Our investment objective is to maximize our portfolio total return and thus increase our net income and book value by generating income from three sources: (1) primarily owning or financing through debt investments, royalties or revenue interests generated by the sales of life science products and related intellectual property, (2) receiving interest and other income by advancing capital in the form of secured debt to companies in the life science sector, and (3) to a lesser extent, realizing capital appreciation from equity-related investments in the life science sector.
We primarily provide capital in exchange for an interest in an existing revenue stream, which can take several forms, but is most commonly either a royalty derived from the sales of a life science product from the marketing efforts of a third party or from the marketing efforts of a partner company. Our structured debt investments may include warrants or other features, giving us the potential to realize enhanced returns on a portion of our portfolio.
Pharmaceutical Development Segment
On August 26, 2019, we commenced our Pharmaceutical Development segment with the acquisition of Enteris, which became our wholly-owned subsidiary. Enteris is a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company offering innovative formulation solutions built around its proprietary oral drug delivery technologies, the Peptelligence® platform. Since its founding in 2013, Enteris has advanced multiple internal and external programs leveraging Peptelligence®, which enables the oral delivery of molecules that are typically injected, including peptides and BCS Class II, III, and IV small molecules, in an enteric-coated tablet formulation.
Our strategy is to utilize the Peptelligence® platform to create a portfolio of milestone and royalty income, and thus increase our net income and book value, by out-licensing our technology in two ways. First, we intend to out-license our technology to pharmaceutical companies to create novel and important oral therapeutic treatments for a wide variety of indications. Second, we intend to out-license to pharmaceutical companies our internally developed reformulations of approved, off-patent injectable therapeutic treatments where Peptelligence® enables oral delivery, resulting in meaningful improvements for patients and caregivers. We also generate income by providing customers pharmaceutical development, formulation and manufacturing with the ultimate goal of generating new out-license agreements of our technology.
Finance Receivables Portfolio Overview
The table below provides an overview of our outstanding transactions as of, and for the year ended, December 31, 2020 (in thousands, except rate, share and per share data):
(1) Investment considered impaired.
(2) Investment on nonaccrual.
(3) Investment is currently in default.
(4) On August 21, 2020, the royalty purchase agreement was terminated in exchange for TRT common equity and a convertible note. The convertible feature is at the option of TRT. Please see Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements, Note 14 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for further details.
(5) In accordance with credit agreement, $2,500 was funded on February 19, 2020. Loan was repaid in October 2020.
(6) B&D is evaluating strategic alternatives for the business. The loan is currently in default.
(7) B&D retired the facility in April 2020 with its final scheduled payment.
(8) We executed an amendment on May 15, 2020, which consolidated first, second and third warrants, for a total of 550,977 shares at $0.39198 per share.
(9) We amended the facility to allow DxTerity to pay in-kind the interest payments due in October 2019, January 2020 and April 2020, subject to DxTerity raising additional subordinated capital, which DxTerity did not accomplish by the required date. This resulted in a default under the credit agreement. DxTerity paid the interest and principal payments due in July 2020, October 2020 and January 2021, and we are currently working with DxTerity to remedy the default.
(10) We executed an amendment on August 11, 2020 to increase the maximum principal amount of the term loan from $10,000 to $15,000. eTon may draw up to $8,000 upon reaching certain milestones outlined in the amendment; $2,000 was funded at closing.
(11) We executed an amendment on March 27, 2020, which extended the maturity date to November 2022.
Unless otherwise specified, our senior secured debt assets generally are repaid by a revenue interest that is charged on a company’s quarterly net sales and royalties.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, stock-based compensation, impairment of finance receivables and long-lived assets, impairment of goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, valuation of warrants and investments, contingent consideration, income taxes and contingencies and litigation, among others. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The accounting estimates and assumptions discussed in this section are those that we consider to be the most critical to an understanding of our consolidated financial statements because they inherently involve significant judgments and uncertainties. For a discussion of our significant accounting policies, refer to Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is reviewed for adequacy based on portfolio collateral values and credit quality indicators, including non-performing assets, evaluation of portfolio diversification and concentration as well as economic conditions to determine the need for a qualitative adjustment. We review our finance receivables periodically to determine the probability of loss, and record charge-offs after considering such factors as delinquencies, the financial condition of obligors, the value of underlying collateral, as well as third party credit enhancements such as guarantees.
The process of determining the level of the allowance for loan losses requires a high degree of judgment. Others given the same information could reach different reasonable conclusions.
Finance Receivables
Finance receivables are measured based upon the difference between the recorded investment in each receivable and either the present value of the expected future cash flows discounted at each receivable’s effective interest rate (the receivable’s contractual interest rate adjusted for any deferred fees, costs or discount / premium at the date of origination/acquisition) or if a receivable is collateral dependent, the collateral’s fair value. When impairment is determined to be probable, the measurement will be based on the fair value of the collateral. The determination of impairment involves management’s judgment and the use of market and third party estimates regarding collateral values. Valuations of impaired receivables and corresponding impairment affect the level of the reserve for credit losses.
Revenue Recognition
Finance Receivables Segment
The Company’s Finance Receivables segment records interest income on an accrual basis based on the effective interest rate method to the extent that we expect to collect such amounts. Incentive fees, if any, are recognized when earned at the end of the relevant performance period, pursuant to the underlying contract. Other administrative service revenues are recognized when contractual obligations are fulfilled or as services are provided.
Pharmaceutical Development Segment
The Company’s Pharmaceutical Development segment enters into collaboration and licensing agreements with strategic partners, under which it may exclusively license rights to research, develop, manufacture and commercialize its product candidates to third parties. The terms of these arrangements typically include payment to the Company of one or more of the following: non-refundable, upfront license fees; reimbursement of certain costs; customer option exercise fees; development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; and royalties on net sales of licensed products.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The fair value of our financial instruments reflects the amounts that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date (exit price).
Our financial instruments not required to be adjusted to fair value on a recurring basis consist principally of cash and restricted cash, accounts and finance receivable, accounts payable, and accrued expenses. We believe the carrying amount of cash and cash equivalents, accounts and finance receivable, accounts payable and accrued expenses approximate fair value due to their relatively short maturities.
Cost Method Investment
The Company holds an investment in TRT. The common stock of TRT does not have a readily determinable fair value and is measured at cost minus impairment, if any. Management regularly evaluates the recoverability of its investment in TRT based on TRT’s performance and financial position, including the status of its intellectual property and related intellectual property licensing agreements. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company evaluated the recoverability of its investment in TRT and determined there were no indicators of impairment.
Income Taxes
The recognition of certain net deferred tax assets of our reporting entities are dependent upon, but not limited to, the future profitability of the reporting entity, when the underlying temporary differences will reverse, and tax planning strategies. Further, management’s judgment regarding the use of estimates and projections is required in assessing our ability to realize the deferred tax assets relating to NOL carryforwards, as most of these assets are subject to limited carryforward periods.
The Company will continue to assess the need for a valuation allowance on the deferred tax assets by evaluating both positive and negative evidence that may exist at each reporting date. Any adjustments to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance is recorded in the statement of operations in the period it is determined an adjustment is required.
Please refer to Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, refer to Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Outlook
Finance Receivables Segment
We believe the income generated by our Finance Receivables segment’s current portfolio will be more than its operational expenses, and we expect to grow our book value going forward. We continue to evaluate multiple attractive opportunities that, if consummated, we believe would similarly generate additional income. We expect that the income generated by such future investments would be earned with minimal additional operational expenses.
Pharmaceutical Development Segment
We expect the Pharmaceutical Development segment’s income to offset its operational expenses. The segment’s income, however, is dependent up our third party licensee’s achieving the clinical and operational milestones pursuant to which we receive milestone payments under the license agreements from our licensees.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
We generated revenues of $36.7 and $30.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenues consisted primarily of $30.8 million of interest, fees and royalties earned on our finance receivables and $5.9 million from our Pharmaceutical Development segment. For the year ended December 31, 2019, revenues consisted primarily of $30.1 million of interest, fees and royalties earned on our finance receivables and $0.6 million received from our Pharmaceutical Development segment, which was acquired in the third quarter of 2019. The net $6.0 million increase in total revenues includes an $0.7 million increase in interest, fees and royalties earned on our finance receivables. The total increase in 2020 revenues also included $5.0 million of milestone revenue related to Enteris’ license agreement with Cara.
Provision for Credit Losses and Impairment Expense
We recognized impairment expense of $0.2 million on our debt securities during the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized credit loss provision expense of $0.6 million related to the Besivance® royalty, which was due to increases in sales chargebacks and various rebates (gross sales to net sales deductions) and lower sales volumes. We also recognized credit loss provision expense of $1.6 million on our Best ABT, Inc. (“Best”) royalty, which was due to reduced future sales expectations.
Please refer to Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Notes 3 and 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding the allowance for credit losses and impairments taken during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of unused line of credit and maintenance fees, as well as amortization of debt issuance costs on our revolving line of credit. Interest expense increased to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. In March and December of 2020, we drew $15.0 million and $12.0 million, respectively, on our revolving credit facility in order to support existing business partners and to finance future investment opportunities; this accounted for the $0.2 million increase in interest expense. The initial $15.0 million drawn in March 2020 was repaid by August 17, 2020. As of December 31, 2020 $11.8 million was outstanding on the line of credit, and $8.2 million was available for borrowing.
Pharmaceutical Manufacturing, Research and Development Expense
Pharmaceutical manufacturing, research and development expense totaling $4.3 million was incurred by our Pharmaceutical Development segment during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.2 million for the period following our acquisition of Enteris through December 31, 2019.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
The change in the fair value of the contingent consideration for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $4.4 million. The contingent consideration is the earnout related to the 2019 acquisition of Enteris and sharing of certain milestone and royalties due to Enteris pursuant to the License Agreement with Cara for oral formulation rights to Enteris’ Peptelligence® technology to develop and commercialize Oral KORSUVA™ in any indication worldwide, excluding South Korea and Japan (please refer to Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements, Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on contingent consideration and the acquisition of Enteris). The contingent consideration was remeasured to fair value throughout 2020. The carrying amount of the liability may fluctuate significantly, and actual amounts paid may be materially different from the estimated value of the liability.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased by $7.1 million due to the increase in property and equipment and intangible assets that were obtained in the acquisition of Enteris, which was acquired in the third quarter of 2019. Please refer to Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements, Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on the acquisition of Enteris.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation; stock-based compensation and related costs for management, staff and Board of Directors; legal, accounting and audit expenses; and corporate governance. General and administrative expenses increased to $10.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $7.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in general and administrative expense was primarily due to a $2.3 million increase in salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense, which included a $0.7 million increase in the performance-based bonus accrual; and a $1.0 million increase in general office, insurance and rent expense. The overall increase in general and administrative expense was primarily due to the addition of Enteris, which was acquired in the third quarter of 2019, along with our 2020 uplisting to the Nasdaq Stock Market.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflected a $0.6 million net fair market value loss on our warrant derivatives, a $0.1 million gain realized related to our warrant in prior borrower Cheetah Medical, Inc. and the release of certain acquisition-related cash proceeds from escrow, and a $0.6 million net fair market value loss on our Misonix common stock.
Other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2019 reflected a net fair market value gain of $0.4 million on our warrant derivatives and a $0.2 million gain realized upon exercising the warrant related to our Cheetah Medical, Inc. investment and a $1.6 million net fair market value gain on our Misonix common stock. The $1.6 million gain on our Misonix common stock resulted from the exchange of our Solsys equity interests, which were obtained upon exercising our Solsys warrants and preemptive right to protect against dilution of our Solsys warrants, into Misonix shares pursuant to the terms of the acquisition agreement.
Income Tax Benefit
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our cumulative gross deferred tax asset was $67.8 million and $82.3 million, respectively. Based on historical and expected future operating performance, we concluded that it was more likely than not that we will not be able to realize the full benefit of the U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets in the future. The valuation allowance against deferred tax assets was $37.5 million and $51.7 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We believe it is more likely than not that we will realize approximately $27.5 million of benefit from the U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets in the future.
	As of December 31, 2020, we had NOLs for federal income tax purposes of $289.4 million. The federal NOL carryforwards, if not offset against future income, will expire by 2037, with approximately half expiring by December 2021. Approximately $4.0 million of the $289.4 million can be carried forward indefinitely. We also had federal research credit carryforwards of $3.0 million. The federal research credits will expire by 2039, with the majority of such credits expiring by 2029.	
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $3.0 million in cash and cash equivalents, compared to $11.2 million in cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2019. The primary driver of the net decrease in our cash balance was $42.7 million, net of origination costs and fees, of new and add-on investment funding; $18.1 million of accounts payable, which included $3.9 million of capital expenditures to upgrade the Enteris facility, benefits and payroll expense; and $2.0 million to repurchase shares of our common stock in the open market. The net decrease was offset by $43.6 million of interest, fees, and principal payments generated by our finance receivables, which included $4.4 million received from the payoff of one term loan; a net $4.4 million of payments generated by our Pharmaceutical Development segment; and $11.8 million of net borrowings under our revolving credit facility. As of December 31, 2020, we had $8.2 million of availability on our revolving credit facility. As of March 31, 2021, current capital, combined with expected cash flows from operations, will be sufficient to meet the company’s operating requirements for at least the next 12 months.
Primary Driver of Cash Flow
Our ability to generate cash in the future depends primarily upon our success in implementing our Finance Receivable segment business model of generating income by providing capital to a broad range of life science companies, institutions and inventors, as well as the success of our Pharmaceutical Development segment. We generate income primarily from four sources:
1. Primarily owning or financing through debt investments, royalties generated by the sales of life science products and related intellectual property;
2. Receiving interest and other income by advancing capital in the form of secured debt to companies in the life science sector;
3. Pharmaceutical development, manufacturing, and licensing activities utilizing the Peptelligence® platform; and
4. To a lesser extent, realizing capital appreciation from equity-related investments in the life science sector.
As of December 31, 2020, our finance receivables portfolio contains $204.5 million of finance receivables, $1.5 million of marketable investments and $3.5 million of convertible notes receivable. We expect these assets to generate positive cash flows in 2021. However, we continuously monitor the short and long-term financial position of our finance receivables portfolio. In addition, the majority of our finance receivables portfolio are debt instruments that carry floating interest rates with a LIBOR-based interest rate floor. Changes in interest rates, including the levels of LIBOR rates or the replacement of LIBOR with another reference rate, may affect the interest income for debt instruments with floating rates. We believe we are well positioned to benefit should market interest rates rise in the future.
We continue to evaluate multiple attractive opportunities that, if consummated, we believe would similarly generate additional income. Since the timing of any investment is difficult to predict, our Finance Receivables segment may not be able to generate positive cash flow above what our existing assets are expected to produce in 2021. We do not assume any near-term repayments from borrowers, and as a result, no assurances can be given that actual results would not differ materially from the statement above.
As of December 31, 2020, our Pharmaceutical Development segment did not have a significant impact on our cash flow. We expect the Pharmaceutical Development segment to generate positive cash flow above its expenses from proceeds received under its license agreements and customer relationships; however, the timing of the receipt of payments under the license agreements is uncertain and dependent upon the success of our technology licensees’ pharmaceutical development candidates. Also, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in disruption and delays to pharmaceutical clinical trials in general and may impact the expected timing of our technology licensees’ ability to achieve milestones upon which we receive income pursuant to our license agreements.
We entered into a $20.0 million revolving credit facility in June 2018. As of December 31, 2020, $11.8 million was outstanding under the credit facility, and $8.2 million was available for borrowing. As of March 25, 2021, the Company drew an additional $9.0 million under the credit facility, incurred and paid $0.1 million of interest and fees and made principal payments of $11.2 million. As of March 25, 2021, $10.3 million was available for borrowing. Our credit facility matures on June 30, 2021. We are exploring options with respect to a new credit facility.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of operations, we engage in a variety of financial transactions that, in accordance with GAAP, are not recorded in our consolidated financial statements. These transactions involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit, interest rate, and liquidity risk. Such transactions are used primarily to manage partner companies’ requests for funding and take the form of loan commitments and lines of credit.
The contractual amounts of commitments to extend credit represent the amounts of potential accounting loss should the contract be fully drawn upon, the partner company defaults, and the value of any existing collateral becomes worthless. We use the same credit policies in making commitments and conditional obligations as we do for on-balance sheet instruments. Please refer to Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements, Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any unfunded commitments. Please refer to Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements, Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding the Company’s commitments and contingencies.