Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We are a diversified industrial manufacturer with leading positions in a variety of products and services that are used in diverse commercial and industrial markets. We have seven operating segments that aggregate to five reportable segments. Please refer to Item 1. Business, above, for additional information regarding our segment structure and management strategy.
It is our objective to grow larger and more profitable business units through both organic initiatives and acquisitions. We seek to identify and implement organic growth initiatives such as new product development, geographic expansion, and the introduction of products and technologies into new markets, key accounts and strategic sales channel partners. Also, we have a long-term objective to create sizable business platforms by adding strategically aligned or “bolt on” acquisitions to strengthen the individual businesses, create both sales and cost synergies with our core business platforms, and accelerate their growth and margin improvement. We look to create both sales and cost synergies within our core business platforms, accelerate growth and improve margins. We have a particular focus on identifying and investing in opportunities that complement our products and will increase the global presence and capabilities of our businesses. From time to time, we have divested, and likely will continue to divest, businesses that we feel are not strategic or do not meet our growth and return expectations.
As part of our ongoing strategy:
o
In the third quarter of fiscal year 2021, we divested Enginetics Corporation (“Enginetics”) our jet engine components business reported within our Engineering Technologies segment, to Enjet Aero, LLC, a privately held aerospace engine component manufacturing company. This divestiture allows us to focus on the higher growth and margin opportunities of our core spin forming solutions business that serves the space, commercial aviation and defense end markets. We received $11.7 million cash consideration and recorded a pre-tax loss on the sale of $14.6 million in the Consolidated Financial Statements including a goodwill impairment charge of $7.6 million, assigned to the entirety of the Engineering Technologies segment, and a $5.4 million write-down of intangible assets.
o
During the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, we acquired Renco Electronics, a designer and manufacturer of customized standard magnetics components and products including transformers, inductors, chokes and coils for power and RF applications. Renco’s end markets and customer base in areas such as consumer and industrial applications are highly complementary to our existing business with the potential to further expand key account relationships and capitalize on cross selling opportunities between the two companies. Renco operates one manufacturing facility in Florida and is supported by contract manufacturers in Asia. Renco’s results are reported within our Electronics segment beginning in fiscal year 2021.
o
During the third quarter of fiscal year 2020, we initiated a program and signed an agreement to divest our Master-Bilt and NorLake businesses (together our Refrigerated Solutions Group or RSG). This divestiture allowed us to continue the simplification of our portfolio and enabled us to focus more clearly on those of our businesses that sell differentiated products and which have higher growth and margin profiles. The divestiture was finalized and consideration was exchanged in the fourth quarter of 2020. Results of RSG in current and prior periods have been classified as discontinued operations in the Consolidated Financial Statements. The divestiture impacts the consolidated company results as follows:
o
During the first quarter of 2019, we decided to divest our Cooking Solutions Group, which consisted of three operating segments, Associated American Industries, BKI, and Ultrafryer, along with a minority interest investment. We completed this divestiture during the third quarter of 2019 and received proceeds for the sale on the first day of the fourth quarter of 2019. In connection with the divestiture efforts, we also sold our minority interest in a European oven manufacturer back to the majority owners. Results of the Cooking Solutions Group in current and prior periods have been classified as discontinued operations in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
o
In the fourth quarter of 2019, we acquired Ohio-based Genius Solutions Engineering Company (d/b/a GS Engineering), a provider of specialized “soft surface” skin texturized tooling, primarily serving the automotive end market. GS Engineering brought us critical proprietary technologies that offer significant advantages in creating tools for “soft surface” components which are used increasingly in vehicle interiors. The tooling for soft surface products offered by GS is highly complementary to our industry-leading capabilities in texturing molds and tools used to create “hard surface” components. This technology also complements and enabled us to improve our existing nickel shell technology that produces soft surface tooling. GS operates one facility in Ohio and its results are reported within our Engraving segment.
o
In September 2018, fiscal year 2019, we acquired New Hampshire-based Regional Mfg. Specialists, Inc. (now a part of Standex Electronics Magnetics, Inc and operated under the name Agile Magnetics), a provider of high-reliability magnetics. The addition of Agile Magnetics is an important step forward in building out the high reliability magnetics business of Standex Electronics. As a result of this combination, we have broadened our exposure to several attractive end-markets and added a valuable manufacturing and sales base in the northeast. Additionally, we can now offer complementary products from Standex’s broader portfolio to Agile’s customer base. Agile Magnetics products include transformers, inductors and coils for mission critical applications for blue chip OEMs in the semiconductor, military, aerospace, healthcare, and industrial markets. Agile operates one manufacturing facility in New Hampshire and its results are reported within our Electronics segment.
o
In August 2018, fiscal year 2019, we acquired Michigan-based Tenibac-Graphion, Inc., a provider of chemical and laser texturing services. The combination of Tenibac and Standex Engraving expanded services available to customers, increased responsiveness to customer demands, and drove innovative approaches to solving customer needs. The combined customer base now has access to the full line of mold and tool services, such as the Architecture design consultancy, chemical and laser engraving, tool finishing, and tool enhancements. Tenibac serves automotive, packaging, medical and consumer products customers, and operates three facilities, two in Michigan and one in China. The Tenibac results are reported within our Engraving segment.
As a result of these portfolio moves, we have transformed Standex to a company with a more focused group of businesses selling customized solutions to high value end markets via a compelling customer value proposition. The narrowing of the portfolio allows for greater management focus on driving operational disciplines and positions us well to benefit from an economic rebound associated with the end of the COVID-19 crisis and to use our cash flow from operations to invest selectively in our ongoing pipeline of organic and inorganic opportunities.
We develop “Customer Intimacy” by utilizing the Standex Growth Disciplines to partner with our customers in order to develop and deliver custom solutions. By partnering with our customers during long-term product development cycles, we become an extension of their development teams. Through this Partner, Solve, Deliver® approach, we are able to secure our position as a preferred long-term solution provider for our products and components. This strategy results in increased sales and operating margins that enhance shareholder returns.
Standex Operational Excellence drives continuous improvement in the efficiency of our businesses, both on the shop floor and in the office environment. We recognize that our businesses are competing in a global economy that requires us to improve our competitive position. We have deployed a number of management competencies to drive improvements in the cost structure of our business units including operational excellence through lean enterprise, the use of low cost manufacturing facilities, the consolidation of manufacturing facilities to achieve economies of scale and leveraging of fixed infrastructure costs, alternate sourcing to achieve procurement cost reductions, and capital improvements to increase productivity.
The Company’s strong historical cash flow has been a cornerstone for funding our capital allocation strategy. We use cash flow generated from operations to fund investments in capital assets to upgrade our facilities, improve productivity and lower costs, invest in the strategic growth programs described above, including organic growth and acquisitions, and to return cash to our shareholders through payment of dividends and stock buybacks.
Restructuring expenses reflect costs associated with the Company’s efforts of continuously improving operational efficiency and expanding globally in order to remain competitive in our end-user markets. We incur costs for actions to size our businesses to a level appropriate for current economic conditions, improve our cost structure, enhance our competitive position and increase operating margins. Such expenses include costs for moving facilities to locations that allow for lower fixed and variable costs, external consultants who provide additional expertise starting up plants after relocation, downsizing operations because of changing economic conditions, and other costs resulting from asset redeployment decisions. Shutdown costs include severance, benefits, stay bonuses, lease and contract terminations, asset write-downs, costs of moving fixed assets, and moving and relocation costs. Vacant facility costs include maintenance, utilities, property taxes and other costs.
Because of the diversity of the Company’s businesses, end user markets and geographic locations, management does not use specific external indices to predict the future performance of the Company, other than general information about broad macroeconomic trends. Each of our individual business units serves niche markets and attempts to identify trends other than general business and economic conditions which are specific to its business and which could impact their performance. Those units report pertinent information to senior management, which uses it to the extent relevant to assess the future performance of the Company. A description of any such material trends is described below in the applicable segment analysis.
We monitor a number of key performance indicators (“KPIs”) including net sales, income from operations, backlog, effective income tax rate, gross profit margin, and operating cash flow. A discussion of these KPIs is included below. We may also supplement the discussion of these KPIs by identifying the impact of foreign exchange rates, acquisitions, and other significant items when they have a material impact on a specific KPI.
We believe the discussion of these items provides enhanced information to investors by disclosing their impact on the overall trend which provides a clearer comparative view of the KPI, as applicable. For discussion of the impact of foreign exchange rates on KPIs, the Company calculates the impact as the difference between the current period KPI calculated at the current period exchange rate as compared to the KPI calculated at the historical exchange rate for the prior period. For discussion of the impact of acquisitions, we isolate the effect on the KPI amount that would have existed regardless of our acquisition. Sales resulting from synergies between the acquisition and existing operations of the Company are considered organic growth for the purposes of our discussion.
Unless otherwise noted, references to years are to fiscal years.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on the Company
Given the global nature of our business and the number of our facilities worldwide, we continue to be impacted globally by COVID-19 related issues. We have taken effective action around the world to protect our health and safety, continue to serve our customers, support our communities and manage our cash flows. Our priority was and remains the health and safety of all of our employees. Each of our facilities is following safe practices as defined in their local jurisdictions as well as sharing experiences and innovative ways of overcoming challenges brought on by the crisis during updates with global site leaders. We are rigorously following health protocols in our plants, including changing work cell configurations and revising shift schedules when appropriate, in order to do our best to maintain operations. During the end of fiscal year 2020 and the beginning of fiscal year 2021, we experienced revenue losses in many of our businesses due to the impact that the pandemic has had on our customers. Conversely, public and private sector responses to COVID-19 vaccine distribution, especially in the United States, have also resulted in increased sales of scientific refrigeration equipment to customers within our Scientific reporting segment.
Given the impact that the pandemic created on our backlog and incoming order rate, we took immediate actions in the end of fiscal year 2020 to identify and implement cost savings and restructuring actions within each of our operating units as well as our corporate headquarters. Actions identified included reducing outside discretionary spend, the natural elimination of travel and trade show expenses that were a result of COVID-19 related curtailments, implementation of rolling furloughs in several businesses where appropriate, and the elimination of certain salaried and hourly positions. The costs, including restructuring charges, for many of these items occurred in our fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020.
We exited the fourth quarter of 2021 with $136.4 million in cash and $200.0 million of borrowings under our revolving credit facility. Our leverage ratio covenant, as defined in our revolving credit agreement, was 1.31 to 1 and allowed us the capacity to borrow an additional $245.2 million at June 30, 2021. We believe that we have sufficient liquidity around the world and access to financing to execute on our short and long-term strategic plans.
Finally, we continue to monitor our ability to participate in any governmental assistance programs available to us in each of our global locations and participate in these programs as available and appropriate. For instance, the Company's required contributions to the United States funded pension plan for the second half of fiscal year 2021 of approximately $1.7 million was reduced to zero upon passage of the American Rescue Plan Act (the "Act"). The required contributions to the United States funded pension plan for fiscal year 2022 is approximately $1.0 million.
Consolidated Results from Continuing Operations (in thousands):
Net sales increased for fiscal year 2021 by $51.7 million or 8.6% when compared to the prior year end. The acquisition of Renco contributed $25.6 million or 4.2% to overall sales growth. Organic sales increased $15.3 million or 2.5% primarily as a result of impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic economic recovery, and foreign currency had a $14.5 million or 2.4% positive impact on sales. These increases were offset by a $3.6 million impact on sales due to the divestiture of Enginetics in the third quarter of fiscal year 2021.We discuss our results and outlook for each segment below.
Net sales for the fiscal year 2020 decreased by $35.4 million, or 5.5%, when compared to the prior year. Incremental sales from our acquisitions accounted for $11.6 million or 1.8% of the increase, while organic sales accounted for a decrease of $40.9 million or 6.4%. Changes in foreign exchange rates contributed to sales declines of $6.1 million or 1.0%. The organic sales decrease occurred in all of our segments and was primarily a result of both direct and indirect impacts of the pandemic driven economic slowdown.
Gross Profit
Gross profit in fiscal year 2021 increased to $241.3 million, or a gross margin of 36.8% as compared to $215.5 million, or a gross margin of 35.6% in fiscal year 2020. This increase is a result of organic sales increases, productivity initiatives and targeted prices increases, offset by raw material and ocean freight cost headwinds, along with business mix.
Gross profit in fiscal year 2020 declined to $215.5 million, or a gross margin of 35.6% as compared to $234.7 million, or a gross margin of 36.7% in fiscal year 2019 primarily due to the pandemic related organic sales decline during the second half of the year.
Restructuring Charges
During fiscal year 2021, we incurred restructuring expenses of $3.5 million, primarily related to productivity improvements, facility rationalization activities, and global headcount reductions within our Engraving and Specialty Solutions segments.
During fiscal year 2020, we incurred restructuring expenses of $4.7 million primarily related to restructuring efforts that were intended to improve profitability, streamline production and reduce our cost base to a level commensurate with a post-pandemic operating environment. These efforts included approximately $1.1 million related to the announced closure of a Specialty Solutions pump rotor production facility in Ireland.
Acquisition Related Expenses
We incurred acquisition-related expenses of $0.9 million in fiscal year 2021. Acquisition-related expenses typically consist of due diligence, integration, and valuation expenses incurred in connection with recent or pending acquisitions.
Acquisition related expenses in fiscal year 2020 were $1.8 million. These expenses were comprised primarily of $1.2 million for deferred compensation payments earned by the Horizon Scientific seller during the year. Because these payments were contingent on the seller remaining an employee of the Company, they are treated as compensation expense. We made the third and final scheduled payment to the seller during the first quarter of fiscal year 2020 and this arrangement was settled.
Loss on Sale of Business
We recorded a pre-tax loss on sale of the Enginetics business of $14.6 million for fiscal year 2021. The loss included a $7.6 million impairment of goodwill assigned to the entirety of the Engineering Technologies segment and a $5.4 million write-down of intangible assets.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses, (“SG&A”) for the fiscal year 2021 were $163.1 million, or 24.8% of sales compared to $148.5 million, or 24.6% of sales during the prior year. SG&A expenses during this period were impacted by approximately $4.8 million of SG&A expenses related to the Renco acquisition, increased distribution expenses of $2.0 million as a result of increased organic sales, an increase in research and development spending to drive future product initiatives, and general wage inflation, offset by productivity and cost out actions.
SG&A for the fiscal year 2020 were $148.5 million, or 24.6% of sales compared to $150.3 million, or 23.5% of sales during the prior year. SG&A expenses were impacted by on-going expenses related to our recent acquisitions of $1.7 million offset by a decrease in variable distribution and selling expenses primarily as a result of organic sales declines.
Income from Operations
Income from operations for the fiscal year 2021 was $59.2 million, compared to $60.5 million during the prior year. The $1.4 million decrease, or 2.3% is primarily due to the loss on sale of the Enginetics business of $14.6 million along with material inflation, partially offset by income from organic sales increases and pricing actions, along with cost reduction activities and productivity improvement initiatives implemented in all of our businesses.
Income from operations for the fiscal year 2020 was $60.5 million, compared to $79.5 million during the prior year. The $19.0 million decrease, or 23.8%, was primarily due to the impact of volume related losses triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic along with material inflation, partially offset by cost reduction activities and productivity improvement initiatives implemented in all of our businesses.
Discussion of the performance of each of our reportable segments is fully explained in the segment analysis that follows.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the fiscal year 2021 was $6.0 million, a decrease of $1.5 million as compared to the prior year, due to lower borrowings outstanding.
Interest expense for the fiscal year 2020 was $7.5 million, a decrease of $3.3 million as compared to the prior year. Decreased interest expense was a result of lower borrowings and a lower effective interest rate.
Income Taxes
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted to address the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. Among other things, the CARES Act allows a five-year carryback period for tax losses generated in 2019 through 2021. The June 30, 2021 tax provision includes benefits of $0.2 million and $0.8 million from tax losses in the years ended June 30, 2019 and June 30, 2020, respectively, that the CARES Act allows to be carried back to the years ended June 30, 2014 and June 30, 2015, when the U.S. federal income tax rate was 35%.
The Company's income tax provision from continuing operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was $14.2 million, or an effective rate of 26.9% compared to $13.1 million, or an effective rate of 24.2% for the year ended June 30, 2020, and $18.7 million, or an effective rate of 27.9% for the year ended June 30, 2019. Changes in the effective tax rates from period to period may be significant as they depend on many factors including, but not limited to, the amount of the Company's income or loss, the mix of income earned in the US versus outside the US, the effective tax rate in each of the countries in which we earn income, and any one-time tax issues which occur during the period.
The Company's income tax provision from continuing operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was impacted by the following items: (i) a tax provision of $5.1 million due to the mix of income in various jurisdictions, (ii) a tax benefit of $1.0 million from our 2019 and 2020 tax losses that the CARES Act allows to be carried back to 2014 and 2015, when the U.S. federal income tax rate was 35%, (iii) a tax benefit of $0.8 million related to Federal R&D credit and Foreign Tax Credit, (iv) a tax benefit of $1.7 million related to return-to-accrual adjustments to true-up up prior-period provision amounts, and (v) the tax expense of $1.2 million attributable to the divestiture of the Enginetics Corporation during the year.
The Company's income tax provision from continuing operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 was impacted by the following items: (i) a tax benefit of $1.2 million related to the Federal R&D credit, (ii) a tax provision of $1.4 million due to the mix of income in various jurisdictions, (iii) a tax benefit of $0.7 million related to the release of uncertain tax provision reserves, and (iv) a tax provision of $0.8 million related to GILTI.
The Company's income tax provision from continuing operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019 was impacted by the following items: (i) a tax benefit related to the impact of the Sec. 965 toll tax of $0.8 million, (ii) a tax provision of $0.3 million related to the elimination of the performance based compensation exception for executive compensation under Sec. 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code, and (iii) a tax provision related to expected foreign withholding taxes on cash repatriation of $2.1 million.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital spending is focused on growth initiatives, cost reduction activities, and upgrades to extend the capabilities of our capital assets. In general, we anticipate our capital expenditures over the long-term will be approximately 3% to 4% of net sales.
During fiscal year 2021, capital expenditures increased to $21.4 million or 3.3% of net sales, as compared to $19.3 million, or 3.2%, of net sales in the prior year. At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in fiscal year 2020, we reduced our capital expenditures to only necessary maintenance, safety and the highest priority growth initiatives. As the global economic recovery began to take shape in fiscal year 2021, we increased our investments in machinery and equipment for those opportunities that will provide future growth and increased productivity, primarily in our Electronics and Engraving segments. Additionally, in fiscal year 2021, $2.2 million of capital expenditures was spent for construction underway to build a new Electronics facility in Germany to replace a legacy facility sold in fiscal year 2019. We expect 2022 capital spending to be between $25 million and $30 million.
Backlog
Backlog includes all active or open orders for goods and services. Backlog also includes any future deliveries based on executed customer contracts, so long as such deliveries are based on agreed upon delivery schedules. Backlog orders are not necessarily an indicator of future sales levels because of variations in lead times and customer production demand pull systems, with the exception of Engineering Technologies. Customers may delay delivery of products or cancel orders prior to shipment, subject to possible cancellation penalties. Due to the nature of long-term agreements in the Engineering Technologies segment, the timing of orders and delivery dates can vary considerably resulting in significant backlog changes from one period to another. In general, the majority of net realizable backlog beyond one year comes from the Engineering Technologies segment.
Backlog orders in place at June 30, 2021 and 2020 are as follows (in thousands):
Total backlog realizable within one year increased $58.2 million, or 38.2% to $210.5 million at June 30, 2021 from $152.3 million at June 30, 2020. We experienced 76% increase in backlog at Scientific due to increased demand for cold storage products in connection with the COVID-19 vaccine rollout. Electronics backlog increased 111% due to demand in all geographic markets in response to the beginning of the global recovery from the pandemic, new business opportunities and the acquisition of Renco. Backlog declines in the Engineering Technologies segment are primarily due to the divestiture of Enginetics.
Changes in backlog under 1 year are as follows (in thousands):
Segment Analysis (in thousands)
Overall
Looking forward to fiscal year 2022, we expect to be well-positioned to build on fiscal year 2021 momentum, with anticipated continued improvement in key financial metrics, supported by orders growth and productivity initiatives.
In general, for fiscal year 2022, we expect:
●
continued end market strength in reed switch and relay products as well as growth in magnetics in our Electronics segment;
●
an increase in soft trim demand in our Engraving segment;
● a decline in demand for COVID-19 related vaccine storage in our Scientific segment;
●
continued strength in the commercial aviation market and growth in the space market in our Engineering Technologies segment; and
●
recovery in the food service market in our Specialty Solutions segment.
Electronics
Net sales in fiscal year 2021 increased $68.1 million, or 36.7%, when compared to the prior year as organic sales increased $35.9 million, or 3.6%. The Renco Electronics acquisition added $25.6 million or 13.8%. The foreign currency impacted increased sales by $6.6 million, or 6.5%. Organic sales growth was positive in all geographic areas as well as the product groups of magnetics, sensors and switching technologies supported by the rebound from the COVID-19 pandemic impact.
Income from operations in the fiscal year 2021 increased $16.9 million, or 56.6%, when compared to the prior year. The operating income increase was the result of organic sales growth, product line mix, various cost savings initiatives, and the impact of the Renco acquisition, offset by inflationary material cost increases and $0.6 million of purchase accounting expenses.
Looking forward to the first quarter of fiscal year 2022, we expect slight revenue growth and moderate operating margin improvement compared to the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021, reflecting continued end market strength.
Net sales in fiscal year 2020 decreased 18.8 million, or 9.2%, when compared to the prior year. Sales were slightly down in North America while down significantly in Europe and Asia. New sensor, switch and relay applications continued to offset some of the core business loss due to economic conditions and COVID-19 impact. The incremental sales impact of the Agile Magnetics acquisition, which was acquired in September of fiscal year 2019, was $3.1 million during the year and foreign exchange rates unfavorably affected sales by $1.6 million or 0.8%.
Income from operations in the fiscal year 2020 decreased $11.5 million, or 27.8% when compared to the prior year. The operating income decline was due to the margin loss on the lower organic sales, inflationary cost increases, particularly rhodium costs, and incremental costs related to the COVID-19 environment, which more than offset cost saving initiatives implemented throughout the year.
Engraving
Net sales in fiscal year 2021 increased by $3.3 million or 2.3% compared to the prior year. Favorable foreign exchange impacts of $6.6 million, or 4.6%, for the period were offset by organic sales declines of $3.3 million, or 2.3%, as a result of the regional timing of automotive projects.
Income from operations in fiscal year 2021 increased by $2.0 million, or 9.8%, when compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily a result of cost savings initiatives partially offset by organic sales declines for the year.
Looking forward to the first quarter of fiscal year 2022, we expect slight to moderate revenue and operating margin declines from the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021 reflecting the timing of projects and regional mix.
Net sales in fiscal year 2020 decreased by $6.0 million or 4.0% compared to the prior year. The effect of acquisitions generated $8.5 million or 5.7% of additional sales for fiscal year 2020 which were partially offset by foreign exchange declines of $3.6 million for the year. Organic sales declines of $10.9 million, or 7.3%, were a result of the timing of automotive projects, slower incoming workloads as a result of pandemic related delays, and the closure of unprofitable sites as part of our announced restructuring.
Income from operations in fiscal year 2020 decreased by $3.5 million, or 14.6%, when compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily a result of organic sales declines for the year.
Scientific
Net sales in fiscal year 2021 increased by $21.9 million, or 38.1% when compared to the prior year. The net sales increase reflects overall growth in end markets including pharmaceutical channels, clinical laboratories, and academic institutions, primarily in response to customer needs for cold storage surrounding COVID-19 vaccine distribution.
Income from operations in fiscal year 2021 increased by $4.5 million, or 32.8%, reflecting revenue growth, partially offset by reinvestments in the business for future growth opportunities and increased freight costs.
Looking forward to the first quarter of fiscal year 2022, we expect a moderate sequential decrease in revenue and a slight operating margin decline from the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021, reflecting lower demand for COVID-19 vaccine related storage and increased freight costs partially offset by pricing actions.
Net sales in fiscal year 2020 remained relatively flat compared to the prior year. We experienced decreased sales volume in our clinical laboratories, physicians' offices, hospitals and academic laboratories markets, primarily due to impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and the economic downturn. This was largely offset by sales in the pharmaceutical market.
Income from operations in fiscal year 2020 increased $0.1 million or 0.5% when compared to the prior year as modest sales declines were overcome with cost controls of labor and discretionary spending as well as stronger sales in our pharmaceutical market.
Engineering Technologies
Net sales in fiscal year 2021 decreased $28.5 million or 27.4% when compared to the prior year. Sales distribution by market in 2021 was as follows: 40% space, 26% aviation, 19% defense, 7% energy, and 8% other markets. The decline was primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 on the commercial aviation segment, especially engine parts manufacturing, along with the divestiture of our Enginetics business.
Income from operations in fiscal year 2021 decreased $7.9 million or 56.1% when compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to lower volume in the commercial aviation segment along with project timing in the energy markets. These declines were partially offset by higher defense segment sales, improvements in manufacturing efficiencies, and cost reductions in response to the reduced volume levels.
Looking forward to the first quarter of fiscal year 2022, we expect slight to moderate sequential decrease in revenue and operating margin from the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021, due to project timing.
Net sales in fiscal year 2020 decreased $1.2 million or 1.2% when compared to the prior year. A decline in aviation sales of 8% from the prior year was primarily in the aircraft engine segment, as a result of both the grounding of the Boeing MAX 737 aircraft and the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the aviation industry in general. Space market sales increased 13.4% from the prior year driven by higher sales in the unmanned and manned space segment on production and new development programs, while defense sales increased by 12.5% from the prior year driven by higher volume in the missile segment.
Income from operations in fiscal year 2020 increased $2.8 million or 25.6% when compared to the prior year. The increase in operating income was driven by improved manufacturing efficiencies, cost reduction programs implemented during the year, and a favorable product mix.
Specialty Solutions
Net sales for fiscal year 2021 decreased $13.1 million, or 11.5% when compared to the prior year. Organic sales declined $13.6 million, or 11.9%, partially offset by positive foreign exchange impacts of $0.5 million, or 0.5%. Decreased sales volume is primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic earlier in the year, which created market downturns in the beverage, food service, and OEM equipment markets.
Income from operations for fiscal year 2021 decreased $4.2 million, or 22.6%, when compared to the prior year. The decrease during the period is primarily due to reduced sales volume in each of our businesses and increased raw material costs in the OEM equipment market, particularly for steel, partially offset by productivity and cost out actions.
Looking forward to the first quarter of fiscal year 2022, we expect a slight sequential increase in revenue and operating margin from the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021, due to a continued recovery in Merchandising and Pumps businesses, partially offset by the impact of a prior work stoppage at one of the plants.
Net sales for fiscal year 2020 decreased $9.3 million, or 7.6% when compared to the prior year as organic sales declined by $8.8 million or 7.1% and foreign exchange rates unfavorably affected sales by $0.6 million or 0.5%. Decreased sales volume is primarily due to impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic which created market downturns in the beverage, convenience store and dump markets.
Income from operations for fiscal year 2020 decreased $0.5 million, or 2.4%, when compared to the prior year, primarily due to decreased sales volume in each of our businesses. The sales volume decrease was offset in our Hydraulics and Display Merchandising businesses by favorable mix, cost control of labor, and the implementation of identified manufacturing efficiencies.
Corporate, Restructuring and Other
Corporate expenses remained flat in in fiscal year 2021 primarily due to general wage inflation and benefit increases offset by cost saving reductions compared to the prior year.
Corporate expenses increased by 19.7% in fiscal year 2020 primarily due to increased stock-based compensation, management transition, and benefit expenses in the first two quarters of fiscal year 2020.
The loss on sale of business, restructuring, and acquisition-related costs have been discussed above in the Company Overview.
Discontinued Operations
In pursing our business strategy, the Company may divest certain businesses. Future divestitures may be classified as discontinued operations based on their strategic significance to the Company. Results of the Refrigerated Solutions Group and Cooking Solutions Group in current and prior periods have been classified as discontinued operations in the Consolidated Financial Statements and excluded from the results of continuing operations. Activity related to discontinued operations is as follows (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At June 30, 2021, our total cash balance was $136.4 million, of which $92.2 million was held outside of the United States. During fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019, we repatriated $37.6 million, $39.2 million, and $51.5 million of our cash previously held outside of the United States, respectively. During fiscal year 2022, we anticipate returning $30.0 million to $35.0 million of foreign cash, however, the amount and timing of cash repatriation during 2022 will be dependent upon each business unit’s operational needs including requirements to fund working capital, capital expenditure, and jurisdictional tax payments. The repatriation of cash balances from certain of our subsidiaries could have adverse tax consequences or be subject to capital controls; however, those balances are generally available without legal restrictions to fund ordinary business operations.
Cash Flow
Net cash provided by continuing operating activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $81.9 million compared to net cash provided by continuing operating activities of $54.7 million in the prior year. We generated $94.7 million from income statement activities and used $4.4 million of cash to fund working capital decreases. Cash flow used in investing activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 totaled $39.1 million. Uses of investing cash consisted primarily of $27.4 million for the acquisition of Renco and capital expenditures of $21.8 million offset by $11.7 million of proceeds from sale of the Enginetics business. Cash used by financing activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 were $31.7 million and included stock repurchases of $21.2 million and cash paid for dividends of $11.4 million.
Net cash provided by continuing operating activities for the year ended June 30, 2020 was $54.7 million compared to net cash provided by continuing operating activities of $72.9 million in the prior year. We generated $88.6 million from income statement activities and used $32.1 million of cash to fund working capital increases. Cash flow used in investing activities for the year ended June 30, 2020 totaled $20.6 million. Uses of investing cash consisted primarily of capital expenditures of $21.52 million. Cash used by financing activities for the year ended June 30, 2020 were $19.0 million and included cash paid for dividends of $10.6 million and stock repurchases of $10.4 million offset by net borrowings of $1.2 million.
We sponsor a number of defined benefit and defined contribution retirement plans. The U.S. pension plan is frozen for all participants. We have evaluated the current and long-term cash requirements of these plans, and our existing sources of liquidity are expected to be sufficient to cover required contributions under ERISA and other governing regulations.
The fair value of the Company's U.S. defined benefit pension plan assets was $212.6 million at June 30, 2021, as compared to $194.8 million as of June 30, 2020. We participate in two multi-employer pension plans and sponsor six defined benefit plans including two in the U.S. and one in the U.K., Germany, Ireland, and Japan. The Company’s pension plan is frozen for U.S. employees and participants in the plan ceased accruing future benefits. Our primary U.S. defined benefit plan is not expected to be 100% funded under ERISA rules at June 30, 2021.
U.S. defined benefit plan contributions of $7.8 million were made during fiscal year 2021 compared to $3.1 million during fiscal year 2020.The required contributions to the United States funded pension plan for fiscal year 2022 is approximately $1.0 million. The Company expects to make contributions during fiscal year 2022 of $0.2 million and $0.3 million to its unfunded defined benefit plans in the U.S. and Germany, respectively. Any subsequent plan contributions will depend on the results of future actuarial valuations.
We have evaluated the current and long-term cash requirements of our defined benefit and defined contribution plans as of June 30, 2021 and determined our operating cash flows from continuing operations and available liquidity are expected to be sufficient to cover the required contributions under ERISA and other governing regulations.
We have an insurance program in place to fund supplemental retirement income benefits for five retired executives. Current executives and new hires are not eligible for this program. At June 30, 2021, the underlying policies had a cash surrender value of $19.3 million and are reported net of loans of $9.1 million for which we have the legal right of offset. These amounts are reported net on our balance sheet.
Capital Structure
During the second quarter of fiscal year 2019, the Company entered into a five-year Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (“credit agreement”, or “facility”). The facility has a borrowing limit of $500 million and can be increased by an amount of up to $250 million, in accordance with specified conditions contained in the agreement. The facility also includes a $10 million sublimit for swing line loans and a $35 million sublimit for letters of credit.
Under the terms of the Credit Facility, we will pay a variable rate of interest and a fee on borrowed amounts as well as a commitment fee on unused amounts under the facility. The amount of the commitment fee will depend upon both the undrawn amount remaining available under the facility and the Company’s funded debt to EBITDA (as defined in the agreement) ratio at the last day of each quarter.
Funds borrowed under the facility may be used for the repayment of debt, working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions (so long as certain conditions, including a specified funded debt to EBITDA leverage ratio is maintained), and other general corporate purposes. As of June 30, 2021, the Company has used $6.0 million against the letter of credit sub-facility and had the ability to borrow $245.2 million under the facility based on our current trailing twelve-month EBITDA. The facility contains customary representations, warranties and restrictive covenants, as well as specific financial covenants. The Company’s current financial covenants under the facility are as follows:
Interest Coverage Ratio - The Company is required to maintain a ratio of Earnings Before Interest and Taxes, as Adjusted (“Adjusted EBIT per the Credit Facility”), to interest expense for the trailing twelve months of at least 2.75:1. Adjusted EBIT per the Credit Facility specifically excludes extraordinary and certain other defined items such as cash restructuring and acquisition-related charges up to the lower of $20.0 million or 10% of EBITDA. The facility allows for unlimited non-cash charges including purchase accounting and goodwill adjustments. At June 30, 2021, the Company’s Interest Coverage Ratio was 13.1:1.
Leverage Ratio- The Company’s ratio of funded debt to trailing twelve month Adjusted EBITDA per the Credit Facility, calculated as Adjusted EBIT per the Credit Facility plus depreciation and amortization, may not exceed 3.5:1. Under certain circumstances in connection with a Material Acquisition (as defined in the Facility), the Facility allows for the leverage ratio to go as high as 4.0:1 for a four-fiscal quarter period. At June 30, 2021, the Company’s Leverage Ratio was 1.31:1.
As of June 30, 2021, we had borrowings under our facility of $200.0 million. In order to manage our interest rate exposure on these borrowings, we are party to $200.0 million of active floating to fixed rate swaps. These swaps convert our interest payments from LIBOR to a weighted average rate of 1.27%. The effective rate of interest for our outstanding borrowings, including the impact of the interest rate swaps, was 2.59%. Our primary cash requirements in addition to day-to-day operating needs include interest payments, capital expenditures, acquisitions, share repurchases, and dividends.
In connection with the acquisition of Renco, we assumed $0.7 million of debt under the Paycheck Protection Program, within the United States Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security ("CARES") Act. These borrowings were forgiven in June 2021.
Our primary sources of cash are cash flows from continuing operations and borrowings under the facility. We expect that fiscal year 2022 depreciation and amortization expense will be between $21.0 and $22.0 million and $12.0 and $13.0 million, respectively.
The following table sets forth our capitalization at June 30:
Stockholders’ equity increased year over year by $44.8 million, primarily as a result of current year net income of $36.5 million. The Company's net debt to capital percentage changed to 11.1% as of June 30, 2021 from 14.8% in the prior year.
At June 30, 2021, we expect to pay estimated interest payments of $15.4 million within the next five years. This estimate is based upon effective interest rates as of June 30, 2021 and excludes any interest rate swaps which are assets to us. See