Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-Looking Information
The Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the audited financial statements and accompanying notes, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read together. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. Operating results are not necessarily indicative of results that may occur for the full fiscal year or any other future period. The term "Private Synlogic" refers to Synlogic, Inc. prior to the consummation of the Merger described herein. The term "Mirna" refers to Mirna Therapeutics, Inc. prior to the consummation of the Merger described herein. Unless otherwise indicated, references to the terms "Synlogic," “the Company," "we," "our" and "us" refer to Private Synlogic prior to the consummation of the Merger described herein and Synlogic, Inc. (formerly known as Mirna Therapeutics, Inc.) upon the consummation of the Merger described herein.
Overview
Business
Synlogic is a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery and development of Synthetic Biotic™ medicines. Synthetic Biotic medicines are generated from Synlogic’s proprietary drug discovery and development platform, leveraging a reproducible, modular approach to Synthetic Biology to develop beneficial microbes which perform or deliver critical therapeutic functions. Synthetic Biotic medicines are designed to metabolize a toxic substance, compensate for missing or damaged metabolic pathways, or deliver combinations of therapeutic factors. Synlogic’s goal is to discover, develop, and ultimately commercialize Synthetic Biotic medicines. Synlogic’s proprietary pipeline includes Synthetic Biotic medicines for the treatment of metabolic disorders including Phenylketonuria (PKU) and Enteric Hyperoxaluria. We are building a portfolio of partner-able assets in immunology and oncology.
In a clinical trial with our lead program SYNB1618, we have demonstrated consumption of phenylalanine (Phe), an amino acid that accumulates in a rare metabolic disorder known as PKU and are expanding our pipeline based on learnings from this program. We have also demonstrated that our pre-clinical candidate SYNB8802 can consume dietary oxalate and reduce hyperoxaluria in animal models. We are designing SYNB8802 to be tested in patients with Enteric Hyperoxaluria, a disease which leads to dangerously high levels of urinary oxalate and for which patients have few treatment options today.
We believe we have the core competencies in synthetic biology and manufacturing, as well as translational medicine, regulatory experience and clinical development to successfully discover and develop our Synthetic Biotic medicines. In June 2019, we announced an expanded collaboration with Ginkgo Bioworks, Inc. (Ginkgo) to complement our in-house expertise in strain design and development. Ginkgo uses software and automation to program and optimize microbial strains at a large scale. Ginkgo’s technology provides us with a synthetic biology-based cell programming platform for testing thousands of microbial strains to accelerate progression of early preclinical leads to drug candidates optimized for clinical development.
While we believe that our Synthetic Biotic platform has potential to address a broad range of diseases, our initial pipeline focus is on metabolic diseases. We will consider leveraging partnerships to advance programs for other diseases including oncology and inflammatory disorders. Our most advanced programs target metabolic diseases that could potentially be treated by oral delivery of Synthetic Biotic medicines. These includes conditions caused by a genetic mutation characterized by a dysfunctional metabolic pathway including PKU, as well as acquired metabolic diseases caused by organ dysfunction, such as Enteric Hyperoxaluria. When delivered orally, Synthetic Biotic medicines are designed to function in the gut to consume a disease-causing toxic metabolite with the intended consequence of reducing its systemic or urinary levels. We believe that success in our metabolic disease programs will enable us to demonstrate the potential of our Synthetic Biotic medicines while bringing meaningful change to the lives of patients suffering from these debilitating conditions.
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business
In December 2019, an outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus was identified in Wuhan, China. This virus continues to spread globally, has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and has spread to over 100 countries, including the United States. The impact of this pandemic has been and will likely continue to be extensive in many aspects of society, which has resulted in and will likely continue to result in significant disruptions to businesses and capital markets around the world. The extent to which the coronavirus impacts us will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the coronavirus and the actions to contain the coronavirus or treat its impact, among others. Our ability to enroll our clinical trials will be dependent on many factors, including the progression of the pandemic and its impact on patients and the investigators at our clinical trial sites. We are actively working with sites and investigators to mitigate these risks. Over the coming weeks and months, we will continue to carefully monitor the situation with respect to each of our clinical trials and follow guidance from local and federal health authorities.
Phenylketonuria
Our most advanced product candidate is SYNB1618, an oral therapy intended for the treatment of PKU, a rare metabolic disease in which Phe accumulates in the body as a result of genetic defects. Elevated levels of Phe are toxic to the brain and can lead to neurological dysfunction. SYNB1618 is designed to function in the gut of patients to reduce excess Phe, with the goal of lowering levels in the blood and other tissues. SYNB1618 has received both Fast Track designation and orphan drug designation for PKU from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). We initiated a Phase 1/2a clinical trial of an early liquid formulation of SYNB1618 in April 2018 and announced top-line data from healthy volunteers evaluated in this study in September 2018. In July 2019, we announced data that demonstrated that SYNB1618 was safe and well-tolerated and achieved proof-of-mechanism of strain activity in both healthy volunteers and patients with PKU.
SYNB1618 is a member of a family of SYNB strains which consume Phe. We have additional Phe consuming strains for PKU in preclinical development. We have evaluated a lyophilized formulation of SYNB1618 in a bridging study in healthy volunteers. The study of this more patient- and commercialization-appropriate presentation of SYNB1618 demonstrated improved tolerability over the early liquid formulation. The next step for SYNB1618 is to conduct a Phase 2 clinical trial. The Phase 2 trial, referred to as the SynPheny-1 Study, is designed to evaluate safety and tolerability of a solid formulation of SYNB1618 as well as its potential to lower blood Phe levels in adult PKU patients.
We continue to evaluate our clinical program progress as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The SynPheny-1 Study is designed to be flexible, with subjects physically coming to the clinic or participating from the patient's home utilizing home healthcare services. We initiated this study in the third quarter of 2020.
Enteric Hyperoxaluria
Enteric Hyperoxaluria is an acquired metabolic disorder with no approved treatment options. It is caused by increased absorption of dietary oxalate, which is present in many common foods including leafy greens, nuts, and chocolate. Enteric Hyperoxaluria often occurs as a result of a primary insult to the bowel, such as inflammatory bowel disease, short bowel syndrome, or surgical procedures such as Roux-en-Y bariatric weight-loss surgery. The disorder may cause dangerously high levels of urinary oxalate and progressive kidney damage.
The disorder can lead to high levels of urinary oxalate, which causes progressive kidney damage, kidney stone formation, and nephrocalcinosis. In May 2020, we announced the nomination of a clinical candidate for Enteric Hyperoxaluria, SYNB8802. We initiated a Phase 1 clinical trial of SYNB8802 in the fourth quarter of 2020.
SYNB8802 will be assessed for safety and tolerability, strain kinetics, changes in plasma and urine biomarkers of strain activity, and the potential to reduce urinary oxalate in the Phase 1 clinical study. The study has two parts: Part A is a multiple ascending dose study in healthy volunteers in whom we will induce temporary hyperoxaluria via diet; Part B is a placebo controlled, cross-over design study in patients with Enteric Hyperoxaluria following Roux-n-Y gastric bypass surgery.
Oncology
We have also developed a portfolio of Synthetic Biotic medicines to treat certain cancers which are designed to modify the tumor microenvironment, activate the immune system and result in tumor reduction. These Synthetic Biotic medicines could be used in combination with other cancer therapies such as checkpoint inhibitors. Our first Synthetic Biotic clinical immuno-oncology (“IO”) candidate is SYNB1891, an intratumorally administered Synthetic Biotic medicine engineered to act as a dual innate and adaptive
immune activator. SYNB1891 has been designed to activate the immune response in tumors via the E.coli Nissle chassis and production of cyclic di-AMP, an activator of the Stimulator of Interferon Genes, also referred to as the STING pathway.
In January 2020, we treated the first subject in a Phase 1 clinical trial of SYNB1891 in patients with advanced solid tumors and lymphoma. The clinical trial is designed to identify a maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of SYNB1891 delivered as a monotherapy. Once an MTD is identified, we will evaluate treatment of patients with a combination of SYNB1891 and the checkpoint inhibitor atezolizumab (Tecentriq), provided through a supply agreement with Roche. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, the Phase 1 clinical trial has remained open and currently enrolled patients are continuing on trial. New patient enrollment in the study is also continuing. We released interim data from the ongoing monotherapy arm of this trial in December of 2020 which demonstrated target engagement and the production of biomarkers consistent with STING activation. In December of 2020 we also initiated the combination arm of the Phase 1 clinical trial.
Other Programs
Maple Syrup Urine Disease (MSUD) is an inherited, rare metabolic disease characterized by a deficiency of enzymes required to break down certain amino acids. We have been conducting studies to advance a pre-clinical candidate for MSUD. Prototype strains did not meet pre-specified criteria for candidate declaration. Therefore, we discontinued efforts in MSUD in the third quarter of 2020 to prioritize other metabolic disorders.
In August 2019, we announced that we were discontinuing the development of SYNB1020, an early stage clinical product candidate for the treatment of hyperammonemia. The decision to discontinue the program was based on top-line data from an interim analysis of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 1b/2a study of the Synthetic Biotic medicine in 23 patients with cirrhosis and elevated blood ammonia. While SYNB1020 was well tolerated in Phase 1b/2a study, the study showed it did not lower blood ammonia in patients with cirrhosis.
We are also leveraging our proprietary technology platform to develop Synthetic Biotic medicines to treat a broader range of human diseases. To achieve this goal, we collaborate with key disease experts who have developed robust models of relevant diseases and to inform our translational medicine strategy. These collaborators bring complementary expertise in preclinical development, clinical development and commercialization. Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is an attractive target for our technology as Synthetic Biotic medicines can be designed to locally deliver combinations of complementary therapeutics to potentially address the unmet medical need for maintenance of disease remissions. In May 2020, we announced the termination of our collaboration with AbbVie S.à.r.l. (“AbbVie”) to develop Synthetic Biotic medicines for the treatment of types of inflammatory bowel diseases, including Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. Upon termination, we regained all rights to develop these and new IBD Synthetic Biotic medicines for all effectors targeting IBD. This allows us to fully leverage our expertise in strain engineering, quantitative biology, regulatory, and manufacturing to expand our wholly owned GI-based program portfolio to include IBD. We further regained the rights to partner these IBD programs. We may enter into additional strategic partnerships in the future to maximize the value of our programs and our Synthetic Biotic platform.
We currently operate in one reportable business segment-the discovery and development of Synthetic Biotic medicines. To date, we have dedicated substantially all of our activities to the research and development of our product candidates. As of March 2021, we have received approximately $340.1 million in proceeds as we financed our operations primarily through the sale of preferred stock, common stock, preferred units, warrants, payments received under the AbbVie collaboration agreement, interest earned on investments, and cash received in the Merger.
We have not generated any revenue to date from product sales and have incurred significant operating losses since our inception. We have incurred net losses of approximately $59.2 million and $51.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $230.3 million and $171.1 million, respectively, and we expect to incur losses for the foreseeable future as we develop our product candidates. We expect our expenses and capital requirements will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•
complete preclinical studies, initiate and complete clinical trials for product candidates;
•
contract to manufacture product candidates;
•
advance research and development related activities to expand our product pipeline;
•
seek regulatory approval for our product candidates;
•
maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•
hire additional staff, including clinical, scientific, and management personnel;
•
expand our existing infrastructure and secure space in a facility to support continued growth in our research and development efforts; and
•
add operational and finance personnel to support product development efforts and to support operating as a public company.
We do not expect to generate product revenue unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approvals for our product candidates, either alone or in collaboration with third parties. Additionally, we expect to utilize third-party contract research organizations (CROs) and contract manufacturing organizations (CMOs) to carry out our clinical development and manufacturing activities, and we do not yet have a commercial organization. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our internal commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing and distribution. Accordingly, we anticipate that we will seek to fund our operations through public or private equity or debt financings, collaborations or licenses, finance lease transactions or other available financing transactions. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds through these or other means when needed. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if it will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product revenue, we may not become profitable.
Financial Overview
Revenue
Revenue to date was generated from our collaboration agreement with AbbVie. In May 2020, we announced the termination of our collaboration with AbbVie. Upon termination of the collaboration with AbbVie, we regained all rights to develop the IBD Synthetic Biotic medicines previously developed with AbbVie as well as new IBD Synthetic Biotic medicines for all effectors targeting IBD. Due to the termination of this Agreement, we do not expect further revenue from AbbVie. See Note 10, “Collaboration Agreements: AbbVie Collaboration” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a full discussion of this arrangement.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense consists of expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates, including the conduct of preclinical and clinical studies and product development, which are expensed as they are incurred. These expenses consist primarily of:
•
compensation, benefits and other employee related expenses;
•
supplies to support our internal research and development efforts;
•
research and development related facility and depreciation costs;
•
leased manufacturing space; and
•
third-party contract costs relating to research, process and formulation development, preclinical and clinical studies and regulatory operations.
The lengthy process of securing regulatory approvals for new drugs requires the expenditure of substantial resources. Any delay or failure to obtain regulatory approvals would materially adversely affect our product candidate development efforts and our business overall. Given the inherent uncertainties of pharmaceutical product development, we cannot estimate with any degree of certainty the likelihood, timing or cost of obtaining regulatory approval and marketing our product candidates and thus, when, if ever, our product candidates will generate revenues and cash flows.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain and subject to a number of risks. Refer to the risk factors under the heading Risks Related to the Development of Our Product Candidates in Part II, Item 1A, found elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We invest carefully in our pipeline, and the commitment of funding for each subsequent stage of our development programs is dependent upon the receipt of clear, supportive data. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which additional programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program on an ongoing basis in response to the scientific and clinical data of each product candidate, as well as the competitive landscape and ongoing assessments of such product candidate’s commercial potential. We expect our research and development costs will be substantial for the foreseeable future. We expect costs associated with our SYNB1618, SYNB1891 and SYNB8802 programs to increase as the programs progress through clinical trials and new programs progress toward IND and into development.
We track direct research and development expenses, consisting principally of external costs, such as costs associated with contract research organizations and manufacturing of preclinical and clinical drug product and other outsourced research and development expenses to specific product programs. Costs related to specific product candidates are tracked upon the selection of a product candidate. We do not allocate employee and consulting-related costs, costs associated with our platform and facility expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product candidate programs because these costs are deployed across multiple product candidate programs under research and development and, as such, are separately classified. The table below summarizes our research and development expenses by categories of costs for the periods presented (in thousands):
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense consists primarily of compensation, benefits and other employee-related expenses for personnel in our administrative, finance, legal, information technology, investor relations, business development and human resource functions. Other costs include the legal costs of pursuing patent protection of our intellectual property, general and administrative related facility and information technology infrastructure costs and professional fees for accounting and legal services. We anticipate increases in expenses related to legal fees, accounting fees, costs for director and officer liability insurance, fees for investor relations services and costs associated with implementing and complying with corporate governance, internal controls and similar requirements applicable to public companies. We charge all general and administrative expenses to operations as incurred.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest and investment income consist of income earned on investments. Interest expense consists of expense related to our finance leases. Other expense consists primarily of gains and losses on foreign currency invoices.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (GAAP). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported periods and related disclosures. These estimates and assumptions, including those related to revenue recognition and research and development expenses are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. These critical estimates and assumptions are based on our historical experience, our observance of trends in the industry, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances and form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from our estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the application of the following accounting policies, each of which require significant judgments and estimates on the part of management, are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”, to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We evaluate collaboration agreements with respect to FASB ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements, considering the nature and contractual terms of the arrangement and the nature of our business operations to determine the classification of the transactions. When we are an active participant in the activity and exposed to significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of the collaboration, we will record our transactions on a gross basis in the consolidated financial statements and describe the rights and obligations under the collaborative arrangement in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, the entity performs the following five-step analysis: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step analysis to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
We may enter into collaboration agreements for research and development services, under which we may license certain rights to our product candidates to third parties. The terms of these arrangements typically include payment to us of one or more of the following: non-refundable, upfront license fees; reimbursement of certain costs; customer option exercise fees; development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; and royalties on net sales of licensed products. Variable consideration is constrained until it is deemed not be at significant risk of reversal.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of our agreements for which the collaboration partner is also a customer, we perform the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must use significant judgment to determine: a) the number of performance obligations based on the determination under step (ii) above; b) the transaction price under step (iii) above; and c) the contract term and pattern of satisfaction of the performance obligations under step (v) above. We use significant judgment to determine whether milestones or other variable consideration, except for royalties, should be included in the transaction price as described further below. The transaction price is allocated to the goods and services we expect to provide. We use estimates to determine the timing of satisfaction of performance obligations, which may include the use of full time equivalent time as a measure of satisfaction of performance obligations.
Amounts received prior to satisfying the revenue recognition criteria are recorded as deferred revenue in our consolidated balance sheets. Amounts expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as current deferred revenue. Amounts not expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as deferred revenue, net of current portion.
Licenses of Intellectual Property
In assessing whether a promise or performance obligation is distinct from the other promises, we consider factors such as the research, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities of the customer and the availability of the associated expertise in the general marketplace. In addition, we consider whether the customer can benefit from a promise for its intended purpose without the receipt of the remaining promises, whether the value of the promise is dependent on the unsatisfied promise, whether there are other vendors that could provide the remaining promise, and whether it is separately identifiable from the remaining promise. For licenses that are combined with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Research and Development Services
If an arrangement is determined to contain a promise or obligation for us to perform research and development services, we must determine whether these services are distinct from the other promises in the arrangement. In assessing whether the services are distinct from the other promises, we consider the capabilities of the customer to perform these same services. In addition, we consider whether the customer can benefit from a promise for its intended purpose without the receipt of the remaining promise, whether the value of the promise is dependent on the unsatisfied promise, whether there are other vendors that could provide the remaining promise, and whether it is separately identifiable from the remaining promise. For research and development services that are combined with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Customer Options
If an arrangement is determined to contain customer options that allow the customer to acquire additional goods or services, the goods and services underlying the customer options are not considered to be performance obligations at the outset of the arrangement, as they are contingent upon option exercise. We evaluate the customer options for material rights, that is, the option to acquire additional goods or services for free or at a discount. If the customer options are determined to represent a material right, the material right is recognized as a separate performance obligation at the outset of the arrangement. We allocate the transaction price to material rights based on an alternative approach when the goods or services are both (i) similar to the original goods and services in the contract and (ii) provided in accordance with the terms of the original contract. Under this alternative, we allocate the total amount of consideration expected to be received from the customer to the total goods or services expected to be provided to the customer. Amounts allocated to a material right are not recognized as revenue until the option is exercised and the performance obligation is satisfied.
Milestone Payments
At the inception of each arrangement that includes milestone payments, we evaluate whether a significant reversal of cumulative revenue provided in conjunction with achieving the milestones is probable and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. For other milestones, we evaluate factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial, and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue would not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we reevaluate the probability of achievement of all milestones subject to constraint and, if necessary, adjusts our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Royalties
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on a level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from any of our licensing arrangements.
Contract Costs
We recognize as an asset the incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer if the costs are expected to be recovered. As a practical expedient, we recognize the incremental costs of obtaining a contract as an expense when incurred if the amortization period of the asset that we otherwise would have recognized is one year or less. To date, we have not incurred any incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer.
Research and Development Expense
All research and development expenses are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses comprise costs incurred in performing research and development activities, including compensation, benefits and other employee costs; equity-based compensation expense; laboratory and clinical supplies and other direct expenses; facilities expenses; overhead expenses; fees for contractual services, including preclinical studies, clinical trials, clinical manufacturing and raw materials; and other external expenses. Nonrefundable advance payments for research and development activities are capitalized and expensed over the related service period or as goods are received and services are performed. When third-party service providers’ billing terms do not coincide with our period-end, we are required to make estimates of our obligations to those third parties, including clinical trial costs, contractual service costs and costs for supply of our drug candidates, incurred in a given accounting period and record accruals at the end of the period. We base our estimates on the completion status of the research and development programs and the associated estimate of unbilled costs.
Results of Operations
The following discussion summarizes the key factors our management believes are necessary for an understanding of our consolidated financial results.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Revenue was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was related to the recognition of deferred revenue from services performed and payments received under the AbbVie collaboration. In May 2020, we announced the termination of our collaboration with AbbVie.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense was $47.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $41.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $5.6 million was primarily due to an increase of $8.9 million of non-clinical costs, $1.5 million in clinical development costs associated with our SYNB8802 program, and $0.8 million in clinical development costs associated with our SYNB1891 program. These increases were partially offset by decreases of $1.0 million in compensation, benefits and other employee-related expenses, $2.0 million in clinical development costs associated with our SYNB1020 program, $1.4 million in clinical development costs associated with our SYNB1618 program, $0.6 million in manufacturing costs associated with our SYNB1618 and SYNB1891 programs, $0.4 million of professional services, and $0.2 million of research and development support costs.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense was $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $1.2 million was due primarily to a decrease of $1.1 million in compensation, benefits and other employee-related expenses associated with decreased headcount, as well as a decrease of $0.6 million in professional services. The decreases were partially offset by an increase of $0.3 million in support costs and a $0.2 million increase in corporate fees.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.3 million compared to $3.1 million for the corresponding period in 2019. The decrease in other income (expense) of $1.8 million was related to a decrease in interest and investment income resulting from lower cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances and lower interest income generated by our investment account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses since our inception on March 14, 2014 and, as of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $230.3 million. We have financed our operations to date primarily through the sale of preferred stock, common stock, preferred units, warrants, payments received under our prior AbbVie collaboration agreement, interest earned on investments, and cash received in the Merger. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received net proceeds of $13.5 million from the sale of 5,866,258 shares of our common stock in the ATM offering program. In June 2019, we issued to Ginkgo 6,340,771 shares of common stock and accompanying Pre-Funded Warrants (the “Pre-Funded Warrants”) to purchase an aggregate of 2,548,117 shares of common stock, at a combined purchase price per share and Pre-Funded Warrant of $9.00. The Pre-Funded Warrants have an exercise price of $9.00 per share, with $8.99 of such exercise price paid at the closing of the offering. The net proceeds to us were approximately $79.9 million. At December 31, 2020, we had approximately $100.4 million in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term marketable securities. Our cash and cash equivalents include amounts held in money market funds, stated at cost plus unrealized gain and loss, which approximates fair market value. Our available-for-sale securities include amounts held in corporate debt securities, commercial paper and U.S. government agency securities and treasuries. We invest cash in excess of immediate requirements in accordance with our investment policy, which limits the amounts we may invest in any one type of investment and requires all investments held by us to maintain minimum ratings from Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating Organizations so as to primarily achieve liquidity and capital preservation.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance decreased approximately $26.6 million. This decrease was primarily due to the cash used to operate our business, including payments related to, among other things, research and development and general and administrative expenses as we continue to invest in our primary drug candidates and support the development of our proprietary platform.
The following table sets forth the major sources and uses of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash for each of the periods below:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash used in operating activities was approximately $39.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary use of cash was our net loss of approximately $59.2 million, which was partially offset by $8.3 million of non-cash items primarily including depreciation, equity-based compensation, and the right of use asset. There was an increase in working capital of $11.4 million, primarily related to decreases in prepaid research and development expenses, as result of our June 2019 services agreement with Ginkgo, decreases in prepaid expense and other current assets, offset by decreases in accounts payable, accrued expenses, operating lease liability and deferred revenue.
Net cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash used in operating activities was approximately $75.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary use of cash was our net loss of approximately $51.4 million and a decrease in working capital of $31.0 million, of which $30.0 million related to prepaid research and development expenses, as a result of our June 2019 services agreement with Ginkgo, decreases in accounts payable and accrued expenses, and an increase in operating lease liability and right of use asset, as a result of the adoption of ASU 2016-02: Leases (Topic 842) effective January 1, 2019, offset by an increase in deferred revenue. Net loss was partially offset by $6.9 million of non-cash items primarily including depreciation, equity-based compensation and the right of use asset.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $32.5 million and resulted primarily from the proceeds from maturity of marketable securities of $90.8 million and proceeds from redemption of marketable securities of $28.5 million. This was offset by the purchases of marketable securities of $86.5 million and property and equipment of $0.4 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $10.8 million and resulted primarily from the purchases of marketable securities of $145.4 million and purchases of property and equipment of $1.3 million. These uses were partially offset by the proceeds of maturity of marketable securities of $157.5 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $13.4 million, primarily related to net proceeds of $13.5 million from the sale of 5,866,258 shares of our common stock in the ATM offering program, offset by payments on our finance leases.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $79.6 million related to net proceeds of $79.9 million from the sale of our common stock and Pre-Funded Warrants to Ginkgo in June 2019, offset by payments on our finance leases.
Funding Requirements
To date, we have not commercialized any products and have not achieved profitability. We anticipate that we will continue to incur substantial net losses for the next several years as we further develop our product candidates, invest in our proprietary platform technology and operate as a publicly traded company.
We have historically generated revenue from our AbbVie collaboration, but have not generated any product revenue since our inception and do not expect to generate any product revenue unless we receive regulatory approval for our product candidates. We believe that our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term marketable securities as of December 31, 2020, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements for at least the next 12 months from the date of this filing. Our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially and negatively as a result of a number of factors, including the factors discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have based our estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
Due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate precisely the amounts of capital outlays and operating expenditures necessary to complete the development of, and to obtain regulatory approval for, our product candidates. Our funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to, the following:
•
the success of our research and development efforts;
•
the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of clinical trials for our product candidates;
•
the time and costs involved in obtaining regulatory approvals for our product candidates;
•
the progress, timing and costs involved in developing manufacturing processes and agreements with third-party manufacturers;
•
the rate of progress and cost of our commercialization activities;
•
the expenses we incur in marketing and selling our product candidates;
•
the revenue generated by sales of our product candidates;
•
the emergence of competing or complementary technological developments;
•
the costs of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•
the terms and timing of any additional collaborative, licensing or other arrangements that we may establish;
•
the acquisition of businesses, products and technologies;
•
our need to implement additional infrastructure and internal systems; and
•
our need to add personnel and financial and management information systems to support our product development and potential future commercialization efforts, and to enable us to operate as a public company.
As an early-stage company, we are subject to a number of risks common to other life science companies, including, but not limited to, the ability to raise additional capital, development by our competitors of new technological innovations, risk of failure in preclinical studies, the safety and efficacy of our product candidates in clinical trials, the regulatory approval process, the ability to efficiently manufacture our products, market acceptance of our products once approved, lack of marketing and sales history, dependence on key personnel and protection of proprietary technology. Our therapeutic programs are currently pre-commercial, spanning discovery through early development and will require significant additional research and development efforts, including extensive preclinical and clinical testing and regulatory approval prior to commercialization of any product candidates. These efforts require significant amounts of additional capital, adequate personnel infrastructure and extensive compliance-reporting capabilities. There can be no assurance that our research and development will be successfully completed, that adequate protection for our intellectual property will be obtained, that any products developed will obtain necessary regulatory approval or that any approved products will be commercially viable. Even if our product development efforts are successful, it is uncertain when, if ever, we will generate revenue from product sales. We may never achieve profitability, and unless and until we do, we will continue to need to raise additional capital or obtain financing from other sources, such as strategic collaborations or partnerships. If we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
Contractual Commitments and Obligations
Our commitments for operating leases relate to our lease of office and laboratory space at 301 Binney Street in Cambridge, Massachusetts and the GMP clean-room space leased from the Azzur Group, LLC, in Waltham, Massachusetts.
In July 2017, we entered into an agreement to lease approximately 41,346 square feet of laboratory and office space at 301 Binney Street in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Annual rent is approximately $3.3 million. The ten-year lease commenced in January
2018 and contains provisions for a free-rent period, annual rent increases and an allowance for tenant improvements. Additionally, we have paid for a tenant improvement investment of approximately $2.9 million. In conjunction with the lease, we established a letter of credit of approximately $1.0 million.
On December 7, 2018, Synlogic Operating Company, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Synlogic, Inc. (the “Company”), entered into a Statement of Work (the “SOW”) with Azzur Group, LLC (“Azzur”) pursuant to a Master Contract Services Agreement (the “Master Services Agreement”), dated September 8, 2018, between the Company and Azzur.
Pursuant to the SOW, Azzur has agreed to provide the Company with access to, and the use of, an approximately 700 square foot cleanroom space to be constructed in Waltham, Massachusetts (the “Azzur Suite”), for a period of 44 months, from May 1, 2019 to December 31, 2022 (the “Term”). Azzur has also agreed to provide the Company with storage space and personnel support at the Azzur Suite. The total estimated project cost during the Term for access to, and use of, the cleanroom and storage space, and the personnel support and other services, is $4.8 million.
The Company may terminate the SOW on four months’ prior written notice at any time during the Term. In addition, either party may terminate the Master Services Agreement (including the SOW) due to a breach by the other party and failure to cure. The Company is reasonably certain not to exercise the termination option through December 31, 2022.
As we are a clinical stage company, having entered the clinic for our first Phase 1 clinical trial in June 2017, we expect our most significant clinical trial expenditures will be with CROs and CMOs. These contracts generally are cancellable, with notice, at our option and do not have cancellation penalties.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements (as that term is defined in Item 303 (a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K) or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As such, we are not exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in those types of relationships. We enter into guarantees in the ordinary course of business related to the guarantee of our performance and the performance of our subsidiaries.
JOBS Act
Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this extended transition period and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other companies.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please read Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.