ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements and Factors That May Affect Results
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes contained elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a variety of factors, including those set forth elsewhere in this report and under Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Impact of COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a global pandemic. In response to the outbreak, governmental authorities implemented numerous containment measures, including travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and business restrictions and shutdowns, resulting in rapidly changing market and economic conditions. In certain countries in which we operate, governments took swift and effective measures to stem the spread, while in other countries in which we operate governments were slow to react or missed opportunities to effectively contain the spread. Although some of these restrictions and other containment measures have since been lifted or scaled back, ongoing surges of COVID-19 have resulted in the re-imposition of certain restrictions and containment measures and may lead to other restrictions being re-implemented in the future in response to efforts to reduce the rapid spread of COVID-19 and its variants.
The health and wellbeing of our workforce is our highest priority. Many of our employees have worked from home since the COVID-19 outbreak was declared a pandemic in order to minimize the potential risk of spread of COVID-19 in our office environment. As the broad roll out of vaccines continues in various countries in which we operate, many employees have returned to the office environment on a part- or full-time basis. As more employees return to the office, we will continue to adhere to return to work protocols, based on guidance from local and global health organizations and applicable laws and regulations.
While the severity and duration of business disruption to our customers and suppliers due to the COVID-19 pandemic continues to remain uncertain, we expect that the ongoing global vaccination programs will moderate the overall severity and duration and remain cautiously optimistic the most significant impact has passed. If more infectious COVID-19 variants become resistant to the existing vaccines, however, we could experience renewed and sustained business disruption. To date, we have not incurred significant disruptions to our business or a materially negative impact on our condensed consolidated results of operations and financial condition from the COVID-19 outbreak, and continue to believe our business will not be severely impacted as steps continue to be taken globally to mitigate the spread, vaccinate large portions of the population and achieve herd immunity.
We will continue to evaluate the nature and scope of the impact to our business, consolidated results of operations, and financial condition and may take further actions altering our business operations and managing our costs and liquidity that we deem necessary or appropriate to respond to this fast moving and uncertain global health crisis and the resulting global economic consequences.
Overview
We are a leading worldwide developer and supplier of custom-designed semiconductor solutions that is changing the way humans engage with connected devices and data, engineering exceptional experiences throughout the home, at work, in the car and on the go. We believe our results to date reflect the combination of our customer focus and the strength of our intellectual property and our engineering know-how, which allow us to develop or engineer products that meet the demanding design specifications of our OEMs.
We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. All of our revenue, except an inconsequential amount, is recognized at a point in time, either on shipment or delivery of the product, depending on customer terms and conditions. For fiscal 2021, revenue from the IoT product applications market accounted for 43.4% of our net revenue, revenue from the PC product applications market accounted for 26.5% of our net revenue, and revenue from the mobile product applications market accounted for 30.2% of our net revenue.
Many of our customers have manufacturing operations in China, and many of our OEM customers have established design centers in Asia. With our expanding global presence, including offices in China, Hong Kong, India, Japan, Korea, Poland, Switzerland, Taiwan, the U.K., and the U.S., we are well positioned to provide local sales, operational, and engineering support services to our existing customers, as well as potential new customers, on a global basis.
Our manufacturing operations are based on a variable cost model in which we outsource all of our production requirements and generally drop ship our products directly to our customers from our contract manufacturers’ facilities, eliminating the need for significant capital expenditures and allowing us to minimize our investment in inventories. This approach requires us to work closely with our contract manufacturers and semiconductor fabricators to ensure adequate production capacity to meet our forecasted volume requirements. As a result of recent supply constraints and capacity shortages affecting the global semiconductor industry, we have entered into long-term capacity and pricing agreements with some suppliers. We use third-party wafer manufacturers to supply wafers and third-party packaging manufacturers to package our proprietary ASICs. In certain cases, we rely on a single source or a limited number of suppliers to provide other key components of our products. Our cost of revenue includes all costs associated with the production of our products, including materials; logistics; amortization of intangibles related to acquired developed technology; backlog; supplier arrangements; manufacturing, assembly, and test costs paid to third-party manufacturers; and related overhead costs associated with our indirect manufacturing operations personnel. Additionally, we charge all warranty costs, losses on inventory purchase obligations, and write-downs to reduce the carrying value of obsolete, slow moving, and non-usable inventory to net realizable value, to cost of revenue.
Our gross margin generally reflects the combination of the added value we bring to our OEM customers’ products by meeting their custom design requirements and the impact of our ongoing cost-improvement programs. These cost-improvement programs include reducing materials and component costs and implementing design and process improvements. Our newly introduced products may have lower margins than our more mature products, which have realized greater benefits associated with our ongoing cost-improvement programs. As a result, new product introductions may initially negatively impact our gross margin.
Our research and development expenses include costs for supplies and materials related to product development, as well as the engineering costs incurred to design ASICs and human experience solutions for OEM customers prior to and after our OEMs’ commitment to incorporate those solutions into their products. In addition, we expense in-process research and development projects acquired as part of a business acquisition, which have not yet reached technological feasibility, and which have no foreseeable alternative future use. We continue to commit to the technological and design innovation required to maintain our position in our existing markets, and to adapt our existing technologies or develop new technologies for new markets.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses include expenses related to sales, marketing, and administrative personnel; internal sales and outside sales representatives’ commissions; market and usability research; outside legal, accounting, and consulting costs; and other marketing and sales activities.
Acquired intangibles amortization, included in operating expenses, consists primarily of amortization of customer relationship and tradenames intangible assets recognized under the purchase method for business combinations.
Restructuring costs primarily reflect severance and facilities consolidation costs related to the restructuring of our operations to reduce operating expenses. These headcount and facilities related costs were in cost of revenue, research and development, and selling, general and administrative expenses. See Note 13 Restructuring Activities to the consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Gain on sale of audio technology assets includes the sale of limited audio technology intangible assets. See below under “Divestiture”.
Gain on sale of assets includes the sale of our TDDI product line for LCD mobile displays. See below under “Divestiture”.
Interest and other expense, net, primarily reflects interest expense on our Senior Notes, 0.50% convertible senior notes due in 2022, or Convertible Notes, and revolving line of credit as well as the amortization of debt issuance costs and discount on our convertible notes, partially offset by interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Equity investment loss includes amortization of intangible assets reflected under the equity method of accounting in connection with our investment in OXi Technology Ltd. See Note 1 Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Acquisitions
DisplayLink
On July 17, 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire all of the equity interests in DisplayLink Corporation, or DisplayLink, a leader in high-performance video compression technology. The acquisition closed on July 31, 2020. As of June 26, 2021, our purchase consideration was $444.0 million. The results of DisplayLink are included in our consolidated financial statements for the period from August 1, 2020 through June 26, 2021. For further discussion of the DisplayLink acquisition, see Note 4 Acquisitions, Divestiture and Investment included in the consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Broadcom
On July 2, 2020, we entered into definitive agreements with Broadcom to acquire certain assets and assume certain liabilities of, and obtain non-exclusive licenses relating to, Broadcom’s existing Wi-Fi, Bluetooth and GPS/GNSS products and business in the IoT market, or Broadcom Business Acquisition, for an aggregate consideration of $250 million in cash which closed on July 23, 2020. We also entered into certain transition agreements with Broadcom for a period of three years. The results of the Broadcom Business Acquisition are included in our consolidated financial statements for the period from July 24, 2020 through June 26, 2021. For further discussion of the Broadcom Business Acquisition, see Note 4 Acquisitions, Divestiture and Investment included in the consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Divestitures
In December 2020, we completed the sale of limited audio technology intangible assets, received a fully-paid up perpetual license back from the buyer and, as an element of the transaction, licensed other audio technology intangible assets to the buyer under a fully-paid up perpetual license arrangement. Under the asset purchase agreement and the intellectual property license agreement, we received $35.0 million in cash. The gain on the sale of the audio technology assets was $34.2 million.
In December 2019, we entered into an asset purchase agreement with a third-party to sell the assets of our TDDI product line for LCD mobile displays. We retained our automotive TDDI product line and our discrete touch and discrete display driver product lines supporting LCD and OLED for the mobile market. The assets sold under the asset purchase agreement had a carrying value of approximately $33.6 million as of the closing date of the transaction in April 2020 for cash consideration of $138.7 million. The gain on sale of this business component was $105.1 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, cost of revenue, inventories, product warranty, share-based compensation costs, provision for income taxes, deferred income tax asset valuation allowances, uncertain tax positions, tax contingencies, goodwill, intangible assets, investments, and contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience, applicable laws and regulations, and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The methods, estimates, interpretations, and judgments we use in applying our most critical accounting policies can have a significant impact on the results that we report in our consolidated financial statements. The SEC considers an entity’s most critical accounting policies to be those policies that are both most important to the portrayal of the entity’s financial condition and results of operations and those that require the entity’s most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make assumptions and estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue is primarily generated from the sale of ASIC chips, either directly to a customer or to a distributor. Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. All of our revenue, except an inconsequential amount, is recognized at a point in time, either on shipment or delivery of the product, depending on customer terms and conditions. We generally warrant our products for a period of 12 months from the date of sale and estimate probable product warranty costs at the time we recognize revenue as the warranty is considered an assurance warranty and not a performance obligation. Non-product revenue is recognized over the same period of time such performance obligations are satisfied. We then select an appropriate method for measuring satisfaction of the performance obligations.
Revenue from sales to distributors is recognized upon shipment of the product to the distributors (sell-in basis). Master sales agreements are in place with certain customers, and these agreements typically contain terms and conditions with respect to payment, delivery, warranty, and supply. In the absence of a master sales agreement, we consider a customer's purchase order or our standard terms and conditions to be the contract with the customer.
Our pricing terms are negotiated independently, on a stand-alone basis. In determining the transaction price, we evaluate whether the price is subject to refund or adjustment to determine the net consideration which we expect to receive for the sale of such products. In limited situations, we make sales to certain customers under arrangements where we grant stock rotation rights, price protection and price allowances; variable consideration associated with these rights is expected to be inconsequential. These adjustments and incentives are accounted for as variable consideration, classified as other current liabilities under the new revenue standard and are shown as customer obligations within Other Accrued Liabilities as disclosed in Note 1 Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this report. We estimate the amount of variable consideration for such arrangements based on the expected value to be provided to customers, and we do not believe that there will be significant changes to our estimates of variable consideration. When incentives, stock rotation rights, price protection, volume discounts, or price allowances are applicable, they are estimated and recorded in the period the related revenue is recognized. Stock rotation reserves are based on historical return rates applied to distributor inventory subject to stock rotation rights and recorded as a reduction to revenue with a corresponding reduction to cost of goods sold for the estimated cost of inventory that is expected to be returned and recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets. In limited circumstances, we enter into volume-based tiered pricing arrangements and we estimate total unit volumes under such arrangement to determine the expected transaction price for the units expected to be transferred. Such arrangements are accounted for as contract liabilities within other accrued liabilities. Sales returns liabilities are recorded as refund liabilities within other accrued liabilities.
Our accounts receivable balance is from contracts with customers and represents our unconditional right to receive consideration from customers. Payments are generally due within three months of completion of the performance obligation and subsequent invoicing and, therefore, do not include significant financing components. To date, there have been no material impairment losses on accounts receivable.
We invoice customers and recognize all of our revenue, except an inconsequential amount, at a point in time, either on shipment or delivery of the product, depending on customer terms and conditions. We account for shipping and handling costs as fulfillment costs before the customer obtains control of the goods. We classify shipping and handling costs as fulfillment costs before the customer obtains control of the goods. We continue to account for collection of all taxes on a net basis.
We incur commission expense that is incremental to obtaining contracts with customers. Sales commissions (which are recorded in the selling, general and administrative expense line item in the consolidated statements of operations) are expensed when the product is shipped because such commissions are owed after shipment.
Inventory
We state our inventories at the lower of cost or net realizable value. We base our assessment of the ultimate realization of inventories on our projections of future demand and market conditions. Sudden declines in demand, rapid product improvements, or technological changes, or any combination of these factors can cause us to have excess or obsolete inventories. On an ongoing basis, we review for estimated excess, obsolete, or unmarketable inventories and write down our inventories to their net realizable value based on our forecasts of future demand and market conditions. If actual market conditions are less favorable than our forecasts, additional inventory write-downs may be required. The following factors influence our estimates: changes to or cancellations of customer orders, unexpected or sudden decline in demand, rapid product improvements, technological advances, and termination or changes by our OEM customers of any product offerings incorporating our product solutions.
Periodically, we purchase inventory from our contract manufacturers when a customer delays its delivery schedule or cancels its order. In those circumstances, we record a write-down, if necessary, to reduce the carrying value of the inventory purchased to its net realizable value. The effect of these write-downs is to establish a new cost basis in the related inventory, which we do not subsequently write up. We also record a liability and charge to cost of revenue for estimated losses on inventory we are obligated to purchase from our contract manufacturers when such losses become probable from customer delays, order cancellations, or other factors.
Business Combinations
We have applied significant estimates and judgments in order to determine the fair value of the identified assets acquired, liabilities assumed and goodwill recognized in connection with our business combinations to ensure the value of the assets and liabilities acquired are recognized at fair value as of the acquisition date. In measuring the fair value, we utilize valuation techniques consistent with the market approach, income approach, or cost approach.
The valuation of the identifiable assets and liabilities includes assumptions made in performing the valuation, such as projected revenue, weighted average cost of capital, discount rates, estimated useful lives, and other relevant assessments. These assessments can be significantly affected by our estimates, judgments, and assumptions. If actual results are not consistent with our estimates, judgments, or assumptions, or if additional or new information arises in the future that affects our fair value estimates, then adjustments to our initial fair value estimates may have a material impact to our purchase accounting or our results of operations. If actual results are not consistent with our estimates, judgments, or assumptions, or if additional or new information arises in the future, beyond our one year measurement period, that affects our fair value estimates, then adjustments to our initial fair value estimates may have a material impact to our results of operations.
Results of Operations
The following sets forth certain of our consolidated statements of income data for fiscal 2021 and 2020 along with comparative information regarding the absolute and percentage changes in these amounts (in millions, except percentages):
The following sets forth certain of our consolidated statements of operations data as a percentage of net revenues for fiscal 2021 and 2020:
Fiscal 2021 Compared with Fiscal 2020
Net Revenue.
Net revenue was $1,339.6 million for fiscal 2021 compared with $1,333.9 million for fiscal 2020, an increase of $5.7 million, or 0.4%. Of our fiscal 2021 net revenue, $580.9 million, or 43.3%, of net revenue was from the IoT product applications market, $354.7 million, or 26.5%, of net revenue was from the PC product applications market, and $404.0 million, or 30.2%, of net revenue was from the mobile product applications market. The overall increase in net revenue for fiscal 2021 was attributable to an increase of $263.3 million, or 82.9%, in net revenue from IoT product applications and an increase of $37.3 million, or 11.8%, in net revenue from PC product applications, partially offset by a decrease of $294.9 million, or 42.2%, in net revenue from mobile product applications. The increase in net revenue from IoT product applications was primarily driven by a 26% increase in the units sold as well as a 45.2% increase in average selling prices. The increase in net revenue from PC product applications was driven by a 9.3% increase in the units sold and a 2.3% increase in average selling prices. The decrease in mobile product applications was driven by a 35.4% decrease in the units sold due primarily to the divestment of our TDDI product line during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020.
Gross Margin.
Gross margin as a percentage of net revenue was 45.6%, or $611.2 million, for fiscal 2021 compared with 40.7%, or $543.1 million, for fiscal 2020. The 490 basis point increase in gross margin was primarily due to a favorable product mix and product costs reductions, partially offset by a $37.6 million increase in acquired intangibles amortization that was charged to cost of revenue during the year primarily related to the acquisition of DisplayLink and the Broadcom Business Acquisition and $26.0 million of inventory fair value adjustments associated with the DisplayLink acquisition.
Because we sell our technology solutions in designs that are generally unique or specific to an OEM customer’s application, gross margin varies on a product-by-product basis, making our cumulative gross margin a blend of our product specific designs. As a fabless manufacturer, our gross margin percentage is generally not materially impacted by our shipment volume. We charge losses on inventory purchase obligations and write-downs to reduce the carrying value of obsolete, slow moving, and non-usable inventory to net realizable value (including warranty costs) to cost of revenue.
Operating Expenses.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses increased $10.9 million, to $313.4 million, for fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020. The increase in research and development expenses primarily reflected a $13.1 million increase in share-based compensation primarily due to an increase in our phantom stock liability resulting from the increase in our stock price; a $9.2 million increase due to the amortization of prepaid development services related to the Broadcom Business Acquisition; and a $1.5 million increase in non-employee services; partially offset by a $4.4 million decrease in software licenses and maintenance; a $3.8 million decrease in employee compensation and employment-related costs, resulting from a 9.9% decrease in research and development headcount from restructuring actions initiated in both fiscal 2020 and 2021 to reduce costs, which exceeded the increase in headcount due to recent acquisitions; a $2.4 million decrease in travel and entertainment related costs as a result of reduced headcount as well as travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic; and a $2.4 million in-process research and development charge in fiscal 2020 not repeated in fiscal 2021.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased $17.9 million, to $144.9 million, for fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020. The increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses primarily reflected a $18.3 million increase in share-based compensation primarily due to new executive grants and the increase in value of our phantom stock liability resulting from the increase in our stock price; a $5.0 million increase in employee compensation and employment-related costs, largely driven by the timing of executive team hiring in fiscal year 2020 and 2021, including a higher overall bonus accrual driven by higher profitability in fiscal 2021; and a $1.2 million increase in accounting and consulting fees associated with our recent acquisitions; partially offset by a $3.7 million decrease in bad debt expense; a $3.0 million decrease in legal fees; and a $1.7 million decrease in travel and entertainment related costs as a result of travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Acquired Intangibles Amortization. Acquired intangibles amortization reflects the amortization of intangibles acquired through recent acquisitions. See Note 5 Acquired Intangibles to the consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Restructuring Costs. Restructuring costs primarily reflect employee severance costs and facilities consolidation costs related to the restructuring of operations to reduce operating costs. These headcount-related costs included personnel in operations, research and development, and selling, general and administrative functions. Restructuring costs incurred in fiscal 2021 were $7.4 million and in fiscal 2020 were $33.0 million. See Note 13 Restructuring Activities to the consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Gain on Sale of Audio Technology Assets. Gain on sale of audio technology assets includes the sale of certain intangible assets related to our audio products. See Note 1 Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, under Divestiture, to the consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Non-Operating Income.
Interest and Other Income, Net. Interest and other income, net was $2.9 million for fiscal 2021 compared with $7.9 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease in interest and other income, net was due to lower interest rates in fiscal 2021.
Interest Expense. Interest expense was $29.5 million and $22.5 million, in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, which represents interest and amortization of debt issuance costs and discount on the $525.0 million aggregate principal amount of the Convertible Notes issued in June 2017 as well as interest and amortization of debt issuance costs on the $400.0 million principal amount of the Senior Notes issued in March 2021. See Note 6 Debt to the consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Gain on Sale of Assets. Gain on sale of assets in fiscal 2020 includes the sale of our TDDI product line for LCD mobile displays. See Note 1 Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, under Divestiture, to the consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Provision for Income Taxes.
As a result of the decrease in the U.S. tax rate from the comprehensive tax legislation enacted in December 2017 by the U.S. government, commonly known as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, our U.S. statutory tax rate is lower than tax rates in many foreign jurisdictions in which we operate. This resulted in an increase to our effective tax rate relating to foreign tax rate differential for our fiscal 2019. However, this was largely offset by the remeasurement and release of various uncertain tax positions. See Note 11 Income Taxes to the consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this report for the table reconciling the provision for income taxes from the federal statutory rate for fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019.
It is reasonably possible that the amount of liability for unrecognized tax benefits may change within the next 12 months; an estimate of the range of possible changes could result in a decrease of $3.4 million to an increase of $3.0 million.
Fiscal 2020 Compared with Fiscal 2019.
For discussion related to the results of operations and changes in financial condition for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, please refer to “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations” in our fiscal 2020 Form 10-K, which was filed with the SEC on August 21, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash and cash equivalents were $836.3 million as of the end of fiscal 2021 compared with $763.4 million as of the end of fiscal 2020, an increase of $72.9 million. This increase reflected cash flows provided by operating activities of $319.2 million and $274.1 million of cash provided by financing activities, partially offset by $522.6 million of cash used in investing activities.
We consider almost all earnings of our foreign subsidiaries as not indefinitely invested overseas and have made appropriate provisions for income or withholding taxes, that may result from a future repatriation of those earnings. As of June 27, 2021, $247.5 million of cash and cash equivalents was held by our foreign subsidiaries. If these funds are needed for our operations in the U.S., we will be able to repatriate these funds without an impact on our tax provision.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities. For fiscal 2021, the $319.2 million in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily attributable to net income of $79.6 million plus adjustments for non-cash charges, including acquired intangibles amortization of $110.1 million, share-based compensation costs of $66.1 million, depreciation and amortization of $21.6 million, and a reduction of $34.2 million for gain on sale of audio technology assets, as well as other non-cash
adjustments of $30.4 million, and a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $45.6 million. The net change in operating assets and liabilities related primarily to a $53.1 million decrease in inventories, a $32.2 million increase in accounts payable, and a $14.9 million increase in accrued compensation; partially offset by a $25.9 million increase in accounts receivable, a $17.2 million decrease in other accrued liabilities, and a $9.4 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets. Our days sales outstanding remained flat at 63 days in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. Our inventory turns increased to seven in fiscal 2021 from six in 2020.
For fiscal 2020, the $221.8 million in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily attributable to net income of $118.8 million plus adjustments for non-cash charges, including acquired intangibles amortization of $51.4 million, share-based compensation costs of $49.3 million, depreciation and amortization of $26.7 million, and a reduction of $105.1 million for gain on sale of assets, as well as other non-cash adjustments of $28.9 million, and a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $51.8 million. The net change in operating assets and liabilities related primarily to a $43.0 million decrease in inventories, a $31.0 million decrease in accounts receivable, a $29.1 million increase in accrued compensation, and a $13.8 million increase in income taxes payable; partially offset by a $36.2 million decrease in accounts payable and a $29.9 million decrease in other accrued liabilities. Our days sales outstanding decreased from 70 days to 63 days from fiscal 2019 to fiscal 2020. Our inventory turns increased to six in fiscal 2020 from five in 2019.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2021 was $522.6 million and net cash provided by investing activities in 2020 was $119.9 million. Net cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2021 consisted primarily of $626.5 million used for the acquisition of businesses, net of cash and cash equivalents acquired, and $21.1 million used for the purchases of capital assets; partially offset by $95.8 million in proceeds from sales of investments and $34.2 million in proceeds from sale of audio technology assets. Net cash provided by investing activities for fiscal 2020 consisted primarily of $138.7 million of proceeds from the sale of assets, partially offset by $16.3 million used for the purchases of capital assets.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities for fiscal 2021 was $274.1 million and for fiscal 2020 was $93.9 million. Our net cash provided by financing activities for fiscal 2021 was primarily attributable to $400.0 million in proceeds from issuance of debt and $27.8 million in proceeds from issuance of shares, partially offset by $100.0 million of payment on the line-of-credit borrowings, $28.2 million used for payroll taxes for restricted stock units, or RSUs, market stock units, or MSUs, and performance stock units, or PSUs, and $19.4 million used for payment for redemption of convertible notes. Our net cash provided by financing activities for fiscal 2020 was primarily attributable to $100.0 million proceeds from borrowing under the line-of-credit and $34.5 million of proceeds from issuance of shares, partially offset by $30.2 million used to repurchase shares of our common stock in the open market and $9.7 million used for payroll taxes for RSUs, MSUs and PSUs.
For discussion related to the statement of cash flows for fiscal 2019, please refer to “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations” in our fiscal 2019 Form 10-K, which was filed with the SEC on August 23, 2019.
Common Stock Repurchase Program. As of June 26, 2021, our Board of Directors had authorized the purchase of up to an aggregate of $1.4 billion of our common stock pursuant to our common stock repurchase program, which was subsequently increased to $1.8 billion in August 2021 and extended through July 2025. The program authorizes us to purchase our common stock in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions, depending upon market conditions and other factors. The number of shares purchased, and the timing of purchases is based on the level of our cash balances, general business and market conditions, and other factors, including alternative investment opportunities. Common stock purchased under this program is held as treasury stock. From April 2005 through the end of fiscal 2021, we purchased 31,749,195 shares of our common stock in the open market for an aggregate cost of $1.2 billion. As of June 26, 2021, and as of August 2021, we had $177.4 million, and $577.4 million, respectively, remaining under our common stock repurchase program.
Senior Debt. On March 11, 2021, we completed an offering of $400.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.0% senior notes due 2029, or the Senior Notes, in a private offering. The Senior Notes were issued pursuant to an Indenture, dated as of March 11, 2021, or the Senior Notes Indenture, by and among us, the subsidiary guarantors named therein and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee.
The Senior Notes Indenture provides that the Senior Notes will bear interest at a rate of 4.0% per annum, payable in cash semi-annually in arrears on December 15 and June 15 of each year, commencing on June 15, 2021. The Senior Notes will mature on June 15, 2029 and are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally, on a senior unsecured basis by each of our current and future domestic restricted subsidiaries that guarantee our obligations under our senior secured credit facilities.
Prior to June 15, 2024, we may redeem the Senior Notes, in whole or in part, at a redemption price of 100% of the principal amount thereof, plus a make-whole premium set forth in the Senior Notes Indenture, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, up to, but excluding, the redemption date.
We may redeem some or all of the Senior Notes on or after June 15, 2024 at the redemption prices specified below, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, up to, but excluding, the redemption date:
In addition, at any time prior to June 15, 2024, we may redeem up to 40% of the aggregate principal amount of the Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to 104% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, up to, but excluding, the applicable redemption date with the net cash proceeds from one or more equity offerings by us.
The Senior Notes are our general unsecured obligations. The Senior Note guarantees are the senior unsecured obligations of each guarantor. Under certain circumstances, the guarantors may be released from their Senior Note guarantees without consent of the holders of Senior Notes. Under the terms of the Senior Notes Indenture, the Senior Notes rank equally in right of payment with all of our and the guarantors’ existing and future senior indebtedness, and rank contractually senior in right of payment to our and the guarantors’ future indebtedness and other obligations that are, by their terms, expressly subordinated in right of payment to the Senior Notes. The Senior Notes are effectively subordinated to our and the guarantors’ existing and future secured indebtedness, including secured indebtedness under our senior secured credit facilities, to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness. The Senior Notes and guarantees are structurally subordinated to all existing and future indebtedness and liabilities (including trade payables) of our subsidiaries that do not guarantee the Senior Notes.
The Senior Notes Indenture contains covenants that, subject to exceptions and qualifications, among other things, limit our ability and the ability of our Restricted Subsidiaries (as defined in the Senior Notes Indenture) to (i) incur additional indebtedness and guarantee indebtedness; (ii) pay dividends or make other distributions or repurchase or redeem our company’s or any parent’s capital stock; (iii) prepay, redeem or repurchase certain indebtedness; (iv) issue certain preferred stock or similar equity securities; (v) make loans and investments; (vi) dispose of assets; (vii) incur liens; (viii) enter into transactions with affiliates; (ix) enter into agreements restricting its subsidiaries’ ability to pay dividends; and (x) consolidate, merge or sell all or substantially all of its assets.
The Senior Notes Indenture contains customary events of default including, without limitation, failure to make required payments, failure to comply with certain agreements or covenants, cross-acceleration to certain other indebtedness in excess of specified amounts, certain events of bankruptcy and insolvency, and failure to pay certain judgments. An event of default under the Senior Notes Indenture will allow either the trustee or the holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding Senior Notes to accelerate, or in certain cases, will automatically cause the acceleration of, the maturity of the principal, and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on all outstanding Senior Notes.
Convertible Debt. On June 20, 2017, we entered into a purchase agreement, or the Purchase Agreement, with Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, as representative of the initial purchasers named therein, or collectively, the Initial Purchasers, pursuant to which we issued and sold, and the Initial Purchasers purchased, $500 million aggregate principal amount of our 0.50% convertible senior notes due in 2022, or the Convertible Notes, in a private placement transaction. Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, we also granted the Initial Purchasers a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional $25 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes, which was exercised in full on June 21, 2017. The net proceeds, after deducting the Initial Purchasers’ discounts, were $514.5 million, which included proceeds from the Initial Purchasers’ exercise of their option to purchase additional Convertible Notes. The Convertible Notes were issued pursuant to an Indenture, dated as of June 26, 2017, or the Convertible Notes Indenture, by and among us, and Wells Fargo, National Association, as trustee. We received the net proceeds on June 26, 2017, which we used to repurchase shares of our common stock, to retire our outstanding bank debt, and to provide additional cash resources to fund the Conexant and Marvell Business Acquisitions.
The Convertible Notes bear interest at a rate of 0.50% per year. Interest accrued from June 26, 2017 and is payable semi-annually in arrears, on June 15 and December 15 of each year, beginning on December 15, 2017. The Convertible Notes are senior unsecured obligations and rank senior in right of payment to any of our indebtedness that is expressly subordinated in right of payment to the Convertible Notes; equal in right of payment to any our liabilities that are not so subordinated; effectively junior in right of payment to any of our secured indebtedness to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness; and structurally junior to all indebtedness and other liabilities (including trade payables) of our subsidiaries.
The Convertible Notes mature on June 15, 2022, or the Maturity Date, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted.
Holders may convert all or any portion of their Convertible Notes, in multiples of $1,000 principal amounts, at their option at any time prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding March 15, 2022 under certain defined circumstances.
On or after March 15, 2022 until the close of business on the business day immediately preceding the Maturity Date, holders may convert all or any portion of their Convertible Notes, in multiples of $1,000 principal amounts, at the option of the holder. Upon conversion, we will pay or deliver, at our election, shares of common stock, cash, or a combination of cash and shares of common stock.
The conversion rate for the Convertible Notes is initially 13.6947 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of Convertible Notes (equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $73.02 per share of common stock). The conversion rate is subject to adjustment in certain circumstances.
Upon the occurrence of a fundamental change (as defined in the Convertible Notes Indenture), holders of the Convertible Notes may require us to repurchase for cash all or a portion of their Convertible Notes at a fundamental change repurchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest up to, but excluding, the fundamental change repurchase date.
Effective April 1, 2021, the Sales Price Condition of our Convertible Notes had been met at the end of the preceding calendar quarter and holders of our notes became entitled to redeem their notes in accordance with the terms of the Convertible Notes Indenture during the calendar quarter ending June 30, 2021. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, a total of $19.4 million principal amount of our Convertible Notes were submitted for conversion, which was completed by June 26, 2021 through a combination of $19.4 million in cash and 118,092 shares of common stock from our treasury shares, resulting in a loss of approximately $0.3 million.
Commencing June 20, 2020, we may redeem for cash all or any portion of the Convertible Notes, at our option, if the last reported sale price of our common stock, as determined by us, has been at least 130% of the conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during any 30 consecutive trading day period (including the last trading day of such period) ending on, and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide notice of redemption at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest up to, but excluding, the redemption date. Our policy is to settle the principal amount of our Convertible Notes with cash upon conversion or redemption.
On June 1, 2021, we provided an irrevocable notice of redemption for all $525,000,000 aggregate principal amount of our outstanding Convertible Notes, or Redemption. The Convertible Notes are redeemable at a cash redemption price of 100.0% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the redemption date of August 4, 2021, or the Redemption Price.
Holders of the Convertible Notes had the right to convert the Convertible Notes called for redemption no later than August 3, 2021, or the Conversion Deadline. The conversion rate is equal to 13.7267 shares per $1,000 principal amount of the Convertible Notes, which is the initial conversion rate of 13.6947 shares per $1,000 principal amount of the Convertible Notes plus a number of additional shares equal to 0.0320 shares per $1,000 principal amount of the Convertible Notes. We elected to settle any conversions by Combination Settlement with a Specified Dollar Amount per $1,000 principal amount of Convertible Notes equal to $1,000, plus a number of shares of the our common stock, to be determined pursuant to the Convertible Notes Indenture, together with additional cash, if applicable, in lieu of delivering any fractional shares of common stock. As a result of this election, on August 4, 2021, we paid $505.6 million in cash for the principal amount of Convertible Notes outstanding and delivered approximately 3.5 million shares in common stock from our treasury stock for additional amounts, resulting in a loss of approximately $8.1 million.
Bank Credit Facility. On March 11, 2021, we amended and restated our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, with the lenders and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent, or the Credit Agreement, to, among other changes, extend the maturity date of our senior secured revolving credit facility, to five years from the closing date of the amendment, increase the facility size from $200.0 million to $250.0 million, and replace the requirement to maintain a total debt to Consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the Credit Agreement) ratio of not more than 4.75 to 1.00 with a
requirement to maintain a net total debt to Consolidated EBITDA ratio of not more than 3.75 to 1.00 provided that for the four fiscal quarters ending after the date of a material acquisition, such maximum leverage ratio shall be adjusted to 4.25 to 1.00, and thereafter 3.75 to 1.00, provided further, that such deemed increase pursuant to the foregoing shall not apply to more than two material acquisitions consummated during the term of the Credit Agreement.
The Credit Agreement provides for a revolving credit facility in a principal amount of up to $250 million, which includes a $20 million sublimit for letters of credit and a $25 million sublimit for swingline loans. Under the terms of the Credit Agreement, we may, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, request increases in the revolving credit facility commitments in an aggregate principal amount of up to $150 million to the extent existing or new lenders agree to provide such increased or additional commitments, as applicable. Future proceeds under the revolving credit facility are available for working capital and general corporate purposes. In March 2021, we used a portion of the proceeds from the Senior Notes described above to repay the $100.0 million outstanding borrowings on this revolving credit facility. As of June 26, 2021, there was no balance outstanding under the revolving credit facility. The weighted average annualized interest rate on these borrowings for the fiscal year ended June 26, 2021, was 2.65%.
Borrowings under the revolving credit facility are required to be repaid in full by March 11, 2026. Debt issuance costs relating to the revolving credit facility of $1.6 million, included in non-current other assets on our consolidated balance sheet, are being amortized over 60 months.
Our obligations under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by the material domestic subsidiaries of our company, subject to certain exceptions (such material subsidiaries, together with our company, collectively, the Credit Parties). The obligations of the Credit Parties under the Credit Agreement and the other loan documents delivered in connection therewith are secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all of the existing and future personal property of the Credit Parties, including, without limitation, 65% of the voting capital stock and 100% of the non-voting capital stock of certain of the Credit Parties’ direct foreign subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions.
The revolving credit facility bears interest at our election of a Base Rate plus an Applicable Margin or LIBOR plus an Applicable Margin. Swingline loans bear interest at a Base Rate plus an Applicable Margin. The Base Rate is a floating rate that is the greater of the Prime Rate, the Federal Funds Rate plus 50 basis points, or LIBOR plus 100 basis points. The Applicable Margin is based on a sliding scale that ranges from 0.25 to 100 basis points for Base Rate loans and 100 basis points to 175 basis points for LIBOR loans. We are required to pay a commitment fee on any unused commitments under the Credit Agreement, which is determined on a leverage-based sliding scale ranging from 0.175% to 0.25% per annum. Interest and fees are payable on a quarterly basis. The LIBOR index is expected to be discontinued at the end of 2021. Under our credit facility, when the LIBOR index is discontinued, we will switch to a comparable or successor rate as selected by us and the administrative agent, which may include the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, or SOFR.
Under the Credit Agreement, there are various restrictive covenants, including two financial covenants that limit the consolidated total leverage ratio, or leverage ratio, the consolidated interest coverage ratio, or interest coverage ratio, a restriction that permits accounts receivable financings provided that the aggregate unpaid amount of permitted accounts receivable financings are no more than the greater of $100.0 million and 50% of the amount of all accounts receivable of the company and specified subsidiaries and other specific items. The leverage ratio is the ratio of debt as of the measurement date to Consolidated EBITDA, for the four consecutive quarters ending with the quarter of measurement. The current leverage ratio shall not exceed 3.75 to 1.00 provided that for the four fiscal quarters ending after the date of a material acquisition, such maximum leverage ratio shall be adjusted to 4.25 to 1.00, and thereafter 3.75 to 1.0. The interest coverage ratio is Consolidated EBITDA to interest expense for the four consecutive quarters ending with the quarter of measurement. The interest coverage ratio must not be less than 3.50 to 1.0 during the term of the Credit Agreement. As of June 26, 2021, we remain in compliance with the restrictive covenants.
$100 Million Shelf Registration. We have registered an aggregate of $100.0 million of common stock and preferred stock for issuance in connection with acquisitions, which shares generally will be freely tradeable after their issuance under Rule 145 of the Securities Act unless held by an affiliate of the acquired company, in which case such shares will be subject to the volume and manner of sale restrictions of Rule 144 of the Securities Act.
Working Capital Needs. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, anticipated cash flows from operating activities, and available credit under our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital and other cash requirements and our debt service obligations, for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our revenue, the effectiveness of vaccines on COVID-19 variants, including the deployment of those vaccines to help reduce the length, duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, the timing and extent of spending to
support product development efforts, costs associated with restructuring activities net of projected savings from those activities, costs related to protecting our intellectual property, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, timing of introduction of new products and enhancements to existing products, costs to ensure access to adequate manufacturing, costs of maintaining sufficient space for our workforce, the continuing market acceptance of our product solutions, our common stock repurchase program, and the amount and timing of our investments in, or acquisitions of, other technologies or companies. Further equity or debt financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. If sufficient funds are not available or are not available on acceptable terms, our ability to fund our future long-term working capital needs, take advantage of business opportunities or to respond to competitive pressures could be limited or severely constrained.
Based on our ability to access our cash and cash equivalents, our expected operating cash flows, and our other sources of cash, we do not currently anticipate the need to remit undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries to meet our working capital and other cash requirements. While we have accrued taxes on almost all of our undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries, if we did remit such earnings, we may be required to pay certain state and foreign taxes to repatriate these funds, which would impact our operating cash flows.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The following table sets forth a summary of our material contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of the end of fiscal 2021 (in millions):
(1)
Represents the principal and interest payable through the maturity date of the underlying contractual obligation.
(2)
Purchase obligations and other commitments include payments due for inventory purchase obligations with contract manufacturers, long-term software tool licenses, and other licenses.
(3)
Represents the tax amount for the transition tax liability associated with our deemed repatriation of accumulated foreign earnings as a result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, enacted into law on December 22, 2017.
The amounts in the table above exclude unrecognized tax benefits related to uncertain tax positions of $22.6 million. As of June 26, 2021, we were unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of when settlement with a taxing authority may occur in connection with our gross unrecognized tax benefit.
Subsequent to our fiscal year ended June 26, 2021, we executed an agreement for purchase and supply commitment with one of our contract manufacturers, under which we have a minimum commitment obligation estimated at approximately $111.0 million over a period of three years.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any transactions, arrangements, or other relationships with unconsolidated entities that are reasonably likely to materially affect our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources. We have no special purpose or limited purpose entities that provide off-balance sheet financing, liquidity, or market or credit risk support; engage in leasing, hedging, or research and development services; or have other relationships that expose us to liability that is not reflected in our financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Effective
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, issued accounting standard update, or ASU, No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40), which simplifies the accounting for convertible instruments. The guidance removes certain accounting models which separate the embedded conversion features from the host contract for convertible instruments, requiring bifurcation only if the convertible debt feature qualifies as a derivative under Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 815 or for convertible debt issued at a substantial premium. The ASU removes certain settlement
conditions required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, permitting more contracts to qualify for it. In addition, the guidance eliminates the treasury stock method to calculate diluted earnings per share for convertible instruments and requires the use of the if-converted method. The ASU is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim reporting periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted no earlier than the fiscal year beginning after December 15, 2020. We do not expect the adoption of this ASU to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, or ASU 2019-12, an amendment of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification. ASU 2019-12 simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions for intra-period tax allocations and deferred tax liabilities for equity method investments and adds guidance regarding whether a step-up in tax basis of goodwill relates to a business combination or a separate transaction. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. We will adopt this ASU at the beginning of our fiscal 2022, and do not expect it to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.