Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements related to future events and our future financial performance that are based on current expectations and subject to risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many important factors, including those described in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
This section of the Form 10-K generally discusses our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, including a year-to-year comparison between 2020 and 2019. For a full discussion related to the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018, including a year-to-year comparison between 2019 and 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview of Our Business and Services
We are a leading global biopharmaceutical solutions organization providing a full suite of clinical and commercial services to customers in the pharmaceutical, biotechnology, and healthcare industries. We offer both stand-alone and integrated biopharmaceutical product development solutions ranging from Early Phase (Phase I) clinical trials to the full commercialization of biopharmaceutical products, with the goal of increasing the likelihood of regulatory approval and commercial success.
Our operations are divided into two reportable segments, Clinical Solutions and Commercial Solutions. Our Clinical Solutions segment offers a variety of services spanning Phases I to IV of clinical development, including full service global studies and real world evidence programs, as well as individual service offerings such as clinical monitoring, investigator recruitment, patient recruitment, data management, and study startup to assist customers with their drug development process. Our Commercial Solutions segment provides commercialization services, including deployment solutions, communication solutions (public relations, advertising, and medical communications), and consulting services. We integrate our clinical and commercial capabilities into customized solutions by sharing knowledge, data, and insights through our Biopharmaceutical Acceleration Model. This collaboration across the development and commercialization continuum facilitates unique insights into patient populations, therapeutic environments, product timelines, and the competitive landscape. For further discussion, refer to Part I, Item 1, “Business” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We acquired the following companies during 2020:
•
Synteract, a full service CRO, focused on the emerging biopharmaceutical segment. Synteract’s client base is primarily comprised of emerging biopharmaceutical companies, a segment in which we have growth opportunities. Synteract has more than 700 employees across North America, Europe, Asia Pacific, and Africa that have supported more than 4,000 Phase I to IV clinical trials across 26,000 sites in more than 60 countries. The transaction provides significant revenue synergy opportunities, as we bring scale and new capabilities to Synteract’s existing and prospective customers while maintaining Synteract’s focus on the emerging biopharmaceutical segment. Building on our track record of delivering cost synergies, we will also leverage our global infrastructure and integration expertise to optimize operational efficiencies and drive improved margins.
•
Illingworth Research, a leading provider of clinical research home health services. This acquisition enhances our decentralized solutions offering by adding a patient-focused company that meets the growing demand for in-home clinical trial services. Illingworth Research provides mobile research nurse services, which eliminates wasted travel time and allows patients to remain at home for their participation in a clinical trial.
COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization designated the outbreak of the novel strain of coronavirus that causes the disease known as COVID-19 as a global pandemic. Governments and businesses around the world have taken unprecedented actions to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, including, but not limited to, shelter-in-place orders, quarantines, significant restrictions on travel, social distancing practices as well as restrictions that prohibit many employees from going to work.
The COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse effects have impacted the locations where we, our customers, suppliers, and partners conduct significant portions of our business, such as Europe and North America, and, as a result, we experienced pronounced disruptions in our operations during the year ended December 31, 2020, the largest of which occurred during the second and third quarters of 2020 before starting to gradually recover.
As a result of these conditions, we took decisive actions to mitigate the revenue, profitability, and cash flow impacts from COVID-19. These actions included cost management strategies consisting of certain temporary compensation adjustments, hiring restrictions, staffing reductions, voluntary and involuntary employee furloughs, reductions in third-party costs, and other initiatives. The majority of the temporary cost savings measures ended in the third quarter of 2020. In addition to these temporary actions, we continued to implement our ForwardBound margin enhancement initiative.
We are guided by our global and regional crisis team, which monitors the evolving situation and recommends risk mitigation actions related to business continuity and employee health and safety. Throughout the pandemic, we have assessed and implemented continuity plans to provide customers with continued services. We also continue to implement contingency planning to protect the health and well-being of our employees. This includes having employees work remotely where possible, implementing travel restrictions and visitor protocols, and following social distancing practices.
While the potential for further disruption to our business from the pandemic is difficult to predict and depends on factors not in our control, such as the degree of success of vaccinations and other treatments for COVID-19, we began to see a recovery in the latter half of 2020 in both our Clinical Solutions and Commercial Solutions segments and expect this recovery to continue in 2021. As of December 31, 2020, a substantial number of our clinical trial sites have returned to allowing physical monitoring visits, and in 2021, we expect a continued increase in patient enrollment rates and a moderate increase in the use of remote monitoring from pre-COVID-19 levels, although below levels necessitated in 2020. Further, in our Commercial Solutions segment, we expect to continue to see an increase in site access as well as the use of remote field team visits.
While certain governments eased restrictions during the balance of 2020, the pandemic remains disruptive to our business operations. As we look ahead, we continue to expect impacts in our Clinical Solutions segment to be temporary and primarily relate to limitations on our ability to physically access investigative sites, delays in patient enrollment and trial start-up activities, as well as delayed decision making related to new business awards. Our full service studies and, to a lesser extent, our functional service provider offering have been impacted, and we expect them to continue to be impacted, by a switch from site-based physical monitoring visits to remote monitoring visits, and reduced capacity of businesses that utilize our services or facilities we use to conduct our business during the pandemic. In our Commercial Solutions segment, we continue to expect impacts to be temporary and primarily relate to delayed decision making related to new business awards, delays or cancellations of existing projects, declines in field team visits to HCPs, and travel disruptions.
The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our future results will depend on future developments. National, state, and local governments may impose, and have imposed in certain areas, additional restrictions or may extend the restrictions already in place if the pandemic continues or if new waves of infection occur. The continuing spread of COVID-19 and the related safety and business operating restrictions could result in a number of adverse impacts to our business, including, but not limited to, additional disruption to the economy and our customers, additional work restrictions, and supply chains being interrupted or slowed. Also, governments may impose other laws, policies, regulations, or taxes that could adversely impact our business, financial condition, or results of operations. Depending on the extent to which our customers continue to be affected, they could further delay or reduce purchases of services we provide. The effects of COVID-19 also could impact us in a number of other ways including, but not limited to, additional reductions to our profitability, fluctuations in foreign currency markets, the availability of future borrowings, the cost of borrowings, credit risks of our customers and counterparties, and potential impairment of the carrying amount of goodwill or other long-lived assets.
Despite these impacts, we remain confident in our liquidity position, which includes cash on hand of $242.5 million as of December 31, 2020, and access to our revolving credit facility. We have also implemented cash conservation initiatives, including reducing operating costs, deferring certain payroll taxes and other tax payments during the year ended December 31, 2020, as permitted by various government stimulus packages in multiple jurisdictions, and entering into interest rate swaps to fix certain variable rate debt at lower interest rates.
See Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the potential impact of the pandemic on our business.
New Business Awards and Backlog
We add new business awards to backlog when we enter into a contract or when we receive a written commitment from the customer selecting us as a service provider, provided that:
•
collection of the award value is probable;
•
the project or projects are expected to commence within a certain period of time from the end of the quarter in which the award was granted;
•
project contingencies such as the outcome of other clinical trials, funding approvals, or other events, are not anticipated to prevent the project or projects from commencing in accordance with the expected timeline;
•
the customer has entered or intends to enter into a comprehensive contract as soon as practicable; and
•
for awards related to deployment solutions and functional service provider offerings, a maximum of twelve months of services are included in the award value.
In addition, we continually evaluate our backlog to determine if any of the previously awarded work is no longer expected to be performed, regardless of whether we have received formal cancellation notice from the customer. If we determine that any previously awarded work is no longer probable of being performed, we remove the value from our backlog based on the risk of cancellation. We recognize revenue from these awards as services are performed, provided we have received proper authorization from the customer.
We report new business awards for our Clinical Solutions and Commercial Solutions segments as well as backlog for our Clinical Solutions segment and the deployment solutions offering within our Commercial Solutions segment. We do not report backlog for the remaining service offerings in the Commercial Solutions segment.
Backlog
Our backlog consists of anticipated future revenue from new business awards that either have not started, or that are in process and have not been completed. Our backlog also reflects any cancellation or adjustment activity related to these awards. The average duration of our backlog will fluctuate from period to period based on the contracts comprising our backlog at any given time. The majority of our contracts contain early termination provisions that typically require notice periods ranging from 30 to 90 days.
Our backlog as of December 31 was as follows (in millions):
We expect approximately $4.63 billion of our backlog as of December 31, 2020 will be recognized as revenue during 2021. We adjust the amount of our backlog each quarter for the effects of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
Net New Business Awards
New business awards, net of cancellations, were as follows (in millions):
New business awards have varied and may continue to vary significantly from year to year. Fluctuations in our net new business award levels often result from the fact that we may receive a small number of relatively large orders in any given reporting period. Because of these large orders, our backlog and net new business awards in a reporting period may reach levels that are not sustainable in subsequent reporting periods.
We believe that our backlog and net new business awards might not be consistent indicators of future revenue because they have been, and likely will continue to be, affected by a number of factors, including the variable size and duration of projects, many of which are performed over several years, and changes to the scope of work during the course of projects. Additionally, projects may be canceled or delayed by the customer or regulatory authorities. Net new business awards and backlog have been and we expect will continue to be affected by the broad effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and major financial markets, as well as various other risks and uncertainties detailed in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Business - The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted our business and results of operations, and is expected to continue to do so” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We generally do not have a contractual right to the full amount of the awards reflected in our backlog. If a customer cancels an award, we might be reimbursed for the costs we have incurred. As we increasingly compete for and enter into large contracts that are more global in nature, we expect that the rate at which our backlog and net new business awards convert into revenue is likely to decrease, and the duration of projects and the period over which related revenue is recognized to lengthen. For more information about risks related to our backlog see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business-Our backlog might not be indicative of our future revenues, and we might not realize all of the anticipated future revenue reflected in our backlog” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth amounts from our consolidated financial statements along with dollar and percentage changes (in thousands, except percentages):
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our revenue decreased by $260.0 million, or 5.6%, to $4.42 billion from $4.68 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the related decline in reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses, in both our Clinical Solutions and Commercial Solutions segments, as discussed below.
No single customer accounted for greater than 10% of our total consolidated revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 or 2019. Revenue from our top five customers accounted for approximately 22% and 23% of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Revenue for each of our segments was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Clinical Solutions
For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue attributable to our Clinical Solutions segment decreased compared to the prior year primarily due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the related decline in reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses, and the sale of the contingent staffing business during the second quarter. For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue was positively impacted by $4.3 million from foreign currency exchange rates fluctuations compared to the prior year.
The pandemic continues to impact our ability to physically access investigative sites and delay patient enrollment and trial start-up activities. However, there were positive trends related to these activities in the second half of 2020. The negative impacts of the pandemic were partially mitigated by performing remote monitoring visits where these visits had previously been conducted on-site. As a result, revenue for the second half of 2020 was less impacted than it was in the second quarter, although we continue to experience lower reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses primarily as a result of remote monitoring. The decrease in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was partially offset by revenue growth during the first quarter and incremental revenue from our recent acquisition of Synteract in December 2020.
Although we are aggressively managing our response to the COVID-19 pandemic, it may continue to negatively impact our Clinical Solutions revenue in 2021, depending on the continuation of the pandemic. At this time, we believe that the ongoing impacts to revenue in our Clinical Solutions segment will be similar in nature to those experienced in 2020 with the most significant being the trend of more remote monitoring visits and delayed patient enrollment, resulting in lower reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses and related revenue as the recovery continues. We expect a moderate increase in the use of remote monitoring from pre-COVID-19 levels, although below levels necessitated in 2020. As of December 31, 2020, a substantial number of our clinical trial sites have returned to allowing physical monitoring visits, although capacity constraints remain at those sites, which we are mitigating through remote monitoring activities. Although patient enrollment rates have increased, they remain below pre-COVD-19 levels. We believe an increase in patient enrollment and the use of remote monitoring, where necessary, will result in year over year revenue growth in 2021.
Commercial Solutions
For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue attributable to our Commercial Solutions segment decreased compared to the prior year primarily due to the impacts of elevated cancellations in the first half of 2020, as well as the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the related decline in reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses and the negative impact of delays in new project starts. We sold our medication adherence business in November 2020, which will negatively impact our year over year revenue growth in 2021.
Although we are aggressively managing our response to the COVID-19 pandemic, it may continue to negatively impact our Commercial Solutions revenue in 2021, depending on the continuation of the pandemic. At this time, we believe that the ongoing impacts to revenue in our Commercial Solutions segment will be temporary and relate to delayed decision-making related to new business awards, delays or cancellations of existing projects, declines in field team visits to HCPs, and travel disruptions, similar to those experienced in 2020. While the potential for further disruption to our business from the pandemic is difficult to predict, we expect to continue to see an increase in site access as well as the use of remote field team visits in 2021, as necessitated by travel restrictions and other factors.
Direct Costs
Direct costs consist principally of compensation expense and benefits associated with our employees and other employee-related costs, and reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses directly related to delivering on our projects. While we have some ability to manage the majority of these costs relative to the amount of contracted services we have during any given period, direct costs as a percentage of revenue can vary from period to period. Such fluctuations are due to a variety of factors, including, among others: (i) the level of staff utilization on our projects; (ii) adjustments to the timing of work on specific customer contracts; (iii) the experience mix of personnel assigned to projects; (iv) the service mix and pricing of our contracts; and (v) the timing of the incurrence of reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have experienced reduced travel and other reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses related to lower physical monitoring visits for Clinical Solutions, as well as lower physician office visits and investigator meetings for Commercial Solutions.
Direct costs consisted of the following (dollars in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our direct costs decreased by $247.8 million, or 6.8%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the related decline in reimbursable out-of-pocket expense and our cost management strategies, in both our Clinical Solutions and Commercial Solutions segments, as discussed below.
Clinical Solutions
Direct costs for our Clinical Solutions segment, excluding share-based compensation expense, were as follows (dollars in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our Clinical Solutions segment direct costs decreased by $122.8 million, or 4.7%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to lower reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses and billable headcount as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. There were additional decreases in direct costs from the impact of various cost management strategies, which included certain temporary compensation adjustments, hiring restrictions, staffing reductions, voluntary and involuntary employee furloughs, reductions in third-party costs, and other initiatives. The majority of the temporary cost savings measures ended in the third quarter of 2020. In addition to these temporary actions, we continued to implement our ForwardBound margin enhancement initiative.
Gross margins for our Clinical Solutions segment were 24.6% and 23.5% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Gross margin was higher during 2020 as compared to the prior year primarily due to reduced travel and other reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses and the impact of our cost management strategies, partially offset by the impact from lower revenue.
Although lower reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses during 2020 have resulted in a higher gross margin, we continue to aggressively manage our response to the COVID-19 pandemic to limit any impact to Clinical Solutions profitability in 2021. At this time, we continue to believe that the most significant impacts to margins in our Clinical Solutions segment will be those noted in the above Revenue section, partially offset by the impact of our cost management strategies and the impact of lower reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses. The trend of more remote monitoring visits is expected to continue after the pandemic, although below levels necessitated in 2020, resulting in both lower reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses and related revenue on a per visits basis, with no impact to profitability. As of December 31, 2020, a substantial number of our clinical trial sites have returned to allowing physical monitoring visits and we expect an increase in patient enrollment rates to result in a year over year increase in Clinical Solutions segment direct costs in 2021.
Commercial Solutions
Direct costs for our Commercial Solutions segment, excluding share-based compensation expense, were as follows (dollars in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our Commercial Solutions segment direct costs decreased by $127.3 million, or 12.7%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. These decreases were primarily related to declines in reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses, reduced billable headcount, and the impact of our cost management strategies, which were all primarily in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. These cost management strategies included certain temporary compensation adjustments, hiring restrictions, staffing reductions, voluntary and involuntary employee furloughs, reductions in third-party costs, and other initiatives. The majority of the temporary cost savings measures ended in the third quarter of 2020. In addition to these temporary actions, we continued to implement our ForwardBound margin enhancement initiative.
Gross margins for our Commercial Solutions segment were 21.3% and 20.2% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Gross margin was higher during 2020 as compared to the prior year primarily due to lower reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses and the impact of our cost management strategies, partially offset by the impact from lower revenue.
Although lower reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses during 2020 have resulted in a higher gross margin, we continue to aggressively manage our response to the COVID-19 pandemic to limit any impact to Commercial Solutions profitability in 2021. At this time, we continue to believe that the most significant impacts in our Commercial Solutions segment will be those noted in the above Revenue section, partially offset by the impact of our cost management strategies.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Selling, general, and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 declined compared to the prior year due to favorable impacts from our cost management strategies, primarily in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as our ForwardBound margin enhancement initiative. Our cost management strategies implemented in response to the uncertainty caused by the pandemic included certain temporary compensation adjustments, hiring restrictions, staffing reductions, voluntary and involuntary employee furloughs, reductions in third-party costs, and other initiatives. The majority of the temporary cost savings measures ended in the third quarter of 2020.
Restructuring and Other Costs
Restructuring and other costs were $29.4 million and $42.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The costs incurred during 2020 were primarily related to our cost management strategies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as our ForwardBound initiative. In connection with the Merger, we established a restructuring plan to eliminate redundant positions and reduce our facility footprint worldwide that partially contributed to our restructuring costs incurred in 2020 and 2019. Additionally, during 2020 and 2019, we incurred employee severance costs and facility closure costs for non Merger-related restructuring activities, as we continued ongoing evaluations of our workforce and facilities infrastructure needs in an effort to optimize our resources.
Restructuring and other costs consisted of the following (in thousands):
We expect to continue to incur significant costs related to the restructuring of our operations. However, the timing and the amount of these costs depend on various factors, including, but not limited to, identifying and realizing synergy opportunities and executing the integration of our combined operations for our recent acquisitions. We may also continue to incur additional restructuring and other costs during 2021 related to our cost savings initiatives, our ForwardBound margin enhancement initiative, our recent acquisitions, and our response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Transaction and Integration-Related Expenses
Transaction and integration-related expenses consisted of the following (in thousands):
Our transaction and integration-related expenses decreased in 2020 as compared to 2019. We expect to continue to incur professional fees and integration-related costs associated with the Synteract and Illingworth Research acquisitions, as well as the continued consolidation of our legal entities and information technology systems.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, there was a decrease in fair value adjustments to contingent obligations primarily due to a decrease in the estimate of the contingent earn-out liability associated with our acquisition of Kinapse Topco Limited in 2018. During the year ended December 31, 2019, there was an increase in the fair value adjustments to contingent obligations primarily due to an increase in the estimate of the transaction tax deduction benefit associated with Double Eagle's acquisition of inVentiv in 2016.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Total depreciation and amortization expense was $222.4 million and $242.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in total depreciation and amortization expense in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in amortization expense from intangible assets resulting from business combinations completed in prior years and a decrease in depreciation expense related to fully depreciated assets.
Total Other Expense, Net
Total other expense, net consisted of the following (dollars in thousands):
Total other expense, net was $89.5 million and $136.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to reductions in our higher interest rate debt as a result of debt prepayments and refinancing transactions as well as lower interest rates on our variable interest rate debt. Other (income) expense, net primarily consists of a $7.1 million gain related to the sale of the medication adherence business and a $3.7 million gain related to certain of our equity investments, partially offset by $7.3 million of foreign currency losses that resulted from exchange rate fluctuations on our monetary asset balances denominated in currencies other than our functional currency.
The loss on extinguishment of debt was $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a gain on extinguishment of debt of $10.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. These were incurred primarily as a result of our debt prepayments and refinancing transactions.
Income Tax Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded income tax expense of $10.9 million, on pre-tax income of $203.7 million. The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 varied from the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0% primarily due to: (i) the recognition of U.S. federal and foreign unrecognized tax benefits, (ii) changes to income tax valuation allowances on deferred tax assets, and (iii) tax benefits recognized related to the elections to retroactively apply recently issued regulations relative to Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (“GILTI”) high-tax exclusion and Section 163(j) CFC group election for interest deductibility.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded an income tax benefit of $29.5 million, on pre-tax income of $101.7 million. The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 varied from the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0% primarily due to: (i) the recognition of tax benefits as a result of releasing the prior year accrual for the base erosion and anti-abuse tax; (ii) foreign income inclusions such as the GILTI provisions; and (iii) valuation changes on domestic deferred tax assets. During 2019, sufficient positive evidence became available to allow us to reach a conclusion that a significant portion of our domestic valuation allowance was no longer needed. Consequently, such release of our valuation allowance resulted in a decrease to income tax expense of $68.5 million.
We currently maintain a valuation allowance against a portion of our state deferred tax assets and a portion of our foreign deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020. We intend to continue to maintain a valuation allowance on these deferred tax assets until there is sufficient evidence to support the reversal of all or some portion of these allowances.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted on March 27, 2020 in the United States to address the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act includes corporate income tax, payroll tax, and other relief provisions. There was not a significant impact to our income tax provision as a result of the CARES Act and other global measures for the year ended December 31, 2020. Throughout the year ended December 31, 2020, we qualified for certain employer payroll tax credits, which have been treated as government subsidies that offset the related operating expenses, as well as the deferral of certain payroll and other tax payments into the future. We have deferred the timing of certain income tax payments and other taxes as permitted by the CARES Act and other stimulus measures enacted globally.
Numerous final and proposed tax regulations were issued during the year ended December 31, 2020, including additional guidance related to changes included in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. The regulations included updated guidance related to revenue recognition pursuant to Section 451, interest expense limitations pursuant to Section 163(j), GILTI high-tax exclusion, and foreign tax credits. The GILTI high-tax and Section 163(j) regulations included certain elective provisions that we have retroactively applied to our 2018 and 2019 tax years.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Key measures of our liquidity were as follows as of December 31 (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, we had $272.2 million of cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash. As of December 31, 2020, substantially all of our cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash was held within the United States. In addition, we had $584.0 million (net of $16.0 million in outstanding letters of credit (“LOCs”)) available for borrowing under our $600.0 million revolving credit facility (the “Revolver”), of which $134.0 million was available for LOCs.
We have historically funded our operations and growth, including acquisitions, primarily with our working capital, cash flow from operations and funds available through various borrowing arrangements. Our principal liquidity requirements are to fund our debt service obligations, capital expenditures, expansion of service offerings, possible acquisitions, integration and restructuring costs, geographic expansion, stock repurchases, working capital, and other general corporate expenses. Cash from operations also could be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and major financial markets, as well as other risks detailed in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have implemented cash conservation initiatives, including delaying certain capital expenditures, reducing operating costs, deferring certain payroll taxes and other tax payments during the year ended December 31, 2020, as permitted by various government stimulus packages in multiple jurisdictions, and entering into interest rate swaps to fix certain variable rate debt at lower interest rates. Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe our cash and cash equivalents, cash generated from operations, and funds available under the Revolver will be sufficient to meet our working capital needs, capital expenditures, scheduled debt and interest payments, income tax obligations, and other currently anticipated liquidity requirements for at least the next 12 months.
As the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and our operations evolves, we will continue to assess our liquidity needs. A continued worldwide disruption could materially affect our future access to sources of liquidity, particularly our cash flows from operations, and financial condition. We may seek to raise additional capital, particularly in the event of a sustained market deterioration, which could be in the form of bonds, convertible debt, or equity. If we obtain additional capital by issuing equity, the interests of our existing stockholders will be diluted. If we incur additional indebtedness, that indebtedness may contain significant financial and other covenants that may significantly restrict our operations. We cannot assure you that we could obtain refinancing or additional financing on favorable terms or at all.
Indebtedness
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $2.97 billion of total principal indebtedness (including $49.0 million in finance lease obligations), consisting of $2.02 billion in term loan debt, $600.0 million of 3.625% senior notes (the “Notes”), and $300.0 million in borrowings against our accounts receivable financing agreement. Approximately $809.5 million of our indebtedness (excluding finance leases) was subject to variable interest rates.
3.625% Senior Notes Due 2029
On November 24, 2020, we completed the issuance and sale of $600.0 million aggregate principal amount of the Notes. We received net proceeds, after deducting offering expenses, of $592.5 million. The net proceeds of the offering were used for general corporate purposes and to fund the Synteract and Illingworth Research acquisitions.
The Notes were issued pursuant to an indenture, dated as of November 24, 2020 (the “Base Indenture”), among us and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee (the “Trustee”), as supplemented by a first supplemental indenture, dated as of November 24, 2020 (the “Supplemental Indenture”, and together with the Base Indenture, the “Indenture”), among us, the subsidiary guarantors named therein, and the Trustee. The Indenture provides, among other things, that the Notes are senior unsecured obligations of us and are guaranteed, jointly and severally, on a senior unsecured basis, by certain of our subsidiaries.
We may redeem some or all of the Notes at any time prior to January 15, 2024 at a redemption price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes to be redeemed plus a “make-whole” premium and accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, prior to July 15, 2023, we may redeem up to 40% of the original principal amount of the Notes with proceeds of certain equity offerings at a redemption price equal to 103.625% of the aggregate principal amount of such Notes plus accrued and unpaid interest. On or after January 15, 2024, we may redeem some or all of the Notes at the redemption prices set forth in the Indenture plus accrued and unpaid interest. The Indenture contains covenants that limit the ability of us and our restricted subsidiaries to, among other things, (1) incur additional liens, (2) engage in certain sale and leaseback transactions, and (3) conduct mergers, consolidations, or asset sales. These covenants are subject to exceptions and qualifications set forth in the Indenture.
If we sell certain of our assets or experience specific kinds of changes of control, we are required to offer to repurchase the Notes at a repurchase price equal to (1) par plus any accrued and unpaid interest in the case of an asset sale or (2) 101% of the aggregate principal amount thereof plus any accrued and unpaid interest in the case of a change of control.
The Notes have not been registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) or the securities laws of any other jurisdiction. The Notes were sold to persons reasonably believed to be qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A and outside the United States pursuant to Regulation S of the Securities Act.
Credit Agreement
We are party to a credit agreement (as amended, the “Credit Agreement”) that includes a $1.55 billion Term Loan A facility (“Term Loan A”) that has two tranches, tranche one that matures on March 26, 2024 and tranche two that matures on August 1, 2024, a $1.60 billion Term Loan B facility (“Term Loan B”) that matures on August 1, 2024, and a $600.0 million Revolver that matures on August 1, 2024. The Revolver includes LOCs with a sublimit of $150.0 million.
On November 24, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the Credit Agreement that extended the maturity date of the Revolver and a portion of Term Loan A to August 1, 2024.
In February 2020, as a result of our Secured Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) being less than or equal to 2.75x, the Adjusted Eurocurrency Rate Spread (as defined in the Credit Agreement) on our Term B Loans decreased from 2.00% to 1.75%.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we made $53.5 million and $235.0 million of voluntary prepayments against Term Loan A and Term Loan B, respectively that were applied to future mandatory principal payments due. As a result of these and previous voluntary prepayments, we are not required to make a mandatory payment against the principal balance of Term Loan A until April 2022 and Term Loan B until maturity in August 2024. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we made $38.8 million of mandatory principal payments towards Term Loan A.
We pay a quarterly commitment fee between 0.25% and 0.375% on the average daily unused balance of the Revolver based on the “First Lien Leverage Ratio” at the adjustment date. Fees are charged on all outstanding LOCs at an annual rate equal to the margin in effect on Eurocurrency Rate revolving loans plus participation and fronting fees. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate on the Term Loan A and the Revolver was 1.646% and the interest rate on the Term Loan B was 1.896%.
Our ability to make payments on our indebtedness and to fund planned capital expenditures and necessary working capital will depend on our ability to generate cash in the future. Our ability to meet our cash needs through cash flows from operations will depend on the demand for our services, as well as general economic, financial, competitive, and other factors, many of which are beyond our control, including the broad effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and major financial markets. Our business may not generate cash flow in an amount sufficient to enable us to pay the principal of, or interest on, our indebtedness, or to fund our other liquidity needs, including working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, investments, and other general corporate requirements. If we cannot fund our liquidity needs, we will have to take actions such as reducing or delaying capital expenditures, acquisitions or investments, selling assets, restructuring or refinancing our debt, reducing the scope of our operations and growth plans, or seeking additional capital. We cannot assure you that any of these remedies could, if necessary, be affected on commercially reasonable terms, or at all, or that they would permit us to meet our scheduled debt service obligations. The Credit Agreement contains covenant restrictions that limit our ability to direct the use of proceeds from any disposition of assets and, as a result, we may not be allowed to use the proceeds from any such dispositions to satisfy all current debt service obligations.
Debt Covenants
The Credit Agreement contains usual and customary restrictive covenants that, among other things, place limitations on our ability to pay dividends or make other restricted payments; prepay, redeem or purchase debt; incur liens; make loans and investments; incur additional indebtedness; amend or otherwise alter debt and other material arrangements; make acquisitions and dispose of assets; transact with affiliates; and engage in transactions that are not related to our existing business. Each of the restrictive covenants is subject to important exceptions and qualifications that would allow us to engage in these activities under certain conditions, including our ability to: (i) pay dividends each year in an amount up to the greater of (a) 6% of the net cash proceeds received by us from any public offering and (b) 5% of our market capitalization; and (ii) pay unlimited dividends if our Secured Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) is no greater than 3.0 to 1.0.
In addition, with respect to the Term Loan A and the Revolver, the Credit Agreement requires us to maintain a maximum First Lien Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of no more than 4.5 to 1.0 as of the last day of each fiscal quarter.
The Indenture also contains customary events of default, including (1) failure to make required payments, (2) failure to comply with certain covenants, (3) failure to pay certain other indebtedness, (4) certain events of bankruptcy and insolvency, and (5) failure to pay certain judgments. An event of default under the Indenture allows either the Trustee or the holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the Notes, as applicable, issued under such Indenture, to accelerate the amounts due under the Notes, or in the case of a bankruptcy or insolvency, will automatically cause the acceleration of the amounts due under the Notes.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all applicable debt covenants.
Covenant Restrictions under our Lease Agreement
The lease agreement for our corporate headquarters in Morrisville, North Carolina includes a provision that may require us to issue a LOC to the landlord based on our debt rating issued by Moody’s Investors Service (or other nationally-recognized debt rating agency, such as S&P Global Ratings). As of December 31, 2020 (and through the date of this filing), our debt rating was such that no LOC is currently required. Any letters of credit issued in accordance with the aforementioned requirements could be issued under our Revolver, and if issued under our Revolver, would reduce its available borrowing capacity by the same amount.
Accounts Receivable Financing Agreement
On September 25, 2020, we amended our accounts receivable financing agreement to increase the amount we can borrow from $275.0 million to $300.0 million and extend the maturity date to October 2022, and drew down the additional $25.0 million. This agreement is secured by a lien on certain receivables and other assets, and we have guaranteed the performance of the obligations of existing and future subsidiaries that sell and service the accounts receivable under this agreement. The available borrowing capacity varies monthly according to the levels of our eligible accounts receivable and unbilled receivables. Loans under this agreement will accrue interest at a reserve-adjusted LIBOR rate or a base rate equal to the higher of (i) the applicable lender’s prime rate and (ii) the federal funds rate plus 0.50%. We may prepay loans upon one business day’s prior notice and may terminate or reduce the facility limit of the accounts receivable financing agreement with 15 days’ prior notice. As of December 31, 2020, we had $300.0 million of outstanding borrowings under this agreement with no remaining borrowing capacity available.
On January 28, 2021, we amended our accounts receivable financing agreement to increase the amount we can borrow from $300.0 million to $365.0 million, and drew down the additional $65.0 million. At the same time, we made voluntary prepayments on our term loans totaling $65.0 million; therefore, there was no incremental impact on our debt.
Interest Rates
We have entered into various interest rate swaps to mitigate our exposure to changes in interest rates on our term loans. As of December 31, 2020, the percentage of our total principal debt (excluding finance leases) that is subject to fixed interest rates was approximately 72%. Each quarter-point increase or decrease in the applicable floating interest rate at December 31, 2020 would change our annual interest expense by approximately $2.0 million.
Stock Repurchase Program
On February 26, 2018, our Board of Directors (our “Board”) authorized the repurchase of up to an aggregate of $250.0 million of our common stock to be executed from time to time in open market transactions effected through a broker at prevailing market prices, in block trades, or privately negotiated transactions through December 31, 2019 (the “2018 stock repurchase program”). On December 5, 2019, our Board approved an expansion and extension of the stock repurchase program. Our Board increased the share repurchase authorization of our common stock to $300.0 million and extended the term of the program to December 31, 2020. Share repurchases are funded primarily with our working capital, cash flow from operations, and funds available through various borrowing arrangements. The 2018 stock repurchase program expired on December 31, 2020.
On November 17, 2020, our Board approved a new stock repurchase program (the “2021 stock repurchase program”) that took effect on January 1, 2021, and which succeeded our 2018 stock repurchase program. The 2021 stock repurchase program authorizes us to repurchase up to $300.0 million of our Class A common stock, par value $0.01, and will expire on December 31, 2022.
We are not obligated to repurchase any particular amount of our common stock, and the 2021 stock repurchase program may be modified, extended, suspended, or discontinued at any time. The timing and amount of repurchases is determined by our management based on a variety of factors such as the market price of our common stock, our corporate requirements for cash, and overall market conditions. The 2021 stock repurchase program is subject to applicable legal requirements, including federal and state securities laws and applicable Nasdaq rules.
The following table sets forth repurchase activity under the 2018 stock repurchase program from inception through December 31, 2020:
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Restricted Cash
Our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities were as follows (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash flows provided by operating activities increased by $107.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily due to both higher cash-related net income and positive changes in operating assets and liabilities relative to the prior year, including the deferral of certain income tax payments and other taxes as permitted by the CARES Act. The CARES Act deferrals ended on December 31, 2020, with required payments in 2021 and 2022. Fluctuations in accounts receivable, unbilled services (including contract assets), and deferred revenue occur on a regular basis as we perform services, achieve milestones or other billing criteria, send invoices to customers, and collect outstanding accounts receivable. This activity varies by individual customer and contract. We attempt to negotiate payment terms that provide for payment of services prior to or soon after the provision of services, but the levels of accounts receivable, unbilled services (including contract assets), and deferred revenue can vary significantly from period to period.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $504.1 million in cash for investing activities, which primarily consisted of $456.5 million of cash paid for the acquisitions of Synteract and Illingworth Research. Additionally, we used $50.0 million in cash for purchases of property and equipment and $15.6 million in cash for investments in unconsolidated affiliates, partially offset by cash received of $18.0 million for the sale of our medication adherence business. We continue to closely monitor our capital expenditures, especially in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, while making strategic investments in the development of our information technology infrastructure to meet the needs of our workforce, enable efficiencies, reduce business continuity risks, and conform to changes in governing rules and regulations.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we used $81.7 million in cash for investing activities, which consisted primarily of $64.0 million for purchases of property and equipment and $17.0 million for investments in unconsolidated affiliates.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, financing activities provided $178.3 million in cash, primarily resulting from a net increase in long term debt from the issuance of the Notes, partially offset by repayments of other long-term debt, repurchases of our common stock, and contingent consideration payments.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we used $215.5 million in cash for financing activities, which consisted primarily of net repayments on term loan debt and our former senior notes that were retired in 2019, as well as payments for the repurchase of our common stock. These payments were partially offset by net proceeds from our Term Loan A, our accounts receivable financing agreement, and proceeds received from the exercise of stock options.
Inflation
Our long-term contracts generally include inflation or cost of living adjustments for the portion of the services to be performed beyond one year from the contract date. In the event actual inflation rates are greater than our contractual inflation rates or cost of living adjustments, inflation could have a material adverse effect on our operations or financial condition.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) requires management to make estimates, judgments, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses during the period, as well as disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis, including those related to revenue recognition, valuation of goodwill and identifiable intangibles, and tax-related contingencies and valuation allowances. These estimates are based on the information available to management at the time these estimates, judgments, and assumptions are made. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations in accordance with ASC Topic 805, Business Combinations, using the acquisition method of accounting. The purchase price, or total consideration transferred, is determined as the fair value of assets exchanged, equity instruments issued, and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. The acquisition method of accounting requires that the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree are measured and recorded at their fair values on the date of a business combination. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value of the net assets acquired, including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets. Acquisition-related costs are expensed as incurred. The consolidated financial statements reflect the results of operations of the acquiree from the date of the acquisition. For additional information, see Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplemental Data - Note 3 - Business Combinations.”
Revenue Recognition
We adopted ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers and all the related amendments (“new revenue standard” or “ASC 606”) on January 1, 2018 using the modified retrospective method for all contracts not completed as of the date of adoption. In accordance with ASC 606, revenue is recognized when, or as, a customer obtains control of promised services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for these services.
The majority of our Clinical Solutions segment revenue is for service offerings that range in duration from a few months to several years and typically represent a single performance obligation. Revenue for these service contracts is recognized over time using an input measure of progress. The input measure reflects costs (including investigator payments and pass-through costs) incurred to date relative to total estimated costs to complete the contract (“cost-to-cost measure of progress”). Under the cost-to-cost measure of progress methodology, revenue is recorded proportionally to costs incurred. Contract costs principally include direct labor, investigator payments, and pass-through costs. The estimate of total revenue and costs to completion requires significant judgment. Contract estimates are based on various assumptions to project future outcomes of events that often span several years, as well on evaluations and updates made on an ongoing basis. These estimates are reviewed periodically and any adjustments are recognized on a cumulative catch up basis in the period they become known. Updates and adjustments to estimates are likely to result in variability in revenue recognized from period to period and may cause unexpected variability in our operating results. In addition, in certain instances a customer contract may include forms of variable consideration such as incentive fees, volume rebates or other provisions that can increase or decrease the transaction price. This variable consideration is generally awarded upon achievement of certain performance metrics, program milestones or cost targets. For the purposes of revenue recognition, variable consideration is assessed on a contract-by-contract basis and the amount to be recorded is estimated based on the assessment of our anticipated performance and consideration of all information that is reasonably available. Variable consideration is recognized as revenue if and when it is deemed probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved in the future.
The largest of the service offerings within the Commercial Solutions segment relates to Deployment Solutions. Deployment Solutions contracts consist of services to promote and sell commercial products on behalf of a customer. The remaining Commercial Solutions contracts are generally short-term, month-to-month contracts or time and materials contracts. As such, Commercial Solutions revenue is generally recognized as services are performed for the amount we estimate we are entitled to for the period. For contracts billed on a fixed price basis, revenue is recognized over time based on the proportion of labor costs expended to total labor costs expected to complete the contract.
Most of our contracts can be terminated by the customer without cause with a 30-day notice. In the event of termination, our contracts generally provide that the customer pay us for fees earned through the termination date; fees and expenses for winding down the project, which include both fees incurred and actual expenses; non-cancellable expenditures; and in some cases, a fee to cover a portion of the remaining professional fees on the project. Our long-term clinical trial contracts contain implied substantive termination penalties because of the significant wind-down cost of terminating a clinical trial. These provisions for termination penalties result in these types of contracts being treated as long-term for revenue recognition purposes.
Changes in the scope of work are common, especially under long-term contracts, and generally result in a renegotiation of future contract pricing terms and change in contract transaction price. If the customer does not agree to a contract modification, we could bear the risk of cost overruns. Most of our contract modifications are for services that are not distinct from the services under the existing contract due to the significant integration service provided in the context of the contract and therefore result in a cumulative catch-up adjustment to revenue at the date of contract modification.
Timing of Billing and Performance
Differences in the timing of revenue recognition and associated billings and cash collections result in recording of billed accounts receivable, unbilled accounts receivable, contract assets, and deferred revenue on the consolidated balance sheet. Amounts are billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms either at periodic intervals or upon achievement of contractual milestones. Billings generally occur subsequent to revenue recognition, resulting in recording of unbilled accounts receivable in instances where the right to bill is contingent solely on the passage of time (e.g., in the following month) and contract assets in instances where the right to bill is associated with a contingency (e.g., achievement of a milestone).
Accounts receivable are recorded at net realizable value. Unbilled accounts receivable (including contract assets) arise when services have been rendered for which revenue has been recognized but the customers have not been billed. In general, prerequisites for billings and payments are established by contractual provisions, including predetermined payment schedules, which may or may not correspond to the timing of the performance of services under the contract. Contract assets include unbilled amounts typically resulting from revenue recognized in excess of the amounts billed to the customer for which the right to payment is subject to factors other than the passage of time. These amounts may not exceed their net realizable value. Contract assets are generally classified as current. Deferred revenue represents contract liabilities and consists of customer payments received in advance of performance and billings in excess of revenue recognized, net of revenue recognized from the balance at the beginning of the period. Contract assets and deferred revenue are presented on the balance sheet on a net contract-by-contract basis at the end of each reporting period.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the estimated fair value of net assets acquired, including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets, in business combinations. In accordance with ASC Topic 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, goodwill is not subject to amortization but must be tested for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is one level below the operating segment level. This test requires us to determine if the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill is less than its carrying amount.
The impairment analysis requires significant judgments, estimates and assumptions. There is no assurance that the actual future earnings or cash flows of the reporting units will not decline significantly from the projections used in the impairment analysis. Goodwill impairment charges may be recognized in future periods in one or more of the reporting units to the extent changes in factors or circumstances occur, including deterioration in the macroeconomic environment, industry, deterioration in our performance or our future projections, or changes in plans for one or more of our reporting units.
We completed our annual impairment test for potential impairment as of October 1, 2020 for all five of our reporting units, determining that there were no impairments. Our goodwill is principally related to the Merger completed on August 1, 2017. The COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted our results of operations during 2020, however, at this time, we do not believe there has been a significant change in the long-term fundamentals of our business. We will continue to evaluate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. Depending on the extent to which future developments negatively impact our results of operations and financial outlook, an interim impairment test may be required in the future.
Intangible assets consist of backlog, customer relationships, trade names, trademarks, and other intellectual property. We amortize intangible assets related to customer relationships, trade names, trademarks, and other intellectual property on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the asset. Intangible assets related to backlog are amortized based on our expectations of the timing of when revenue associated with the backlog is expected to be recognized.
We review intangible assets at the end of each reporting period to determine if facts and circumstances indicate that the useful life is shorter than originally estimated or that the carrying amount of the assets might not be recoverable. If such facts and circumstances exist, we assess the recoverability of identified assets by comparing the projected undiscounted net cash flows associated with the related asset or group of assets over their remaining lives to their respective carrying amounts. Impairments, if any, are based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of those assets and occur in the period in which the impairment determination is made.
Income Taxes
We and our U.S. subsidiaries file a consolidated U.S. federal income tax return. Our other subsidiaries file tax returns in their local jurisdictions.
We provide for income taxes on all transactions that have been recognized in the consolidated financial statements. Specifically, we estimate our tax liability based on current tax laws in the statutory jurisdictions in which we operate. Accordingly, the impact of changes in income tax laws on deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are recognized in net earnings in the period during which such changes are enacted. We record deferred tax assets and liabilities based on temporary differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities and for tax benefit carryforwards using enacted tax rates in effect in the year in which the differences are expected to reverse.
We provide valuation allowances against deferred tax assets for amounts that are not considered more likely than not to be realized. The valuation of the deferred tax asset is dependent on, among other things, our ability to generate a sufficient level of future taxable income. In estimating future taxable income, we have considered both positive and negative evidence, such as historical and forecasted results of operations, and have considered the implementation of prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. If the objectively verifiable negative evidence outweighs any available positive evidence (or the only available positive is subjective and cannot be verified), then a valuation allowance will likely be deemed necessary. If a valuation allowance is deemed to be unnecessary, such allowance is released and any related benefit is recognized in the period of the change.
We recognize a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if we believe it is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position. Judgment is required in determining what constitutes an individual tax position, as well as the assessment of the outcome of each tax position. We consider many factors when evaluating and estimating tax positions and tax benefits. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations in domestic and foreign jurisdictions. The amount of the accrual for which an exposure exists is measured as the largest amount of benefit determined on a cumulative probability basis that we believe is more likely than not to be realized upon ultimate settlement of the position. If the calculation of liability related to uncertain tax positions proves to be more or less than the ultimate assessment, a tax expense or benefit, respectively, would result. Unrecognized tax benefits are presented as either a reduction to a deferred tax asset for a net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforward, a similar tax loss, or a tax credit carryforward or as a separate liability.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For a description of recently issued accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and the estimated effects, if any, on our consolidated financial statements, see “Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.