Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our consolidated results of operations and financial condition should be read together with the other financial information and consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from the results anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of a variety of factors, including those discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a diversified provider of truck components, oil and gas pipeline components and aerospace and defense electronics. We offer a wide range of manufactured products, often under multi-year sole-source contracts.
We are organized into two business segments, Sypris Technologies and Sypris Electronics. Sypris Technologies, which is comprised of Sypris Technologies, Inc. and its subsidiaries, generates revenue primarily from the sale of forged, machined, welded and heat-treated steel components primarily for heavy commercial vehicle and high-pressure energy pipeline applications. Sypris Electronics, which is comprised of Sypris Electronics, LLC, generates revenue primarily through circuit card and full “box build” manufacturing, high reliability manufacturing, systems assembly and integration, design for manufacturability and design to specification work.
We focus on those markets where we believe we have the expertise, qualifications and leadership position to sustain a competitive advantage. We target our resources to support the needs of industry participants that embrace technological innovation and flexibility, coupled with multi-year contractual relationships, as a strategic component of their supply chain management. These contracts, many of which are sole-source by part number, have historically created opportunities to invest in leading-edge processes or technologies to help our customers remain competitive. The productivity and innovation that can result from such investments helps to differentiate us from our competition when it comes to cost, quality, reliability and customer service.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted, and is likely to continue to result, in significant economic disruption and has and will likely continue to adversely affect our business. As of the date of this filing, significant uncertainty exists concerning the continued impact and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company has continued to operate at each location and sought to remain compliant with government regulations imposed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company began to experience lower revenue late in the first quarter of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, followed by a more significant impact in the second quarter, especially within the Sypris Technologies group. During periods of lower production, the Company performed certain preventative maintenance procedures on its equipment and utilized resources to continue to make progress on certain strategic initiatives. Towards the end of the second quarter, some state and local jurisdictions started to lift mandatory stay-at-home or shelter-in-place orders and started gradually to ease restrictions. While the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted the Company’s results of operations, cash flows and financial position in 2020, management implemented actions to mitigate the financial impact, to protect the health of its employees and to comply with government regulations at each of our locations. Factors deriving from the COVID-19 response that have and may continue to negatively impact sales and gross margin in the future include, but are not limited to: limitations on the ability of our suppliers to manufacture, or procure from manufacturers, the material components we utilize in the manufacture of the products we sell, or to meet delivery requirements and commitments; limitations on the ability of our employees to perform their work due to illness caused by the pandemic or local, state, or federal orders requiring employees to remain at home; limitations on the ability of our customers to conduct their business and purchase our products; and limitations on the ability of our customers to pay us on a timely basis.
We experienced disruptions in our business as we implemented modifications to preserve adequate liquidity and ensure that our business continued to operate during this uncertain time. With respect to liquidity, we evaluated and took actions to reduce costs and spending across our organization. This included reducing hiring activities, reducing compensation of our Chairman, President and CEO, certain other senior leadership and corporate personnel and our Board of Directors, and limiting discretionary spending. In addition, under the CARES Act, we have deferred certain payroll taxes into future years. We also reduced spending on capital investment projects and managed working capital to preserve liquidity during this crisis. In addition to these activities, during the second quarter, the Company secured a $3.6 million term loan with BMO, pursuant to the PPP under the CARES Act. Proceeds from the PPP Loan have been used to retain workers and maintain payroll and make lease and utility payments.
While we are unable to determine or predict the nature, duration or scope of the overall impact the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business, results of operations, liquidity or capital resources, we will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers and shareholders.
Sypris Technologies Outlook
After two years of record high volumes, the commercial vehicle market softened materially during the fourth quarter of 2019, impacting production rates as customers responded to the demand reduction and balanced inventory levels. This anticipated cyclical decline, coupled with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, resulted in a significant decline in North American Class 4-8 shipments in 2020, with Class 8 production dropping nearly 31% from the prior year. In 2020, Sypris Technologies experienced a significant reduction in demand from customers serving the automotive, commercial vehicle, sport utility vehicle and off-highway markets, and the significant drop in oil prices has created uncertainty for many of the energy infrastructure projects utilizing the components we produce and sell. Sypris Technologies’ revenue was negatively impacted at the end of the first quarter of 2020 and was more significantly impacted during the second quarter contributing to a 55.9% decline from the second quarter of 2019. However, demand improved during the second half of 2020, declining only 15.7% from the second half of 2019. We are anticipating year-over-year growth in 2021. We believe that the market diversification Sypris Technologies has accomplished over recent years by adding new programs in the automotive, sport-utility and off-highway markets has benefited and will continue to benefit the Company, as demand for our products in these markets did not decline as dramatically as demand declined in the Class 8 commercial vehicle market.
Depressed oil and gas prices coupled with reduced travel, business closures, and other economic impacts related to the COVID-19 pandemic are suppressing near-term oil and natural gas demand, which has adversely impacted the oil and gas markets served by our Tube Turns® brand of engineered product lines. This is causing major pipeline developers to significantly scale back near term capital investments in new pipeline infrastructure. This has resulted in reduced demand for our products for the oil and gas markets. However, we expect oil and gas sector spending to improve in 2021 compared to 2020.
We will continue to pursue new business in a wide variety of markets from light automotive to new energy related product lines to achieve a more balanced portfolio across our customers, markets and products.
Sypris Electronics Outlook
In accordance with the DoD guidance issued in March 2020 designating the Defense Industrial Base as a critical infrastructure workforce, our Sypris Electronics production facility continued to operate in support of essential products and services required to meet national security commitments to the U.S. Government and the U.S. military.
The U.S. Government has taken actions in response to COVID-19 to increase progress payments in new and existing contracts and accelerate contract awards through increased use of Undefinitized Contracting Actions (UCAs) to provide cash flow and liquidity for companies in the Defense Industrial Base, including large prime contractors and smaller suppliers. Certain of the large prime contractors are implementing multiple actions to help support certain suppliers affected by COVID-19, including accelerating payments to subcontractors, such as Sypris Electronics.
In the past few years, we have faced challenges within Sypris Electronics, including certain electronic component shortages and extensive lead-time manufacturing issues. This had a negative impact on our production schedules and margin performance in 2019. However, these negative impacts did not persist in 2020, as many of the component shortages and issues were resolved in 2019 and in early 2020. The majority of the government aerospace and defense programs that we support require specific components that are sole-sourced to specific suppliers; therefore, the resolution of supplier constraints requires coordination with our customers or the end-users of the products. We have partnered with our customers to qualify alternative components or suppliers and will continue to focus on our supply chain to attempt to mitigate the impact of supply component shortages on our business. While the COVID-19 outbreak did not have a material impact on our supply chain in 2020, overall component shortages may become a challenge in 2021. We may not be successful in addressing these shortages and other issues.
During 2019 and 2020, we announced new program awards as a contractor for Sypris Electronics, with certain programs contributing to revenue in 2020 and continuing into 2022. In addition to contract awards from U.S. Department of Defense (“DoD”) prime contractors related to weapons systems, electronic warfare and infrared countermeasures in our traditional aerospace and defense markets, we have also been awarded subcontracts related to the communication and navigation markets, which align with our advanced capabilities for delivering products for complex, high cost of failure platforms.
On December 27, 2020, the President of the United States signed the fiscal year (FY) 2021 Consolidated Appropriations Act, providing annual funding for the DoD, other government agencies, and COVID-19 relief. The appropriations provide $741 billion in discretionary funding for national defense (including DoD funding and defense-related spending in energy and water development, homeland security, and military construction appropriations), of which $671 billion is in base funding and $69 billion is OCO/emergency funding (OCO and emergency supplemental funding do not count toward discretionary spending caps). Of the $741 billion, the DoD was allocated $704 billion, composed of $635 billion in base funding and $69 billion in OCO and emergency funding. The appropriations adhere to the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2019 (BBA 2019), which increased the spending limits for both defense and non-defense discretionary funds for the final two years (FY 2020 and FY 2021) of the Budget Control Act of 2011 (BCA).
It remains uncertain when the government will approve FY 2021 appropriations and what government programs will be funded and at what levels. We expect to compete for follow-on business opportunities as a subcontractor on future builds of several existing government programs. However, the long-term impacts of COVID-19 on government budgets and other funding priorities that impact demand for our products and services and our business are difficult to predict.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires that we make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported. Changes in facts and circumstances could have a significant impact on the resulting estimated amounts included in our consolidated financial statements. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more complex judgments and estimates. We also have other policies that we consider to be key accounting policies, such as our policies for revenue recognition for Sypris Technologies, including cost of sales; however, these policies do not meet the definition of critical accounting policies because they do not generally require us to make estimates or judgments that are difficult or subjective. The following discussion of accounting estimates is intended to supplement the Summary of Significant Accounting Policies presented as Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
Net Revenue and Cost of Sales. The Company recognizes revenue when it satisfies a performance obligation by transferring control of a promised product or rendering a service to a customer. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for the product or service (the “transaction price”). The Company’s transaction price in its contracts with customers is generally fixed; no payment discounts, rebates or refunds are included within its contracts. The Company does not provide service-type warranties, nor does it allow customer returns. In connection with the sale of various parts to customers, the Company is subject to typical assurance warranty obligations covering the compliance of the electronics parts produced to agreed-upon specifications (See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Customer returns, when they occur, relate to quality rework issues and are not connected to any repurchase obligation of the Company.
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct product or render a service to a customer and is the unit of account to which the transaction price is allocated under ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. When a contract contains multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to the individual performance obligations using the price at which the promised goods or services would be sold to customers on a standalone basis. For most sales within our Sypris Technologies segment and a portion of sales within Sypris Electronics, control transfers to the customer at a point in time. Indicators that control has transferred to the customer include the Company having a present right to payment, the customer obtaining legal title and the customer having the significant risks and rewards of ownership. The Company’s principal terms of sale are FOB Shipping Point, or equivalent, and, as such, the Company primarily transfers control and records revenue for product sales upon shipment.
For contracts where Sypris Electronics serves as a contractor for aerospace and defense companies under federally funded programs, we generally recognize revenue over time as we perform due to the continuous transfer of control to the customer. This continuous transfer of control to the customer is supported by clauses in the contracts that allow the customer to unilaterally terminate the contract for convenience, pay us for costs incurred plus a reasonable profit and take control of any work in process. Because control is transferred over time, revenue is recognized based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation. We use labor hours incurred as a measure of progress for these contracts because it best depicts the Company’s performance of the obligation to the customer, which occurs as we incur labor on our contracts. Under this measure of progress, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of labor hours incurred to date to the total estimated labor hours at completion of the performance obligation.
Our contract profit margins may include estimates of revenues for goods or services on which the customer and the Company have not reached final agreements, such as contract changes, settlements of disputed claims, and the final amounts of requested equitable adjustments permitted under the contract. These estimates are based upon management’s best assessment of the totality of the circumstances and are included in our contract profit based upon contractual provisions and our relationships with each customer.
Long-lived asset impairment. We perform periodic impairment analysis on our long-lived amortizable assets whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. When indicators are present, we compare the estimated future undiscounted net cash flows of the operations to which the assets relate to their carrying amount. If the operations are unable to recover the carrying amount of their assets, the long-lived assets are written down to their estimated fair value. Fair value is determined based on discounted cash flows, third party appraisals or other methods that provide appropriate estimates of value. A considerable amount of management judgment and assumptions are required in performing the impairment test, principally in determining whether an adverse event or circumstance has triggered the need for an impairment review. The Company did not have any long-lived assets measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis as of December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Pension Plan Funded Status. Our U.S. defined benefit pension plans are closed to new entrants and only $5,000 of service-related cost was recorded in 2020 related to a small number of participants who are still accruing benefits in the Louisville Hourly and Salaried Plans. Changes in our net obligations are principally attributable to changing discount rates and the performance of plan assets. Pension obligations are valued using discount rates established annually in consultation with our outside actuarial advisers using a theoretical bond portfolio, adjusted according to the timing of expected cash flows for our future obligations. Plan liabilities at December 31, 2020 are based upon a discount rate of 2.25% which reflects the Above Mean Mercer Yield Curve rate as of December 31, 2020 rounded to the nearest 5th basis point. Declining discount rates increase the present value of future pension obligations; a 25 basis point decrease in the discount rate would increase our U.S. pension liability by about $0.9 million. As indicated above, when establishing the expected long-term rate of return on our U.S. pension plan assets, we consider historical performance and forward looking return estimates reflective of our portfolio mix and investment strategy. Based on the most recent analysis of projected portfolio returns, we concluded that the use of 3.15% for the Louisville Hourly Plan, 3.40% for the Marion Plan and 3.05% for the Louisville Salaried Plan as the expected return on our U.S. pension plan assets for 2020 was appropriate. A change in the assumed rate of return on plan assets of 100 basis points would result in a $0.3 million change in the estimated 2020 pension expense.
At December 31, 2020, we have $13.3 million of unrecognized losses relating to our U.S. pension plans. Actuarial gains and losses, which are primarily the result of changes in the discount rate and other assumptions and differences between actual and expected asset returns, are deferred in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income and amortized to expense following the corridor approach. We use the average remaining service period of active participants unless almost all of the plan’s participants are inactive, in which case we use the average remaining life expectancy for all active and inactive participants.
Based on the current funded status of our U.S. plans, we expect to contribute approximately $0.6 million during 2021, which represents the minimum funding amounts required by federal law.
Reserve for Excess, Obsolete and Scrap Inventory. We record inventory at the lower of cost, determined under the first-in, first-out method, or net realizable value, and we reserve for excess, obsolete or scrap inventory. These reserves are primarily based upon management’s assessment of the salability of the inventory, historical usage of raw materials, historical demand for finished goods and estimated future usage and demand. An improper assessment of salability or improper estimate of future usage or demand, or significant changes in usage or demand could result in significant changes in the reserves and a positive or a negative impact on our consolidated results of operations in the period the change occurs.
Stock-based Compensation. We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with the fair value recognition provisions using the Black-Scholes option-pricing method, which requires the input of several subjective assumptions. These assumptions include estimating the length of time employees will retain their vested stock options before exercising them (expected term) and the estimated volatility of our common stock price over the expected term. The dividend yield is assumed to be zero as we have not paid dividends nor do we anticipate paying any dividends in the foreseeable future. Changes in the subjective assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate of stock-based compensation and consequently, the related expense recognized in the consolidated statements of operations.
Income Taxes. We account for income taxes as required by the provisions of ASC 740, Income Taxes, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the tax effects of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities measured using enacted tax rates.
Management judgment is required in determining income tax expense and the related balance sheet amounts. In addition, under ASC 740-10, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, judgments are required concerning the ultimate outcome of uncertain income tax positions. Actual income taxes paid may vary from estimates, depending upon changes in income tax laws, actual results of operations and the final audit of tax returns by taxing authorities. Tax assessments may arise several years after tax returns have been filed. We believe that our recorded income tax liabilities adequately provide for the probable outcome of these assessments.
Deferred tax assets are also recorded for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. However, ASC 740 requires that a valuation allowance be recorded when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. This assessment is largely dependent upon projected near-term profitability including the effects of tax planning. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined separately for each tax jurisdiction in which we conduct our operations or otherwise incur taxable income or losses. The Company evaluates its deferred tax position on a quarterly basis and valuation allowances are provided as necessary. During this evaluation, the Company reviews its forecast of income in conjunction with other positive and negative evidence surrounding the realizability of its deferred tax assets to determine if a valuation allowance is needed. Based on its current forecast, the Company believes it will have sufficient future taxable income to realize the deferred tax assets recorded by its Mexican subsidiaries. Therefore, the Company reversed its valuation allowance recorded in prior years against certain Mexican net deferred tax assets and recognized an income tax benefit of $3.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Based on its current forecast, the Company has established a valuation allowance against all U.S. deferred tax assets. Until an appropriate level and characterization of profitability is attained, the Company expects to continue to maintain a valuation allowance on its net deferred tax assets related to future U.S. tax benefits. If we determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net recorded amount, an adjustment to reduce the valuation allowance would increase net income in the period that such determination is made.
Results of Operations
We operate in two segments, Sypris Technologies and Sypris Electronics. The table presented below compares our segment and consolidated results of operations from 2020 to 2019. The table presents the results for each year, the change in those results from one year to another in both dollars and percentage change and the results for each year as a percentage of net revenue.
●
The first two columns in each table show the absolute results for each period presented.
●
The columns entitled “Year-Over-Year Change” and “Year-Over-Year Percentage Change” show the change in results, both in dollars and percentages. These two columns show favorable changes as positive and unfavorable changes as negative. For example, when our net revenue increases from one period to the next, that change is shown as a positive number in both columns. Conversely, when expenses increase from one period to the next, that change is shown as a negative number in both columns.
●
The last two columns in each table show the results for each period as a percentage of net revenue. In these two columns, the cost of sales and gross profit for each are given as a percentage of each segment’s net revenue. These amounts are shown in italics.
In addition, as used in the table, “NM” means “not meaningful.”
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Revenue. Sypris Technologies derives its revenue from the sale of forged and finished steel components and subassemblies and high-pressure closures and other fabricated products. Net revenue for Sypris Technologies decreased $16.4 million from the prior year to $45.3 million in 2020 as a result of the expected cyclical decline in the commercial vehicle market and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as noted above. The net revenue decrease for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to decreased sales volumes of $13.8 million primarily with customers in the commercial vehicle market and decreased energy related product sales of $6.7 million, partially offset by growth in the automotive, light truck and sport utility markets of $4.1 million. Revenue for Sypris Technologies is expected to increase in 2021, primarily attributable to the expected improvement in the commercial vehicle market and the addition of new program launches.
Sypris Electronics derives its revenue primarily from circuit card and full “box build” manufacturing, high reliability manufacturing and systems assembly and integration. Net revenue for Sypris Electronics increased $10.8 million to $37.0 million in 2020. The year over year revenue growth reflects increased demand for a government funded product, shipments on a weapons system program that was in development and early build during 2019 and increased orders on certain commercial subsea communications components. Revenue for 2019 was partially affected by shortages of certain electronic components and extensive lead-time issues in the electronic manufacturing industry. Revenue for 2019 was also impacted by shipments accelerated into the fourth quarter of 2018 as the Company planned for the implementation of a new ERP system effective in January 2019. Most of the challenges faced during 2019 with electronic component shortages have been resolved and production rebounded to more normal run rates during 2020. The majority of programs that generated revenue in 2020 will continue to generate revenue into 2021.
Gross Profit. Sypris Technologies’ gross profit decreased $3.6 million to $6.2 million in 2020 as compared to $9.8 million in the prior year. The net decrease in volumes contributed to a decrease in gross profit of $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Partially offsetting this decrease were improvements in productivity, utilities, scrap and rework expense. During 2019, the results for the period were negatively impacted by additional start-up costs on new programs, including lower productivity, higher supply consumption and scrap and rework expense. Additionally, utility costs were higher in 2019 as more production occurred during peak electrical rate periods. Management implemented programs to control variable and fixed spend during 2020 in response to the sharp decline in revenue attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic. In the operations most dramatically impacted by the reduction in demand, these programs included initiatives to retain the workforce necessary to support future demand in anticipation of reduced impacts of COVID-19.
Sypris Electronics’ gross profit increased $5.3 million to $5.4 million as compared to $0.1 million in the prior year. The increase in gross profit was primarily as a result of the growth in revenue during 2020. Certain programs contributing to the improvement in revenue and gross margin for the year reached their expected quarterly run rates during 2020 and allowed management to more efficiently balance production and to improve overhead absorption. The order backlog for Sypris Electronics supported a stable revenue rate during the year ended December 31, 2020 and price increases on certain programs also contributed to margin expansion in comparison with the previous year.
Selling, General and Administrative. Selling, general and administrative expense decreased $2.3 million to $11.4 million in 2020 as compared to $13.7 million in 2019 as a result of a reduction in spending across the Company. This included reducing hiring activities, reducing compensation for our Chairman, President and CEO and certain other senior leadership and corporate personnel and our Board of Directors, and limiting discretionary spending. We also had a reduction in consultation costs associated with the Company’s new ERP implementation effective in January 2019.
Severance, Relocation and Other Costs. Severance, relocation and other costs were $0.1 million and $0.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The charges for 2020 and 2019 were primarily related to mothball costs associated with the closure of the Broadway Plant (see Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Other Expense (Income), Net. Other expense (income), net, was expense of $0.5 million in 2020 as compared to income of $1.3 million for 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company completed the sale of the Broadway Plant real estate for $1.7 million and other idle assets for $0.3 million and recognized net gains of $0.8 million (see Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). The $0.8 million gain on disposal was offset by a loss on the abandonment of assets of $0.6 million and pension expense of $0.7 million. Foreign currency related expenses were not material for the year ended December 31, 2020.
During 2019, the Company recognized a gain in other income of $1.5 million related to a settlement agreement reached with one of its customers during the year (see Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Additionally, the Company recognized a net gain of $0.7 million related to the sale of idle assets within Sypris Technologies, offset by pension expense of $1.0 million.
Income Taxes. The 2020 income tax provision consists of current tax expense of $0.1 million and a deferred tax benefit of $3.1 million. The current tax expense in 2020 and 2019 includes taxes paid by our Mexican subsidiaries and domestic state income taxes and adjustments. The 2020 deferred tax benefit includes a $3.7 million benefit from the change in the valuation allowance for our Mexican subsidiaries, partially offset by net changes in the foreign deferred tax assets during the year. The 2019 deferred tax benefit includes a $0.2 million benefit recorded due to the required intraperiod tax allocation resulting from the loss from continuing operations and other comprehensive income.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined separately for each tax jurisdiction in which we conduct our operations or otherwise incur taxable income or losses. The Company evaluates its deferred tax position on a quarterly basis and valuation allowances are provided as necessary. During this evaluation, the Company reviews its forecast of income in conjunction with other positive and negative evidence surrounding the realizability of its deferred tax assets to determine if a valuation allowance is needed. Based on its current forecast, the Company believes it will have sufficient future taxable income to realize the deferred tax assets recorded by its Mexican subsidiaries. Therefore, the Company reversed its valuation allowance recorded in prior years against certain Mexican net deferred tax assets and recognized an income tax benefit of $3.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Based on its current forecast, the Company has established a valuation allowance against all U.S. deferred tax assets. Until an appropriate level and characterization of profitability is attained, the Company expects to continue to maintain a valuation allowance on its net deferred tax assets related to future U.S. tax benefits. If we determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net recorded amount, an adjustment to reduce the valuation allowance would increase net income in the period that such determination is made.
Quarterly Results
The following table presents our unaudited condensed consolidated statements of operations data for each of the eight quarters in the two-year period ended December 31, 2020. The quarterly results are presented on a 13-week period basis. We have prepared this data on the same basis as our audited consolidated financial statements and, in our opinion, have included all normal recurring adjustments necessary for a fair presentation of this information. You should read these unaudited quarterly results in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The consolidated results of operations for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected for any subsequent period. The sum of quarterly earnings per share may differ from the full-year amounts due to rounding.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Paycheck Protection Program. The Company secured the PPP Loan under the CARES Act during the second quarter of 2020. Proceeds from the PPP Loan have been used to retain workers and maintain payroll and make lease and utility payments. The PPP Loan is evidenced by a promissory note in favor of BMO, as lender, with a principal amount of $3.6 million that bears interest at a fixed annual rate of 1.00%. The term of the PPP Loan is two years, with no payments due under the PPP Loan until July 2021, although interest will accrue during the deferment period. Beginning July 2021, the Company will pay equal monthly installments of principal and interest in the amount necessary to fully amortize the PPP Loan through the Maturity Date, less any amount of potential forgiveness. Recent legislation under the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020 provides for an extension of the maturity date up to five years, an extension of the principal and interest deferral period to the date of a loan forgiveness determination and modifications to the debt amortization schedule if the Company and BMO reach an agreement on modified terms. The PPP Loan may be accelerated upon the occurrence of an event of default.
Under the terms of the CARES Act, all or a portion of the principal of the PPP Loan may be forgiven. Such forgiveness will be determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of the PPP Loan proceeds for payroll costs, mortgage interest payments, lease payments or utility payments. On November 24, 2020, the Company submitted an application for forgiveness of the entire amount due on the PPP Loan. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has not made any principal or interest payments related to the PPP Loan. The Company cannot provide assurance that the principal and interest amounts under the PPP Loan will be forgiven. See Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Gill Family Capital Management Note. The Company has received the benefit of cash infusions from GFCM in the form of secured promissory note obligations totaling $6.5 million in principal as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 (the “Note”). GFCM is an entity controlled by the Company’s Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Jeffrey T. Gill and one of our directors, R. Scott Gill. GFCM, Jeffrey T. Gill and R. Scott Gill are significant beneficial stockholders of the Company.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company amended its secured promissory note obligation with GFCM to, among other things: (i) extend the maturity dates by one year for (a) $2.5 million of the obligation from April 1, 2021 to April 1, 2022, (b) $2.0 million of the obligation from April 1, 2023 to April 1, 2024 and (c) the balance of the obligation from April 1, 2025 to April 1, 2026; (ii) extend the allowance for up to an 18-month deferral of payment for up to 60% of the interest due on the notes maturing in April of 2022 and 2024; (iii) provide for the reinstatement of a first security interest in the assets of Sypris Electronics, LLC; and (iv) provide for payment on January 4, 2021 of any accrued but unpaid interest for 2020. All other terms of the Note, as amended, remain in place. The Note provides for a first security interest in substantially all of the Company’s assets, including those in Mexico (see Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Finance Lease Obligations. On March 9, 2016, the Company completed the sale of its 24-acre Toluca property for 215 million Mexican Pesos, or approximately $12.2 million in U.S. dollars. Simultaneously, the Company entered into a ten-year lease of the 9 acres and buildings currently occupied by the Company and needed for its ongoing business in Toluca. As a result of the Toluca Sale-Leaseback, the Company has a finance lease obligation of $2.1 million for the building as of December 31, 2020.
In February 2019, the Company entered into a finance lease for $0.3 million for new machinery at its Sypris Technologies facility in the U.S. The balance of the lease obligation as of December 31, 2020 was $0.2 million.
Purchase Commitments. We also had purchase commitments totaling approximately $15.4 million at December 31, 2020, primarily for inventory.
Cash Balance. At December 31, 2020, we had approximately $11.6 million of cash and cash equivalents, of which $3.2 million was held in jurisdictions outside of the U.S. that, if repatriated, could result in withholding taxes. We expect existing cash and cash flows of operations to continue to be sufficient to fund our operating activities and cash commitments for investing and financing activities, such as capital expenditures, for at least the next 12 months.
We have projected that our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to allow us to continue operations for the next 12 months. Significant changes from our current forecasts, including, but not limited to: (i) meaningful shortfalls in our projected revenues, (ii) unexpected costs or expenses, and/or (iii) operating difficulties which cause unexpected delays in scheduled shipments, could require us to seek additional funding or force us to make further reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, liquidate assets where possible and/or suspend or curtail planned programs. Any of these actions could materially harm our business, results of operations and future prospects.
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing and Financing Activities
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities was $3.6 million in 2020, as compared to net cash used of $5.9 million in 2019. The aggregate decrease in accounts receivable in 2020 resulted in a source of cash of $0.2 million as a result of a $1.4 million early payment by a customer at the end of 2020 partially offset by an increase in fourth quarter revenue with customers in the commercial vehicle market. The decrease in inventory in 2020 resulted in a source of cash of $4.2 million. The decrease in inventory primarily relates to inventory within Sypris Electronics, as shipments on programs using inventory procured in prior periods increased in 2020. Additionally, there was a decrease in accounts payable during 2020, which resulted in a usage of cash of $2.6 million. Prepaid expenses and other assets increased during 2020, resulting in a usage of cash of $0.2 million, primarily as a result of an increase in contract assets. Accrued and other liabilities increased during 2020, resulting in a source of cash of $0.4 million, primarily as a result of an increase in pension related liabilities.
Investing Activities. Net cash provided by investing activities was $0.4 million in 2020 as compared to $1.0 million in 2019. Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December, 31, 2020 includes proceeds of $2.0 million from the sale of idle assets by Sypris Technologies during the period partially offset by capital expenditures of $1.5 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December, 31, 2019 includes proceeds of $1.9 million from the sale of idle assets by Sypris Technologies during the period partially offset by capital expenditures of $0.9 million.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $2.7 million in 2020 as compared to net cash used of $0.8 million in 2019. Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 included proceeds of $3.6 million under the PPP Loan, as described above, partially offset by finance lease payments of $0.7 million and payments of $0.1 million for minimum statutory tax withholdings on stock-based compensation. Net cash used in financing activities in 2019 included finance lease payments of $0.6 million and payments of $0.2 million for minimum statutory tax withholdings on stock-based compensation.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
On December 31, 2020, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the respective dates of adoption and effects on our results of operations and financial condition.