ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
AT&T Inc. is referred to as “we,” “AT&T” or the “Company” throughout this document, and the names of the particular subsidiaries and affiliates providing the services generally have been omitted. AT&T is a holding company whose subsidiaries and affiliates operate worldwide in the telecommunications, media and technology industries. You should read this discussion in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes (Notes). We completed the acquisition of Time Warner Inc. (Time Warner) on June 14, 2018, and have included its results after that date. In accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), operating results from Time Warner prior to the acquisition are excluded.
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in this document generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this document can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
We have three reportable segments: (1) Communications, (2) WarnerMedia and (3) Latin America. Our segment results presented in Note 4 and discussed below follow our internal management reporting. We analyze our segments based on segment operating contribution, which consists of operating income, excluding acquisition-related costs and other significant items and equity in net income (loss) of affiliates for investments managed within each segment. Each segment’s percentage calculation of total segment operating revenue and contribution is derived from our segment results table in Note 4 and may total more than 100% due to losses in one or more segments. Percentage increases and decreases that are not considered meaningful are denoted with a dash.
We have recast our segment results for all prior periods presented to include our prior Xandr segment within our WarnerMedia segment and to remove the Crunchyroll anime business that is classified as held-for-sale and removed from the WarnerMedia segment, instead including it in Corporate and Other.
The Communications segment accounted for approximately 79% of our 2020 total segment operating revenues compared to 77% in 2019 and 80% of our 2020 total segment operating contribution as compared to 76% in 2019. This segment provides services to businesses and consumers located in the U.S. and businesses globally. Our business strategies reflect bundled product offerings that cut across product lines and utilize shared assets. In December 2020, we changed our management strategy and reevaluated our domestic video business, allowing us to maximize value in our domestic video business and further accelerate our ability to innovate and execute in our fast-growing broadband and fiber business. In conjunction with the strategy change, we separated the former Entertainment Group into two business units, Video and Broadband, which includes legacy telephony operations. We have recast our results for all prior periods to split the Entertainment Group into two separate business units, Video and Broadband, and removed video operations from Business Wireline, combining all video operations in the Video business unit. This segment contains the following business units:
•Mobility provides nationwide wireless service and equipment.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
•Video provides video, including over-the-top (OTT) services and also sells multiplatform advertising services as video revenues.
•Broadband provides internet, including broadband fiber, and legacy telephony voice communication services to residential customers.
•Business Wireline provides advanced IP-based services, as well as traditional voice and data services to business customers.
The WarnerMedia segment accounted for approximately 17% of our 2020 total segment operating revenues compared to 19% in 2019 and 22% of our 2020 total segment operating contribution compared to 25% in 2019. This segment develops, produces and distributes feature films, television, gaming and other content over various physical and digital formats globally. Historical financial results of Eliminations & Other included in the WarnerMedia segment have been recast to include Xandr, previously a separate reportable segment, and to remove the Crunchyroll anime business that was classified as held-for-sale. This segment contains the following:
•Turner primarily operates multichannel basic television networks and digital properties. Turner also sells advertising on its networks and digital properties.
•Home Box Office consists of premium pay television and HBO Max domestically and premium pay, basic tier television internationally and content licensing and home entertainment.
•Warner Bros. primarily consists of the production, distribution and licensing of television programming and feature films, the distribution of home entertainment products and the production and distribution of games.
•Eliminations & Other includes the Xandr advertising business, and also removes transactions between the Turner, Home Box Office and Warner Bros. business units, including internal sales of content to the HBO Max platform that began in the fourth quarter of 2019 (see Note 5).
The Latin America segment accounted for approximately 3% of our 2020 total segment operating revenues compared to 4% in 2019. This segment provides entertainment and wireless services outside of the U.S. This segment contains the following business units:
•Vrio provides video services primarily to residential customers using satellite technology in Latin America and the Caribbean.
•Mexico provides wireless service and equipment to customers in Mexico.
COVID-19 Update
Disruptions caused by the coronavirus (COVID-19) and measures taken to prevent its spread or mitigate its effects both domestically and internationally have impacted our results of operations. We recorded approximately $850, or $0.10 per diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2020, of incremental costs associated with voluntary corporate actions taken to protect and compensate front-line employees and contractors and additional WarnerMedia production disruption.
In addition to these incremental costs, we estimate that our operations and comparability were impacted by approximately $2,925, or $0.33 per diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2020, for: (1) reluctance of consumers to travel at previous levels, driving significantly lower international wireless roaming service revenues that do not have a directly correlated expense reduction, (2) the partial closure of movie theaters and postponement of theatrical releases, leading to lower content revenues, and (3) lower television licensing and production revenues due to production hiatus, and associated expenses.
With partial reopening of the economy and improved collections experience, the economic effects of the pandemic and resulting societal changes remain unpredictable. There are a number of uncertainties that could impact our future results of operations, including the effectiveness of COVID-19 mitigation measures, the duration of the pandemic, the efficacy and widespread distribution of a vaccine, global economic conditions, changes to our operations, changes in consumer confidence, behaviors and spending, work and learn from home trends and the sustainability of supply chains. We expect operating results and cash flows to continue to be adversely impacted by COVID-19 for the duration of the pandemic. We expect our 2021 results to be impacted by the following:
•Lower revenues from the continued partial closure of movie theaters and higher costs based on our decision to distribute 2021 films on HBO Max in the U.S. simultaneous with theaters for 31 days and costs associated with the international launch of HBO Max;
•Uncertainty in revenues from international wireless roaming services due to reduced travel, particularly in the first quarter; and
•Continued expenses to protect front-line employees, contractors and customers.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated Results Our financial results are summarized in the following table. We then discuss factors affecting our overall results. Additional analysis is discussed in our “Segment Results” section. We also discuss our expected revenue and expense trends for 2021 in the “Operating Environment and Trends of the Business” section. Certain prior-period amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current period’s presentation.
OVERVIEW
Operating revenues decreased in 2020, with declines in all segments reflecting impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Lower WarnerMedia segment revenues reflect limited and postponed theatrical and home entertainment releases as well as lower television licensing, productions and advertising revenues. Communications segment revenue declines were driven by continued declines in video and legacy services, partially offset by higher wireless device sales and increases in strategic and managed business service revenues. Latin America segment revenue declines were primarily due to foreign exchange rates.
Operations and support expenses decreased in 2020, driven by impacts of the pandemic which resulted in lower broadcast and programming costs in our Communications and WarnerMedia segments and lower film-related print and advertising costs at WarnerMedia. Also contributing to declines were a noncash gain of $900 on a spectrum transaction in the first quarter that was recorded as an offset to operating expenses as well as our continued focus on cost management. Offsetting these expense decreases were higher costs associated with our investment in HBO Max, employee separation charges and incremental costs related to COVID-19. As part of our cost and efficiency initiatives, we expect operations and support expense improvements to continue as we size our operations to reflect the current economic activity level.
Asset impairments and abandonments increased in 2020, primarily due to noncash impairment charges of $15,508 in the fourth quarter, resulting from our assessment of the recoverability of the long-lived assets and goodwill associated with our video business (see Notes 7 and 9). The increase also includes a goodwill impairment of $2,212 at our Vrio business unit in the second quarter (see Note 9) and $780 from the impairment of production and other content inventory at WarnerMedia, with approximately $524 resulting from the continued shutdown of theaters during the pandemic and the hybrid distribution model for our 2021 film slate (see Note 11). Charges in 2019 primarily related to the abandonment of certain copper assets that were not necessary to support future network activity (see Note 7).
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
Depreciation and amortization expense increased in 2020.
Amortization expense increased $307, or 3.9%, in 2020 due to the amortization of orbital slot licenses, which began in the first quarter of 2020 (see Note 1). Amortization expense in 2021 will reflect approximately $1,200 of reductions from the 2020 impairment of orbital slots and customers lists associated with our domestic video business (see Note 9).
Depreciation expense decreased $8 in 2020 primarily due to ongoing capital spend for network upgrades and expansion partially offset by fully depreciated assets in our Communications segment. Depreciation expense in 2021 will reflect approximately $480 of reductions from the 2020 impairment of property, plant and equipment associated with our domestic video business (see Note 7).
Operating income decreased in 2020 and increased in 2019. Our operating margin was 3.7% in 2020, compared to 15.4% in 2019 and 15.3% in 2018.
Interest expense decreased in 2020, primarily due to lower interest rates and debt balances.
Equity in net income (loss) of affiliates increased in 2020, reflecting changes in our investment portfolio, including $130 equity in earnings resulting from an investee transaction.
Other income (expense) - net decreased in 2020 primarily due to the recognition of $1,405 of debt redemption costs and lower income from Rabbi trusts and other investments. Offsetting the decrease were lower actuarial losses in 2020, $4,169 compared to $5,171 in 2019 (see Note 15).
Income tax expense decreased in 2020, primarily driven by decreased income before income taxes offset by impairments of goodwill (see Note 9), which are not deductible for tax purposes.
Our effective tax rate was (33.8)% in 2020, 18.9% in 2019, and 19.8% in 2018. The effective tax rate in 2020 was impacted by the goodwill impairments, which are not deductible for tax purposes.
Segment Results Our segments are strategic business units that offer different products and services over various technology platforms and/or in different geographies that are managed accordingly. Our segment results presented below follow our internal management reporting. In addition to segment operating contribution, we also evaluate segment performance based on EBITDA and/or EBITDA margin. EBITDA is defined as segment operating contribution, excluding equity in net income (loss) of affiliates and depreciation and amortization. We believe EBITDA to be a relevant and useful measurement to our investors as it is part of our internal management reporting and planning processes and it is an important metric that management uses to evaluate operating performance. EBITDA does not give effect to depreciation and amortization expenses incurred in operating contribution nor is it burdened by cash used for debt service requirements and thus does not reflect available funds for distributions, reinvestment or other discretionary uses. EBITDA margin is EBITDA divided by total revenues.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
Operating revenues decreased in 2020 and were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Declines in our Video, Broadband and Business Wireline business units were partially offset by increases in our Mobility business unit. The decrease also reflects the continued shift away from linear video and legacy services, partially offset by higher equipment and service revenues.
Operating contribution decreased in 2020 and increased in 2019. The 2020 operating contribution includes declines in our Video, Broadband and Business Wireline business units, and reflects stable operating contribution from our Mobility business. Our Communications segment operating income margin was 22.0% in 2020, 22.6% in 2019 and 22.3% in 2018.
Communications Business Unit Discussion
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
The following tables highlight other key measures of performance for Mobility:
Service revenue increased during 2020 largely due to growth in phone subscribers and connected devices, offset by declines in international roaming revenue due to reduced travel during the pandemic. Successful offers aimed at customer retention contributed to subscriber growth and lower churn.
ARPU
Average revenue per subscriber (ARPU) decreased primarily due to the decline in international roaming and waived fees.
Churn
The effective management of subscriber churn is critical to our ability to maximize revenue growth and to maintain and improve margins. Postpaid churn and postpaid phone-only churn were lower in 2020 due to migrations to unlimited plans, continued network improvements, subscriber retention offers in the fourth quarter, and lower overall involuntary disconnects.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
Equipment revenue increased in 2020 primarily due to higher equipment revenue from higher postpaid upgrade volumes, the mix of sales of higher-priced smartphones, and higher sales of data devices, including wearables, wireless modems and hotspots.
Operations and support expenses increased in 2020, largely driven by higher equipment costs, increased commission deferral amortization and intercompany content costs associated with plans offering HBO Max, partially offset by lower bad debt expense. The increase in commission deferral amortization is partly offset by the impacts of our second-quarter 2020 updates to extend the expected economic life of our Mobility customers.
Depreciation expense increased in 2020, primarily due to ongoing capital spending for network upgrades and expansion partially offset by fully depreciated assets.
Operating income increased in 2020 and 2019. Our Mobility operating income margin was 30.8% in 2020, 31.4% in 2019 and 30.6% in 2018. Our Mobility EBITDA margin was 42.0% in 2020, 42.7% in 2019 and 42.3% in 2018.
Subscriber Relationships
As the wireless industry has matured, future wireless growth will depend on our ability to offer innovative services, plans and devices that take advantage of our premier 5G wireless network, which went nationwide in July 2020, and to provide these services in bundled product offerings. Subscribers that purchase two or more services from us have significantly lower churn than subscribers that purchase only one service. To support higher mobile data usage, our priority is to best utilize a wireless network that has sufficient spectrum and capacity to support these innovations on as broad a geographic basis as possible.
To attract and retain subscribers in a mature and highly competitive market, we have launched a wide variety of plans, including our FirstNet and prepaid products, and arrangements that bundle our video services. Virtually all of our postpaid smartphone subscribers are on plans that provide for service on multiple devices at reduced rates, and subscribers to such plans tend to have higher retention and lower churn rates. We offer unlimited data plans and such subscribers also tend to have higher retention and lower churn rates. Our offerings are intended to encourage existing subscribers to upgrade their current services and/or add devices, attract subscribers from other providers and/or minimize subscriber churn.
Connected Devices
Connected devices include data-centric devices such as wholesale automobile systems, monitoring devices, fleet management and session-based tablets. Connected device subscribers increased in 2020, and we added approximately 9.9 million wholesale connected cars through agreements with various carmakers, and experienced strong growth in other Internet of Things (IoT) connections. These connected car agreements give us the opportunity to create future retail relationships with the car owners.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
The following tables highlight other key measures of performance for Video:
Service revenues are comprised of video entertainment subscription and advertising revenues. Revenues decreased in 2020 and 2019, largely driven by a decline in premium TV and OTT subscribers as we continue to focus on retention of existing subscribers with a particular focus on our high-value subscribers. Partially offsetting video revenue declines was higher advertising revenues during a general election year. Consistent with the rest of the industry, our customers continue to shift from a premium linear video service to more economically priced OTT and subscription video on demand offerings, which has impacted our video revenues.
Equipment revenue increased in 2020 primarily due to the nationwide introduction of our IP-based AT&T TV service in early 2020.
Operations and support expenses decreased in 2020 and 2019, largely driven by lower content costs from fewer subscribers, partially offset by annual content rate increases, including those associated with NFL SUNDAY TICKET and pandemic-related compassion payments made in the first half of 2020.
Depreciation expense decreased in 2020 and 2019, due to network assets becoming fully depreciated.
Operating income decreased in 2020 and increased in 2019. Our Video operating income margin was 6.0% in 2020, 6.4% in 2019 and 4.0% in 2018. Our Video EBITDA margin was 13.9% in 2020, 14.1% in 2019 and 12.1% in 2018.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
The following tables highlight other key measures of performance for Broadband:
High-speed internet revenues increased in 2020 and 2019, reflecting higher ARPU resulting from the continued shift of subscribers to our higher-speed fiber services and pricing actions.
Legacy voice and data service revenues decreased in 2020 and 2019, reflecting the continued decline in the number of customers.
Other service and equipment revenues decreased in 2020 and 2019, reflecting the continued decline in the number of VoIP customers.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
Operations and support expenses increased in 2020, largely driven by intercompany content costs associated with plans offering HBO Max. Expense increases in 2020 and 2019 also reflect higher acquisition and fulfillment cost deferral amortization, including the impact of updates to decrease the estimated economic life of our subscribers.
Depreciation expense increased in 2020 and 2019, primarily due to ongoing capital spending for network upgrades and expansion.
Operating income decreased in 2020 and 2019. Our Broadband operating income margin was 14.8% in 2020, 20.6% in 2019 and 25.7% in 2018. Our Broadband EBITDA margin was 38.4% in 2020, 42.7% in 2019 and 45.7% in 2018.
Strategic and managed services revenues increased in 2020. Our strategic services are made up of (1) data services, including our VPN, dedicated internet ethernet and broadband, (2) voice service, including VoIP and cloud-based voice solutions, (3) security and cloud solutions, and (4) managed, professional and outsourcing services. Revenue increases were primarily attributable to growth in our security and cloud solutions, dedicated internet and voice services and the impact of higher demand for connectivity due to the pandemic.
Legacy voice and data service revenues decreased in 2020, primarily due to lower demand as customers continue to shift to our more advanced IP-based offerings or our competitors.
Other service and equipment revenues decreased in 2020, reflecting higher prior-year licensing of intellectual property assets. Revenue trends are impacted by the licensing of intellectual property assets, which vary from period-to-period. Other service revenues include project-based revenue, which is nonrecurring in nature, as well as revenues from customer premises equipment.
Operations and support expenses decreased in 2020, primarily due to our continued efforts to drive efficiencies in our network operations through automation and reductions in customer support expenses through digitization.
Depreciation expense increased in 2020, reflecting increases in capital spending for network upgrades and expansion.
Operating income decreased in 2020 and 2019. Our Business Wireline operating income margin was 18.1% in 2020, 19.7% in 2019 and 21.8% in 2018. Our Business Wireline EBITDA margin was 38.7% in 2020, 38.6% in 2019 and 39.5% in 2018.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
Our WarnerMedia segment includes our Turner, Home Box Office (HBO) and Warner Bros. business units. The order of presentation reflects the consistency of revenue streams, rather than overall magnitude as that is subject to timing and frequency of studio releases. Historical financial results of the WarnerMedia segment, (Eliminations & Other) have been recast to include Xandr, previously a separate reportable segment, and to remove the Crunchyroll anime business that is classified as held-for-sale.
The WarnerMedia segment does not include results from Time Warner operations prior to our June 14, 2018 acquisition. For this reason, 2018 results are not comparable to the other two years presented for this segment and therefore percent changes comparing 2018 and 2019 are not shown in the tables. Otter Media and HBO Latin America Group (HBO LAG) are included as equity method investments prior to our acquiring the remaining interests in each, which occurred in August 2018 and May 2020, respectively. Both are included in the segment operating results following the dates of acquisition. Consistent with our past practice, many of the impacts of the fair value adjustments from the application of purchase accounting required under GAAP have not been allocated to the segment, instead they are reported as acquisition-related items in the reconciliation to consolidated results.
Operating revenues decreased in 2020, primarily due to lower theatrical and television product revenues, reflecting the pandemic-related postponement of theatrical releases and theatrical and television production delays at Warner Bros. Turner revenues also decreased due to lower advertising revenues resulting from cancellation and shifting of sporting events, and/or compressed seasons. HBO revenues partially offset these decreases, driven by growth in international revenues and domestic HBO Max retail subscribers, partially offset by lower licensing revenues.
Operating contribution decreased in 2020 and increased in 2019. The WarnerMedia segment operating income margin was 26.9% in 2020, 29.8% in 2019 and 34.0% in 2018.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
WarnerMedia Business Unit Discussion
Operating revenues decreased in 2020 primarily due to lower advertising revenues resulting from the cancellation of the NCAA Division I Men’s Basketball Tournament in the first quarter of 2020 and the impacts from shifting sporting event schedules and/or compressed seasons, such as the delay of the NBA season that historically has started earlier in the fourth quarter. These revenue declines were partially offset by increased advertising due to news coverage of general elections and COVID-19 developments. Operating revenue declines were also caused by lower subscription revenues at regional sports networks and unfavorable exchange rates, partially offset by higher content and other revenue, including internal sales to HBO Max, which are eliminated in consolidation within the WarnerMedia segment.
Cost of revenues decreased in 2020 primarily due to lower sports programming costs as a result of the previously mentioned cancellations and modifications to the timing and/or duration of various sporting events.
Selling, general and administrative decreased in 2020 driven by cost-saving initiatives.
Operating income increased in 2020 and 2019. Our Turner operating income margin was 42.5% in 2020, 39.2% in 2019 and 43.8% in 2018.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
Operating revenues increased in 2020, primarily due to the May 2020 acquisition of HBO LAG and higher domestic HBO Max retail subscribers, partially offset by decreases in content and other revenue from lower content licensing. At December 31, 2020, we had 41.5 million U.S. subscribers from HBO and HBO Max, up from 34.6 million at December 31, 2019, including growth from intercompany relationships with the Communications segment.
Cost of revenues increased in 2020, primarily due to approximately $1,800 of programming investment related to HBO Max.
Selling, general and administrative increased in 2020, primarily due to higher marketing costs associated with HBO Max.
Operating income decreased in 2020 and increased in 2019. Our HBO operating income margin was 10.0% in 2020, 34.6% in 2019 and 37.7% in 2018.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
Operating revenues decreased in 2020, primarily due to pandemic-related movie theater closures and television and theatrical production delays.
Theatrical product revenues were lower due to theaters closing for a significant portion of the year and postponement of theatrical releases, which also reduced licensing revenues, such as home entertainment licensing. Additionally, unfavorable comparisons to the prior-year releases, which included, in 2019, Joker and carryover revenues from the theatrical release of Aquaman, compared to the limited-capacity theater and hybrid HBO Max distribution release of Wonder Woman 1984, in late 2020.
Television product revenues decreased primarily due to lower initial telecast revenues resulting from television production delays, including delays in the start of the 2020-2021 broadcast season, partially offset by increased licensing, including internal sales to HBO Max, which are eliminated in consolidation within the WarnerMedia segment.
Games and other revenue declines were primarily due to reduced studio operations and unfavorable games comparison to the prior year, which included, in 2019, the release of Mortal Kombat 11.
Cost of revenues decreased in 2020, primarily due to the production hiatus and lower marketing of theatrical product, partially offset by incremental production shutdown costs.
Selling, general and administrative decreased in 2020, primarily due to lower print and advertising expenses from limited theatrical releases and lower distribution fees.
Operating income decreased in 2020 and increased in 2019. Our Warner Bros. operating income margin was 17.0% in 2020, 16.6% in 2019 and 17.0% in 2018.
Our Latin America operations conduct business in their local currency and operating results are converted to U.S. dollars using official exchange rates, subjecting results to foreign currency fluctuations. In May 2020, we found it necessary to close our DIRECTV operations in Venezuela due to political instability in the country and to comply with sanctions of the U.S. government.
Operating revenues decreased in 2020, primarily driven by foreign exchange rates and overall economic impacts.
Operating contribution decreased in 2020, reflecting foreign exchange rates and overall economic impacts, and increased in 2019, due to improvement in Mexico. Our Latin America segment operating income margin was (13.2)% in 2020, (9.5)% in 2019 and (9.7)% in 2018.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
Latin America Business Unit Discussion
The following tables highlight other key measures of performance for Vrio:
Operating revenues decreased in 2020, primarily driven by foreign exchange and overall economic impacts.
Operations and support expenses decreased in 2020, primarily driven by foreign exchange and overall economic impacts. Approximately 21% of Vrio expenses are U.S. dollar-based, with the remainder in the local currency.
Depreciation expense decreased in 2020, primarily due to changes in foreign exchange rates.
Operating income decreased in 2020 and 2019. Our Vrio operating income margin was (5.3)% in 2020, 1.4% in 2019 and 6.5% in 2018. Our Vrio EBITDA margin was 11.2% in 2020, 17.5% in 2019 and 21.8% in 2018.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
The following tables highlight other key measures of performance for Mexico:
Service revenues decreased in 2020, primarily due to foreign exchange rates, as well as lower volumes and store traffic related to COVID-19.
Equipment revenues decreased in 2020, primarily due to lower equipment sales volumes related to COVID-19 and changes in foreign exchange rates.
Operations and support expenses decreased in 2020, primarily due to lower equipment sales and changes in foreign exchange rates. Approximately 7% of Mexico expenses are U.S. dollar-based, with the remainder in the local currency.
Depreciation expense increased in 2020, primarily due to amortization of spectrum licenses and higher in-service assets. These increases were partially offset by changes in foreign exchange rates.
Operating income increased in 2020 and 2019. Our Mexico operating income margin was (22.9)% in 2020, (25.0)% in 2019 and (36.9)% in 2018. Our Mexico EBITDA margin was (2.9)% in 2020, (7.5)% in 2019 and (19.1)% in 2018.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
SUPPLEMENTAL TOTAL ADVERTISING REVENUE INFORMATION
As a supplemental presentation, we are providing a view of total advertising revenues generated by AT&T. See revenue categories tables in Note 5 for a reconciliation.
SUPPLEMENTAL COMMUNICATIONS OPERATING INFORMATION
As a supplemental presentation to our Communications segment operating results, we are providing a view of our AT&T Business Solutions results which includes both wireless and wireline operations. This combined view presents a complete profile of the entire business customer relationship and underscores the importance of mobile solutions for our business customers. Results have been recast to conform to the current period’s classification of consumer and business wireless subscribers. See “Discussion and Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measure” for a reconciliation of these supplemental measures to the most directly comparable financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT AND TRENDS OF THE BUSINESS
2021 Revenue Trends We expect revenue growth in our wireless and broadband businesses as customers demand premium content, instant connectivity and higher speeds made possible by our fiber network expansion and wireless network enhancements through 5G deployment.
In our Communications segment, we expect that our network quality and First Responder Network Authority (FirstNet) deployment will continue to contribute to wireless subscriber and service revenue growth, that 5G handsets will continue to drive wireless equipment revenue growth, and that applications like video streaming will also continue to drive greater demand for broadband services. The reluctance of consumers to travel at levels prior to the pandemic is expected to continue to contribute to uncertainty in international roaming wireless service revenues.
In our WarnerMedia segment, we expect our video streaming platform, HBO Max, and premium content will continue to drive revenue growth. The pandemic-related partial closure of movie theaters is expected to continue to pressure revenues and higher costs are anticipated based on our decision to distribute our 2021 films on HBO Max in the U.S. simultaneous with theaters for 31 days.
Across AT&T, we expect to provide consumers with a broad variety of video entertainment services, from mobile-centric and OTT streaming packages, to traditional full-size linear video. Revenue from business customers is expected to continue to grow for mobile and IP-based services but decline for legacy wireline services. Overall, we believe growth in wireless, broadband and WarnerMedia’s premium content should offset pressure from our linear video and legacy voice and data services.
2021 Expense Trends We expect the spending required to support growth initiatives, primarily our continued deployment of fiber, 5G, and FirstNet build, as well as continued investment into the HBO Max platform, to pressure expense trends in 2021. To the extent 5G handset introductions continue in 2021, and as anticipated, the expenses associated with those device sales are expected to contribute to higher costs. During 2021, we will also continue to transition our hardware-based network technology to more efficient and less expensive software-based technology. These investments will help prepare us to meet increased customer demand for enhanced wireless and broadband services, including video streaming, augmented reality and “smart” technologies. The software benefits of our 5G wireless technology and new video delivery platforms should result in a more efficient use of capital and lower network-related expenses in the coming years.
We continue to transform our operations to be more efficient and effective, reinvesting savings into growth areas of the business. We are restructuring businesses, sunsetting legacy networks, improving customer service and ordering functions through digital transformation, sizing our support costs and staffing with current activity levels, and reassessing overall benefit costs. We expect continued savings from these initiatives and through our WarnerMedia merger synergy program. Cost savings and non-strategic asset sales aligns with our focus on debt reduction.
Market Conditions The U.S. stock market experienced significant volatility in 2020 due to several factors, including the global pandemic, and thus general business investment remained modest, which had impact on our business services. The global pandemic has caused, and could again cause, delays in the development, manufacturing (including the sourcing of key components) and shipment of products. As the labor market has not returned to pre-pandemic levels of unemployment, our residential customers continue to be price sensitive in selecting offerings, especially in the video area, and continue to focus on products that give them efficient access to video and broadcast services. Most of our products and services are not directly affected by the imposition of tariffs on Chinese goods. However, we expect ongoing pressure on pricing during 2021 as we respond to the competitive marketplace, especially in wireless and video services.
Included on our consolidated balance sheets are assets held by benefit plans for the payment of future benefits. Our pension plans are subject to funding requirements of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended (ERISA). We expect only minimal ERISA contribution requirements to our pension plans for 2021. Investment returns on these assets depend largely on trends in the economy, and a weakness in the equity, fixed income and real asset markets could require us to make future contributions to the pension plans. In addition, our policy of recognizing actuarial gains and losses related to our pension and other postretirement plans in the period in which they arise subjects us to earnings volatility caused by changes in market conditions; however, these actuarial gains and losses do not impact segment performance as they are required to be recorded in “Other income (expense) - net.” Changes in our discount rate, which are tied to changes in the bond market, and changes in the performance of equity markets, may have significant impacts on the valuation of our pension and other postretirement obligations at the end of 2021 (see “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates”).
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT OVERVIEW
AT&T subsidiaries operating within the United States are subject to federal and state regulatory authorities. AT&T subsidiaries operating outside the United States are subject to the jurisdiction of national and supranational regulatory authorities in the markets where service is provided.
In the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Telecom Act), Congress established a national policy framework intended to bring the benefits of competition and investment in advanced telecommunications facilities and services to all Americans by opening all telecommunications markets to competition and reducing or eliminating regulatory burdens that harm consumer welfare. Nonetheless, over the ensuing two decades, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and some state regulatory commissions have maintained or expanded certain regulatory requirements that were imposed decades ago on our traditional wireline subsidiaries when they operated as legal monopolies. More recently, the FCC has pursued a more deregulatory agenda, eliminating a variety of antiquated and unnecessary regulations and streamlining its processes in a number of areas. We continue to support regulatory and legislative measures and efforts, at both the state and federal levels, to reduce inappropriate regulatory burdens that inhibit our ability to compete effectively and offer needed services to our customers, including initiatives to transition services from traditional networks to all IP-based networks. At the same time, we also seek to ensure that legacy regulations are not further extended to broadband or wireless services, which are subject to vigorous competition.
Communications Segment
Internet The FCC currently classifies fixed and mobile consumer broadband services as information services, subject to light-touch regulation. The D.C. Circuit upheld the FCC’s current classification, although it remanded three discrete issues to the FCC for further consideration. These issues related to the effect of the FCC’s decision to classify broadband services as information services on public safety, the regulation of pole attachments, and universal service support for low-income consumers through the Lifeline program. Because no party sought Supreme Court review of the D.C. Circuit’s decision to uphold the FCC’s classification of broadband as an information service, that decision is final.
In October 2020, the FCC adopted an order addressing the three issues remanded by the D.C. Circuit for further consideration. After considering those issues, the FCC concluded they provided no grounds to depart from its determination that fixed and mobile consumer broadband services should be classified as information services. An appeal of the FCC’s remand order is pending.
Some states have adopted legislation or issued executive orders that would reimpose net neutrality rules repealed by the FCC. Suits have been filed concerning such laws in two states.
Privacy-related legislation continues to be adopted or considered in a number of jurisdictions. Legislative, regulatory and litigation actions could result in increased costs of compliance, further regulation or claims against broadband internet access service providers and others, and increased uncertainty in the value and availability of data.
Wireless The industry-wide deployment of 5G technology, which is needed to satisfy extensive demand for video and internet access, will involve significant deployment of “small cell” equipment and therefore increase the need for local permitting processes that allow for the placement of small cell equipment on reasonable timelines and terms. Between 2018 and 2019, the FCC streamlined multiple federal wireless structure review processes with the potential to delay and impede deployment of infrastructure used to provide telecommunications and broadband services, including small cell equipment. Recognizing that state and local regulations have the same potential, in November 2020 the FCC adopted an order tightening the limits on state and local authority to deny requests to use existing structures for wireless facilities. These orders were appealed to the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals, where the appeals remain pending.
In December 2018, we introduced the nation’s first commercial mobile 5G service, and in July 2020, we announced nationwide 5G coverage. We anticipate the introduction of 5G handsets and devices will contribute to a renewed interest in equipment upgrades.
As the U.S. wireless industry has matured, we believe future wireless growth will depend on our ability to offer innovative services, plans and devices. We will need a network with sufficient spectrum and capacity and sufficiently broad coverage to support the growth of these services. We continue to invest significant capital in expanding our network capacity, as well as to secure and utilize spectrum that meets our long-term needs.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
Video We provide domestic satellite video service through our subsidiary DIRECTV, whose satellites are licensed by the FCC. The Communications Act of 1934 and other related acts give the FCC broad authority to regulate the U.S. operations of DIRECTV, and some of WarnerMedia’s businesses are also subject to obligations under the Communications Act and related FCC regulations.
WarnerMedia Segment
We create, own and distribute intellectual property, including copyrights, trademarks and licenses of intellectual property. To protect our intellectual property, we rely on a combination of laws and license agreements. Outside of the U.S., laws and regulations relating to intellectual property protection and the effective enforcement of these laws and regulations vary greatly from country to country. The European Union Commission is pursuing legislative and regulatory initiatives which could impact WarnerMedia’s activities in the EU. Piracy, particularly of digital content, continues to threaten WarnerMedia’s revenues from products and services, and we work to limit that threat through a combination of approaches, including technological and legislative solutions. Outside the U.S., various laws and regulations, as well as trade agreements with the U.S., also apply to the distribution or licensing of feature films for exhibition in movie theaters and on broadcast and cable networks. For example, in certain countries, including China, laws and regulations limit the number of foreign films exhibited in such countries in a calendar year.
EXPECTED GROWTH AREAS
Over the next few years, we expect our growth to come from wireless, software-based video offerings like HBO Max, and IP-based fiber broadband services. We provide integrated services to diverse groups of customers in the U.S. on an integrated telecommunications network utilizing different technological platforms. In 2021, our key initiatives include:
•Continuing expansion of 5G service on our premier wireless network.
•Generating mobile subscriber growth from FirstNet and our premier network quality.
•Increasing subscriber base for HBO Max, our platform for premium content and video offered directly to consumers, as well as through other distributors.
•Improving fiber penetration and growing broadband revenues.
•Continuing to develop a competitive advantage through our corporate cost structure.
•Improving profitability in our Mexico business unit.
Wireless We expect to continue to deliver revenue growth in the coming years. We are in a period of rapid growth in wireless video usage and believe that there are substantial opportunities available for next-generation converged services that combine technologies and services.
As of December 31, 2020, we served 202 million wireless subscribers in North America, with more than 182 million in the United States. Our LTE technology covers over 440 million people in North America, and in the United States, we cover all major metropolitan areas and over 330 million people. We also provide 4G coverage using another technology (HSPA+), and when combined with our upgraded backhaul network, we provide enhanced network capabilities and superior mobile broadband speeds for data and video services. In December 2018, we introduced the nation’s first commercial mobile 5G service and expanded that deployment nationwide in July 2020.
Our networks covering both the U.S. and Mexico have enabled our customers to use wireless services without roaming on other companies’ networks. We believe this seamless access will prove attractive to customers and provide a significant growth opportunity. As of the end of 2020, we provided LTE coverage to over 110 million people in Mexico.
Integration of Data/Broadband and Entertainment Services As the communications industry has evolved into internet-based technologies capable of blending wireline and wireless services, we plan to focus on expanding our wireless network capabilities and provide high-speed internet and video offerings that allow customers to integrate their home or business fixed services with their mobile service. During 2021, we will continue to develop and provide unique integrated video, mobile and broadband solutions. The launch of the HBO Max platform has facilitated our customers’ desire to view video anywhere on demand and has encouraged customer retention.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
REGULATORY DEVELOPMENTS
Set forth below is a summary of the most significant regulatory proceedings that directly affected our operations during 2020. Industry-wide regulatory developments are discussed above in Operating Environment Overview. While these issues may apply only to certain subsidiaries, the words “we,” “AT&T” and “our” are used to simplify the discussion. The following discussions are intended as a condensed summary of the issues rather than as a comprehensive legal analysis and description of all of these specific issues.
International Regulation Our subsidiaries operating outside the United States are subject to the jurisdiction of regulatory authorities in the territories in which the subsidiaries operate. Our licensing, compliance and advocacy initiatives in foreign countries primarily enable the provision of enterprise (i.e., large business), wireless and satellite television services. AT&T is engaged in multiple efforts with foreign regulators to open markets to competition, foster conditions favorable to investment and increase our scope of services and products.
The General Data Protection Regulation went into effect in Europe in May of 2018. AT&T processes and handles personal data of its customers and subscribers, employees of its enterprise customers and its employees. This regulation created a range of new compliance obligations and significantly increased financial penalties for noncompliance.
Federal Regulation We have organized our following discussion by service impacted.
Internet In February 2015, the FCC released an order classifying both fixed and mobile consumer broadband internet access services as telecommunications services, subject to Title II of the Communications Act. The Order, which represented a departure from longstanding bipartisan precedent, significantly expanded the FCC’s authority to regulate broadband internet access services, as well as internet interconnection arrangements. In December 2017, the FCC reversed its 2015 decision by reclassifying fixed and mobile consumer broadband services as information services and repealing most of the rules that were adopted in 2015. In lieu of broad conduct prohibitions, the order requires internet service providers to disclose information about their network practices and terms of service, including whether they block or throttle internet traffic or offer paid prioritization. On October 1, 2019, the D.C. Circuit issued a unanimous opinion upholding the FCC’s reclassification of broadband as an information service, and its reliance on transparency requirements and competitive marketplace dynamics to safeguard net neutrality. While the court vacated the FCC’s express preemption of any state regulation of net neutrality, it stressed that its ruling did not prevent the FCC or ISPs from relying on conflict preemption to invalidate particular state laws that are inconsistent with the FCC’s regulatory objectives and framework. The court also remanded the matter to the FCC for further consideration of the impact of reclassifying broadband services as information services on public safety, the Lifeline program, and pole attachment regulation. In October 2020, the FCC adopted an order concluding that those issues did not justify reversing its decision to reclassify broadband services as information services. An appeal of the FCC’s remand decision is pending.
Following the FCC’s 2017 decision to reclassify broadband as information services, a number of states adopted legislation to reimpose the very rules the FCC repealed. In some cases, state legislation imposes requirements that go beyond the FCC’s February 2015 order. Additionally, some state governors have issued executive orders that effectively reimpose the repealed requirements. Suits have been filed concerning laws in California and Vermont. Both lawsuits were stayed pursuant to agreements by those states not to enforce their laws pending final resolution of all appeals of the FCC’s December 2017 order. Because that order is now final, the California suit has returned to active status. Nonetheless, enforcement of both the California and Vermont laws remains stayed pending a ruling by a U.S. District Court in California on motions for a preliminary injunction against enforcement of the California law. Argument on those motions is now scheduled for February 2021. We expect that going forward additional states may seek to impose net neutrality requirements. We will continue to support congressional action to codify a set of standard consumer rules for the internet.
Wireless and Broadband In June and November 2020, the FCC issued a Declaratory Ruling clarifying the limits on state and local authority to deny applications to modify existing structures to accommodate wireless facilities. Appeals of the November 2020 order remain pending in the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals. If sustained on appeal, these FCC decisions will remove state and local regulatory barriers and reduce the costs of the infrastructure needed for 5G and FirstNet deployments, which will enhance our ability to place small cell facilities on utility poles, expand existing facilities to accommodate public safety services, and replace legacy facilities and services with advanced broadband infrastructure and services.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
In 2020, the FCC took several actions to make spectrum available for 5G services. First, the FCC completed the auction of the 39 GHz band in large, contiguous blocks of spectrum that will support 5G. AT&T obtained spectrum in this auction, which also included spectrum in the 37 GHz and 47 GHz bands (see “Other Business Matters”). The FCC also made 150 MHz of mid-band CBRS spectrum available, to be shared with Federal incumbents, who enjoy priority. Furthermore, the FCC began the auction of 280 MHz of mid-band spectrum presently used for satellite service (the “C Band” auction). This auction is expected to conclude by June of 2021. Other mid-band spectrum auctions are planned for later in 2021.
Following enactment in December 2019 of the Pallone-Thune Telephone Robocall Abuse Criminal Enforcement and Deterrence Act (TRACED Act) by Congress, the FCC adopted new rules requiring voice service providers to implement caller ID authentication protocols (known as STIR/SHAKEN) and adopt robocall mitigation measures. These measures apply to portions of their networks where STIR/SHAKEN is not enabled, in addition to other anti-robocall measures. The new rules contemplate ongoing FCC oversight and review of efforts related to STIR/SHAKEN implementation. Among other goals, the FCC has stated its intention to promote the IP transition through its rules.
In September 2019, the FCC released reformed aspects of its intercarrier compensation regime related to tandem switching and transport charges, with the goal of reducing the prevalence of telephone access arbitrage schemes. In October 2020, the FCC further reformed aspects of its intercarrier compensation regime by greatly reducing, and in some cases eliminating, the charges long distance carriers must pay to originating carriers for toll-free calls. Appeals of both orders are pending at the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND STANDARDS
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates Because of the size of the financial statement line items they relate to or the extent of judgment required by our management, some of our accounting policies and estimates have a more significant impact on our consolidated financial statements than others. The following policies are presented in the order in which the topics appear in our consolidated statements of income.
Pension and Postretirement Benefits Our actuarial estimates of retiree benefit expense and the associated significant weighted-average assumptions are discussed in Note 15. Our assumed weighted-average discount rates for pension and postretirement benefits of 2.70% and 2.40%, respectively, at December 31, 2020, reflect the hypothetical rate at which the projected benefit obligations could be effectively settled or paid out to participants. We determined our discount rate based on a range of factors, including a yield curve composed of the rates of return on several hundred high-quality, fixed income corporate bonds available at the measurement date and corresponding to the related expected durations of future cash outflows for the obligations. These bonds were all rated at least Aa3 or AA- by one of the nationally recognized statistical rating organizations, denominated in U.S. dollars, and neither callable, convertible nor index linked. For the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, we decreased our pension discount rate by 0.70%, resulting in an increase in our pension plan benefit obligation of $5,594 and decreased our postretirement discount rate by 0.80%, resulting in an increase in our postretirement benefit obligation of $1,311.
Our expected long-term rate of return on pension plan assets is 6.75% for 2021 and 7.00% for 2020. Our expected long-term rate of return on postretirement plan assets is 4.50% for 2021 and 4.75% for 2020. Our expected return on plan assets is calculated using the actual fair value of plan assets. If all other factors were to remain unchanged, we expect that a 0.50% decrease in the expected long-term rate of return would cause 2021 combined pension and postretirement cost to increase $277, which under our accounting policy would be adjusted to actual returns in the current year as part of our fourth-quarter remeasurement of our retiree benefit plans.
We recognize gains and losses on pension and postretirement plan assets and obligations immediately in “Other income (expense) - net” in our consolidated statements of income. These gains and losses are generally measured annually as of December 31, and accordingly, will normally be recorded during the fourth quarter, unless an earlier remeasurement is required. Should actual experience differ from actuarial assumptions, the projected pension benefit obligation and net pension cost and accumulated postretirement benefit obligation and postretirement benefit cost would be affected in future years. See Note 15 for additional discussions regarding our assumptions.
Depreciation Our depreciation of assets, including use of composite group depreciation for certain subsidiaries and estimates of useful lives, is described in Notes 1 and 7.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
If all other factors were to remain unchanged, we expect that a one-year increase in the useful lives of our plant in service would have resulted in a decrease of approximately $3,128 in our 2020 depreciation expense and that a one-year decrease would have resulted in an increase of approximately $4,353 in our 2020 depreciation expense. See Notes 7 and 8 for depreciation and amortization expense applicable to property, plant and equipment, including our finance lease right-of-use assets.
Asset Valuations and Impairments
Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized but tested at least annually on October 1 for impairment. For impairment testing, we estimate fair values using models that predominantly rely on the expected cash flows to be derived from the reporting unit or use of the asset. Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicated that the book value may not be recoverable over the remaining life. Inputs underlying the expected cash flows include, but are not limited to, subscriber counts, revenues from subscriptions, advertising and content, revenue per user, capital investment and acquisition costs per subscriber, production and content costs, and ongoing operating costs. We based our assumptions on a combination of our historical results, trends, business plans and marketplace participant data.
Annual Goodwill Testing
Goodwill is tested on a reporting unit basis by comparing the estimated fair value of each reporting unit to its book value. If the fair value exceeds the book value, then no impairment is measured. We estimate fair values using an income approach (also known as a discounted cash flow model) and a market multiple approach. The income approach utilizes our future cash flow projections with a perpetuity value discounted at an appropriate weighted average cost of capital. The market multiple approach uses the multiples of publicly traded companies whose services are comparable to those offered by the reporting units. As of October 1, 2020, the calculated fair values of the reporting units exceeded their book values in all circumstances; however, the Turner, HBO and Entertainment Group (prior to our December reporting unit change discussed below) fair values exceed their book values by less than 10% with COVID-19 impacts, industry trends and our content distribution strategy affecting fair value. For the reporting units with fair value in excess of 10% of book value, if either the projected rate of long-term growth of cash flows or revenues declined by 0.5%, or if the weighted average cost of capital increased by 0.5%, the fair values would still be higher than the book value of the goodwill. In the event of a 10% drop in the fair values of the reporting units, the fair values still would have exceeded the book values of the reporting units. For the Turner and HBO reporting units as of October 1, 2020, if the projected rate of longer-term growth of cash flows or revenues declined by 1% and more than 2%, respectively, or if the weighted average cost of capital increased by 0.5%, it would result in impairment of the goodwill. Carrying values of the reporting units in the WarnerMedia segment (Turner, HBO and Warner Bros.) decrease as intangibles identified in the acquisition are amortized.
Domestic Video Business
In December 2020, we changed our management strategy and reevaluated our domestic video business, allowing us to maximize value in our domestic video business and further accelerate our ability to innovate and execute in our fast-growing broadband and fiber business. The strategy change required us to reassess the grouping and recoverability of the video business long-lived assets. In conjunction with the strategy change, we separated the former Entertainment Group into two business units, Video and Broadband, which includes legacy telephony operations. These changes required us to identify a separate Video reporting unit, which required evaluating assigned goodwill for impairment, while first assessing any impairment of goodwill at the historical Entertainment Group level.
The fair value of long-lived assets was determined primarily using the present value approach of probability-weighted expected cash flow. We determined that these assets were no longer recoverable and recognized an impairment to their estimated fair value. A pre-tax impairment of $7,255 ($4,373 orbital slots, $1,201 customer lists and $1,681 in property, plant and equipment) was assigned to the long-lived assets of the video business (see Notes 7 and 9). Upon updating the carrying value of the video business, we were then required to reperform our goodwill impairment testing of the historical Entertainment Group reporting unit, as of December 31, 2020, and before separation into the two reporting units, where we again concluded that no impairment was required, consistent with the testing as of October 1, 2020. GAAP requires ongoing fair value assessments for recoverability upon defined triggering events.
We further concluded that our video business should be identified as a separate reporting unit within the Communications segment. The change in reporting unit required the historical Entertainment Group goodwill to be assigned to the separate Video and Broadband reporting units, for which we used the relative fair value allocation methodology. The affected reporting units were then tested for goodwill impairment. We recorded an impairment of the entire $8,253 of goodwill allocated to the Video reporting unit. No goodwill impairment was required in the Broadband reporting unit. (See Note 9).
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
In total, we recorded an impairment charge of $15,508 ($7,255 for long-lived assets and $8,253 of assigned goodwill) in December 2020 results.
U.S. Wireless Licenses
The fair value of U.S. wireless licenses is assessed using a discounted cash flow model (the Greenfield Approach) and a corroborative market approach based on auction prices, depending upon auction activity. The Greenfield Approach assumes a company initially owns only the wireless licenses and makes investments required to build an operation comparable to current use. These licenses are tested annually for impairment on an aggregated basis, consistent with their use on a national scope for the United States. For impairment testing, we assume subscriber and revenue growth will trend up to projected levels, with a long-term growth rate reflecting expected long-term inflation trends. We assume churn rates will initially exceed our current experience but decline to rates that are in line with industry-leading churn. We used a discount rate of 9.25%, based on the optimal long-term capital structure of a market participant and its associated cost of debt and equity for the licenses, to calculate the present value of the projected cash flows. If either the projected rate of long-term growth of cash flows or revenues declined by 0.5%, or if the discount rate increased by 0.5%, the fair values of these wireless licenses would still be higher than the book value of the licenses. The fair value of these wireless licenses exceeded their book values by more than 10%.
Other Finite-Lived Intangibles
Customer relationships, licenses in Mexico, certain trade names in our Latin America business and other finite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the book value may not be recoverable over their remaining life. For this analysis, we compare the expected undiscounted future cash flows attributable to the asset to its book value. When the asset’s book value exceeds undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment is recorded to reduce the book value of the asset to its estimated fair value (see Notes 7 and 9).
Vrio Goodwill
In the second quarter of 2020, driven by significant and adverse economic and political environments in Latin America, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced accelerated subscriber losses and revenue decline in the region, as well as closure of our operations in Venezuela. When combining these business trends and higher weighted-average cost of capital resulting from the increase in country-risk premiums in the region, we concluded that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the Vrio reporting unit, estimated using discounted cash flow and market multiple approaches, is less than its carrying amount. We recorded a $2,212 goodwill impairment, the entire amount of goodwill allocated to the Vrio reporting unit, with $105 attributable to noncontrolling interest (see Note 9).
Orbital Slots
During the first quarter of 2020, in conjunction with the nationwide launch of AT&T TV and our customers’ continued shift from linear to streaming video services, we reassessed the estimated economic lives and renewal assumptions for our orbital slot licenses. As a result, we changed the estimated lives of these licenses from indefinite to finite-lived, effective January 1, 2020, and amortized $1,504 of the orbital slots in 2020. (See Note 1)
Income Taxes Our estimates of income taxes and the significant items giving rise to the deferred assets and liabilities are shown in Note 14 and reflect our assessment of actual future taxes to be paid on items reflected in the financial statements, giving consideration to both timing and probability of these estimates. Actual income taxes could vary from these estimates due to future changes in income tax law or the final review of our tax returns by federal, state or foreign tax authorities.
We use our judgment to determine whether it is more likely than not that we will sustain positions that we have taken on tax returns and, if so, the amount of benefit to initially recognize within our financial statements. We regularly review our uncertain tax positions and adjust our unrecognized tax benefits (UTBs) in light of changes in facts and circumstances, such as changes in tax law, interactions with taxing authorities and developments in case law. These adjustments to our UTBs may affect our income tax expense. Settlement of uncertain tax positions may require use of our cash.
New Accounting Standards
Beginning with 2020 interim and annual reporting periods, we adopted the FASB’s new accounting guidance related to the measurement of credit losses on trade receivables, loans, contract assets and certain other assets not subject fair value measurement existing at January 1, 2020. We adopted the standard using a modified retrospective approach as of the beginning of the period of adoption, which did not require us to adjust the balance for prior periods, therefore affecting the comparability of our financial statements. Upon adoption, we recorded an increase to our allowances for credit losses, primarily for trade and loan receivables. See Note 1 for discussion of the impact of the standard.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
See Note 1 for discussion of the expected impact of new standards.
OTHER BUSINESS MATTERS
Video Business On February 25, 2021, we signed an agreement to form a new company named DIRECTV (New DTV) with TPG Capital, which will be jointly governed by a board with representation from both AT&T and TPG. Under the agreement, we will contribute our Video business unit to New DTV for $4,250 of junior preferred units, an additional distribution preference of $4,200 and a 70% economic interest in common units. We expect to receive $7,600 in cash from New DTV at closing. TPG will contribute approximately $1,800 in cash to New DTV for $1,800 of senior preferred units and a 30% economic interest in common units. The remaining $5,800 will be funded by debt taken on by New DTV. As part of this transaction, we agreed to pay net losses under the NFL SUNDAY TICKET contract up to a cap of $2,500 over the remaining period of the contract.
The transaction is expected to close in the second half of 2021, pending customary closing conditions. The total of $7,600 of proceeds from the transaction are expected to reduce our total and net debt positions.
In the first quarter of 2021, we expect to apply held-for-sale accounting treatment to the assets and liabilities of the U.S. video business, and accordingly will include the assets in “Other current assets,” and the related liabilities in “Accounts payable and accrued liabilities,” on our consolidated balance sheet at March 31, 2021. The carrying amounts at December 31, 2020 of these assets and liabilities were approximately $16,150 and $4,900, respectively.
Spectrum Auction In March 2020, we were the winning bidder of high-frequency 37/39 GHz licenses in FCC Auction 103 covering an average of 786 MHz nationwide for approximately $2,400. Prior to the auction, we exchanged the 39 GHz licenses with a book value of approximately $300 that were previously acquired through FiberTower Corporation for vouchers to be applied against the winning bids and recorded a $900 gain in the first quarter of 2020. These vouchers yielded a value of approximately $1,200 which was applied toward our $2,400 gross bids. We made our final payment of approximately $950 for the Auction 103 payment in April 2020. The FCC granted the licenses in June 2020.
On February 24, 2021, the FCC announced that AT&T was the winning bidder for 1,621 C-Band licenses, comprised of a total of 80 MHz nationwide, including 40 MHz in Phase I. We must provide to the FCC an initial down payment of $4,681 on March 10, 2021, of which $550 was paid as an upfront payment prior to the start of the auction, and to pay a remaining $18,725 on or before March 24, 2021. We estimate that AT&T will be responsible for $955 of Incentive Payments upon clearing of Phase I spectrum and $2,112 upon clearing of Phase II spectrum. Additionally, we will be responsible for a portion of compensable relocation costs over the next several years as the spectrum is being cleared. Satellite operators have provided the FCC with relocation cost estimates totaling $3,400. AT&T intends to fund the purchase price using a combination of cash and short-term investments, funds from operations and either short-term or long-term debt, depending upon market conditions.
Labor Contracts As of December 31, 2020, we employed approximately 231,000 persons. Approximately 37% of our employees are represented by the Communications Workers of America (CWA), the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW) or other unions. After expiration of the collective bargaining agreements, work stoppages or labor disruptions may occur in the absence of new contracts or other agreements being reached. There are no significant contracts expiring in 2021. A contract covering approximately 14,000 Mobility employees in 36 states and the District of Columbia that was set to expire in February 2021 was extended until February 2022. A contract covering approximately 10,000 Mobility employees in nine Southeast states that was set to expire in February 2022 was extended until February 2023.
Pension Diversification In 2013, we made a voluntary contribution of 320 million Series A Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Membership Interests in AT&T Mobility II LLC (Mobility preferred interests), the primary holding company for our wireless business, to the trust used to pay pension benefits under certain of our qualified pension plans (see Note 17). Since their contribution, the Mobility preferred interests are plan assets under ERISA, and have been recognized as such in the plan’s separate financial statements. On September 28, 2020, the trust, through the independent investment manager/fiduciary, sold 106.7 million of the Mobility preferred interests to unrelated third parties. The aggregate purchase price was $2,885, which includes accrued distributions through the date of sale (see Note 15).
Environmental We are subject from time to time to judicial and administrative proceedings brought by various governmental authorities under federal, state or local environmental laws. We reference in our Forms 10-Q and 10-K certain environmental proceedings that could result in monetary sanctions (exclusive of interest and costs) of three hundred thousand dollars or more. However, we do not believe that any of those currently pending will have a material adverse effect on our results of operations.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We had $9,740 in cash and cash equivalents available at December 31, 2020. Cash and cash equivalents included cash of $2,842 and money market funds and other cash equivalents of $6,898. Approximately $2,205 of our cash and cash equivalents were held by our foreign entities in accounts predominantly outside of the U.S. and may be subject to restrictions on repatriation.
The Company's liquidity and capital resources were not materially impacted by COVID-19 and related economic conditions during 2020. We will continue to monitor impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our liquidity and capital resources.
Cash and cash equivalents decreased $2,390 since December 31, 2019. In 2020, cash inflows were primarily provided by cash receipts from operations, including cash from our sale and transfer of our receivables to third parties and the issuances of long-term debt, cumulative preferred stock and cumulative preferred interests in a subsidiary. These inflows were offset by cash used to meet the needs of the business, including, but not limited to, payment of operating expenses, debt repayments, funding capital expenditures and vendor financing payments, dividends to stockholders, share repurchases and spectrum acquisitions.
Cash Provided by or Used in Operating Activities
During 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $43,130 compared to $48,668 in 2019, impacted by the timing of working capital payments.
We actively manage the timing of our supplier payments for operating items to optimize the use of our cash. Among other things, we seek to make payments on 90-day or greater terms, while providing the suppliers with access to bank facilities that permit earlier payments at their cost. In addition, for payments to a key supplier, as part of our working capital initiatives, we have arrangements that allow us to extend payment terms up to 90 days at an additional cost to us (referred to as supplier financing). The net impact of supplier financing was to improve cash from operating activities $432 in 2020 and $909 in 2019. All supplier financing payments are due within one year.
Cash Used in or Provided by Investing Activities
During 2020, cash used in investing activities totaled $13,548, and consisted primarily of $15,675 (including interest during construction) for capital expenditures, final payment of approximately $950 for wireless spectrum licenses won in Auction 103 and $141 of net cash paid to acquire the remaining interest in HBO LAG. Investing activities also included cash receipts of $1,928 from the sale of our operations in Puerto Rico, which were used to redeem the preferred interests secured by the sales proceeds (see Notes 6 and 17), $1,100 from the sale of our investment in Central European Media Enterprises, Ltd. (see Note 6) and $400 from corporate owned life insurance investments.
For capital improvements, we have negotiated favorable vendor payment terms of 120 days or more (referred to as vendor financing) with some of our vendors, which are excluded from capital expenditures and reported as financing activities. Vendor financing payments were $2,966 in 2020, compared to $3,050 in 2019. Capital expenditures in 2020 were $15,675, and when including $2,966 cash paid for vendor financing and excluding $1,063 of FirstNet reimbursements, gross capital investment was $19,704 ($3,986 lower than the prior year).
The vast majority of our capital expenditures are spent on our networks, including product development and related support systems. In 2020, we placed $4,664 of equipment in service under vendor financing arrangements (compared to $2,632 in 2019) and approximately $1,230 of assets related to the FirstNet build (compared to $1,116 in 2019). Total reimbursements from the government for FirstNet were $1,626 for 2020 and $1,374 for 2019, predominately for capital expenditures.
The amount of capital expenditures is influenced by demand for services and products, capacity needs and network enhancements. In 2021, we expect that our gross capital investment, which includes capital expenditures and cash paid for vendor financing and excludes expected FirstNet reimbursement of approximately $1,000, will be in the $21,000 range (including capital expenditures in the $18,000 range).
Cash Used in or Provided by Financing Activities
For the year, cash used in financing activities totaled $32,007 and was comprised of issuances and repayments of debt, issuances of preferred stock, issuances and redemptions of preferred interests in subsidiaries, payments of dividends and share repurchases.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
During 2020, debt issuances included proceeds of $9,440 in short-term borrowings (including approximately $3,950 of commercial paper) and $31,988 of net proceeds from long-term debt. Borrowing activity included the following issuances:
Issued and redeemed in 2020:
•March draw of $750 on a private financing agreement (repaid in the second quarter).
•April draw of $5,500 on a term loan credit agreement with certain commercial banks and Bank of America, N.A., as lead agent (repaid in the second quarter).
Issued and outstanding in 2020:
•February issuance of $2,995 of 4.000% global notes due 2049.
•March borrowings of $665 from loan programs with export agencies of foreign governments to support network equipment purchases in those countries.
•May issuances totaling $12,500 in global notes, comprised of $2,500 of 2.300% global notes due 2027, $3,000 of 2.750% global notes due 2031, $2,500 of 3.500% global notes due 2041, $3,000 of 3.650% global notes due 2051 and $1,500 of 3.850% global notes due 2060.
•May issuances totaling €3,000 million in global notes (approximately $3,281 at issuance), comprised of €1,750 million of 1.600% global notes due 2028, €750 million of 2.050% global notes due 2032 and €500 million of 2.600% global notes due 2038.
•June issuance of $1,050 of 3.750% global notes due 2050.
•August issuances totaling $11,000 in global notes, comprised of $2,250 of 1.650% global notes due 2028, $2,500 of 2.250% global notes due 2032, $2,500 of 3.100% global notes due 2043, $2,250 of 3.300% global notes due 2052 and $1,500 of 3.500% global notes due 2061.
During 2020, repayments of debt included $9,467 of short-term borrowings (including $3,967 of commercial paper) and $39,964 of long-term debt. Repayments included:
Notes redeemed at maturity:
•$800 of AT&T floating-rate notes in the first quarter.
•$687 of AT&T floating-rate notes in the second quarter.
•€2,250 million of AT&T floating-rate notes in the third quarter (approximately $2,637 at maturity).
•€1,000 million of 1.875% AT&T global notes in the fourth quarter ($1,290 at maturity).
•CAD$1,000 million of 3.825% AT&T global notes in the fourth quarter (approximately $954 at maturity).
Notes redeemed or repurchased prior to maturity:
•$2,619 of 4.600% AT&T global notes with original maturity in 2045, in the first quarter.
•$2,750 of 2.450% AT&T global notes with original maturity in 2020, in the second quarter.
•$1,000 of annual put reset securities issued by BellSouth, in the second quarter.
•$683 of 4.600% AT&T global notes with original maturity in 2021, in the second quarter.
•$1,695 of 2.800% AT&T global notes with original maturity in 2021, in the second quarter.
•$853 of 4.450% AT&T global notes with original maturity in 2021, in the second quarter.
•$1,172 of 3.875% AT&T global notes with original maturity in 2021, in the second quarter.
•$1,430 of 5.500% AT&T global notes with original maturity in 2047, in the second quarter.
•$1,457 of 3.000% AT&T global notes with original maturity in 2022, in the third quarter.
•$1,250 of 3.200% AT&T global notes with original maturity in 2022, in the third quarter.
•$1,012 of 3.800% AT&T global notes with original maturity in 2022, in the third quarter.
•$422 of 4.000% AT&T global notes with original maturity in 2022, in the third quarter.
•$60 of 3.800% DIRECTV senior notes with original maturity in 2022, in the third quarter.
•$63 of 4.000% Warner Media, LLC notes with original maturity in 2022, in the third quarter.
•$11,384 of AT&T global notes and subsidiary notes that were tendered for cash in the third quarter. The notes had floating and fixed interest rates. The fixed rates ranged from 3.400% to 7.850% and original maturities ranging from 2021 to 2025.
•$53 of 3.400% Warner Media, LLC notes with original maturity in 2022, in the third quarter.
•$177 of 3.400% AT&T global notes with original maturity in 2022, in the third quarter.
•$928 of 3.600% AT&T global notes with original maturity in 2023, in the third quarter.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
Credit facilities repaid and other redemptions:
•$750 of borrowings under a private financing agreement, in the first quarter.
•$750 of borrowings under a private financing agreement, in the second quarter.
•$5,500 under our April 2020 term loan credit agreement with certain commercial banks and Bank of America, in the second quarter.
•$1,300 under our term loan credit agreement with Bank of America, in the second quarter.
•$500 under our term loan credit agreement with Bank of Communications Co., in the second quarter.
•R$3,381 million of Sky Serviços de Banda Larga Ltda. floating-rate loan in the third quarter (approximately $1,000 when issued in April 2018 and $638 at redemption due to strengthening of the U.S. dollar against Brazilian real).
Debt Exchanges:
•During the third quarter of 2020, we exchanged $17,677 of AT&T and subsidiary notes, with interest rates ranging from 4.350% to 8.750% and original maturities ranging from 2031 to 2058 for $1,459 of cash and $21,500 of three new series of AT&T global notes, with interest rates ranging from 3.500% to 3.650% and maturities ranging from 2053 to 2059.
•During the fourth quarter of 2020, we exchanged $8,280 of AT&T and subsidiary notes, with interest rates ranging from 2.950% to 7.125% and original maturities ranging from 2026 to 2048 for $8 of cash and $9,678 of two new series of AT&T global notes, with interest rates of 2.550% and 3.800% and maturities of 2033 and 2057, respectively.
Our weighted average interest rate of our entire long-term debt portfolio, including the impact of derivatives, was approximately 4.1% as of December 31, 2020 and 4.4% as of December 31, 2019. We had $155,209 of total notes and debentures outstanding at December 31, 2020, which included Euro, British pound sterling, Canadian dollar, Mexican peso, Australian dollar, Swiss franc and Brazilian real denominated debt that totaled approximately $43,399.
At December 31, 2020, we had $3,470 of debt maturing within one year, consisting entirely of long-term debt issuances. Debt maturing within one year includes an accreting zero-coupon note that may be redeemed each May until maturity in 2022. If the remainder of the zero-coupon note (issued for principal of $500 in 2007 and partially exchanged in the 2017 debt exchange offers) is held to maturity, the redemption amount will be $592.
During 2020, we paid $2,966 of cash under our vendor financing program, compared to $3,050 in 2019. Total vendor financing payables included in our December 31, 2020 consolidated balance sheet were approximately $3,761, with $3,563 due within one year (in “Accounts payable and accrued liabilities”) and the remainder predominantly due within two to three years (in “Other noncurrent liabilities”).
Financing activities in 2020 also included $1,979 from the September issuance of preferred interests in a subsidiary and $3,869 for the February issuance of Series B and Series C preferred stock (see Note 17).
We repurchased approximately 142 million shares of common stock at a cost of $5,278, predominantly in the first quarter, and completed the share repurchase authorization approved by the Board of Directors in 2013. In March 2020, we cancelled an accelerated share repurchase agreement that was planned for the second quarter and other repurchases to maintain flexibility and focus on continued investment in serving our customers, taking care of our employees and enhancing our network, including 5G. At December 31, 2020, we had approximately 178 million shares remaining from our share repurchase authorizations approved by the Board of Directors in 2014.
We paid dividends on common shares and preferred shares of $14,956 in 2020, compared with $14,888 in 2019. Dividends were higher in 2020, primarily due to dividend payments to preferred stockholders and the increase in our quarterly dividend on common stock approved by our Board of Directors in December 2019, partially offset by fewer shares outstanding.
Dividends on common stock declared by our Board of Directors totaled $2.08 per share in 2020 and $2.05 per share in 2019. Our dividend policy considers the expectations and requirements of stockholders, capital funding requirements of AT&T and long-term growth opportunities.
Our 2021 financing activities will focus on managing our debt level and paying dividends, subject to approval by our Board of Directors. We plan to fund our financing uses of cash through a combination of cash from operations, issuance of debt, and asset sales. The timing and mix of any debt issuance and/or refinancing will be guided by credit market conditions and interest rate trends.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
Credit Facilities
The following summary of our various credit and loan agreements does not purport to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by reference to each agreement filed as exhibits to our Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We use credit facilities as a tool in managing our liquidity status. In November 2020, we amended one of our $7,500 revolving credit agreements by extending the termination date. In total, we have two $7,500 revolving credit agreements, totaling $15,000, with one terminating on December 11, 2023 and the other terminating on November 17, 2025. No amounts were outstanding under either agreement as of December 31, 2020.
In September 2019, we entered into and drew on a $1,300 term loan credit agreement containing (i) a 1.25 year $400 facility due in 2020, (ii) a 2.25 year $400 facility due in 2021, and (iii) a 3.25 year $500 facility due in 2022, with Bank of America, N.A., as agent. These facilities were repaid and terminated in the second quarter of 2020.
On April 6, 2020, we entered into and drew on a $5,500 Term Loan Credit Agreement (Term Loan) with 11 commercial banks and Bank of America, N.A. as lead agent. We repaid and terminated the Term Loan in May 2020.
On January 29, 2021, we entered into a $14,700 Term Loan Credit Agreement (Term Loan), with Bank of America, N.A., as agent. The Term Loan is available for a single draw at any time before May 29, 2021. The proceeds will be used for general corporate purposes, which may include among other things, financing acquisitions of additional spectrum. The entire principal amount of the Term Loan will be due and payable 364 days after the date on which the borrowing is made. At January 31, 2021, we had approximately $6,100 of commercial paper outstanding.
We also utilize other external financing sources, which include various credit arrangements supported by government agencies to support network equipment purchases, as well as a commercial paper program.
Each of our credit and loan agreements contains covenants that are customary for an issuer with an investment grade senior debt credit rating as well as a net debt-to-EBITDA financial ratio covenant requiring us to maintain, as of the last day of each fiscal quarter, a ratio of not more than 3.5-to-1. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants for our credit facilities.
Collateral Arrangements
During 2019 and 2020, we amended collateral arrangements with counterparties to require cash collateral posting by AT&T only when derivative market values exceed certain thresholds. Under these arrangements, which cover over 90% of our approximate $41,000 derivative portfolio, counterparties are still required to post collateral. During 2020, we received approximately $800 of cash collateral, on a net basis. Cash postings under these arrangements vary with changes in credit ratings and netting agreements. (See Note 13)
Other
Our total capital consists of debt (long-term debt and debt maturing within one year) and stockholders’ equity. Our capital structure does not include debt issued by our equity method investment. At December 31, 2020, our debt ratio was 46.7%, compared to 44.7% at December 31, 2019 and 47.7% at December 31, 2018. Our net debt ratio was 43.8% at December 31, 2020, compared to 41.4% at December 31, 2019 and 46.2% at December 31, 2018. The debt ratio is affected by the same factors that affect total capital, and reflects our recent debt issuances and repayments and debt acquired in business combinations.
A significant amount of our cash outflows is related to tax items, acquisition of spectrum through FCC auctions and benefits paid for current and former employees:
•Total taxes incurred, collected and remitted by AT&T during 2020 and 2019, were $21,967 and $24,170. These taxes include income, franchise, property, sales, excise, payroll, gross receipts and various other taxes and fees.
•Total domestic spectrum acquired primarily through FCC auctions, including cash, exchanged spectrum and auction deposits was approximately $2,800 in 2020, $1,300 in 2019 and $450 in 2018.
•Total health and welfare benefits provided to certain active and retired employees and their dependents totaled $3,656 in 2020, with $1,029 paid from plan assets. Of those benefits, $3,293 related to medical and prescription drug benefits. In addition, in 2020 we prefunded $745 for future benefit payments. During 2020, we paid $5,124 of pension benefits out of plan assets.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
During 2020, we have received $3,641 from the disposition of assets, and when combined with working capital monetization initiatives, which include the sale of receivables, total cash received from monetization efforts, net of $1,613 of spectrum acquisitions, was approximately $1,100. We plan to continue to explore similar opportunities.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS, COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 are in the following table:
1Represents principal or payoff amounts of notes and debentures at maturity or, for putable debt, the next put opportunity (see Note 12). Foreign debt includes the impact from hedges, when applicable.
2We expect to fund the purchase obligations with cash provided by operations or through incremental borrowings. The minimum commitment for certain obligations is based on termination penalties that could be paid to exit the contracts. If we elect to exit these contracts, termination fees for all such contracts in the year of termination could be approximately $259 in 2021, $257 in the aggregate for 2022 and 2023 and $64 in the aggregate for 2024 and 2025 and $1,987 in the aggregate thereafter. Certain termination fees are excluded from the above table, as the fees would not be paid every year and the timing of such payments, if any, is uncertain. (See Note 21)
3Represents operating lease payments (see Note 8).
4Represents contractual commitment to make sustainability payments over the 25-year contract. These sustainability payments represent our commitment to fund FirstNet’s operating expenses and future reinvestment in the network, which we own and operate. FirstNet has a statutory requirement to reinvest funds that exceed the agency’s operating expenses, which we anticipate to be $15,000. (See Note 20)
5The noncurrent portion of the UTBs is included in the “More than 5 Years” column, as we cannot reasonably estimate the timing or amounts of additional cash payments, if any, at this time (see Note 14).
6Represents future minimum payments under the Crown Castle and other arrangements (see Note 19), payables subject to extended payment terms (see Note 22) and finance lease payments (see Note 8).
Certain items were excluded from this table, as the year of payment is unknown and could not be reliably estimated since past trends were not deemed to be an indicator of future payment, we believe the obligations are immaterial or because the settlement of the obligation will not require the use of cash. These items include: deferred income tax liability of $60,472 (see Note 14); net postemployment benefit obligations of $19,690; expected pension and postretirement payments (see Note 15); and other noncurrent liabilities of $11,829.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
DISCUSSION AND RECONCILIATION OF NON-GAAP MEASURE
We believe the following measure is relevant and useful information to investors as it is used by management as a method of comparing performance with that of many of our competitors. This supplemental measure should be considered in addition to, but not as a substitute of, our consolidated and segment financial information.
Business Solutions Reconciliation
We provide a supplemental discussion of our Business Solutions operations that is calculated by combining our Mobility and Business Wireline business units, and then adjusting to remove non-business operations. The following table presents a reconciliation of our supplemental Business Solutions results. Results have been recast to conform to the current period's classification.
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts
AT&T Inc.
Dollars in millions except per share amounts