Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We have filed a registration statement on Form S-4 with the SEC, which includes the preliminary proxy statement/prospectus, and we will file other documents regarding the Transactions. A definitive proxy statement/prospectus will also be sent to our stockholders and Talkspace’s stockholders, seeking any required stockholder approvals. We urge stockholders to carefully read the entire registration statement and proxy statement/prospectus and any other relevant documents filed with the SEC, including any amendments or supplements to
these documents, because they contain important information about the proposed transactions, including detailed descriptions of the Transactions and a discussion of historical information and risks relating to the Transactions. The documents filed by us with the SEC may be obtained free of charge at the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on February 6, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more target businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering, the sale of the Private Placement Warrants that occurred simultaneously with the completion of our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Forward Purchase Units, the sale of shares in a private placement to certain investors (including the PIPE Investment), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Merger Agreement
On January 12, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the parties thereto will enter into the Proposed Business Combination by which, (i) First Merger Sub will merge with and into the Company with the Company being the surviving corporation in the First Merger and (ii) Second Merger Sub will merge with and into the surviving corporation with Second Merger Sub being the surviving entity in the Second Merger.
Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, at the effective time of the Merger:
(a) All shares of common stock and preferred stock of Talkspace and all vested options exercisable for common stock of Talkspace, in each case, outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the First Merger, will be cancelled in exchange for the right to receive, at the election of the holders thereof, a number of shares of our common stock or a combination of shares of our common stock and cash, in each case, as adjusted pursuant to the Merger Agreement, which in the aggregate with the options to acquire common stock of Talkspace to be assumed by us in exchange for options to acquire our common stock, will be equal to the Closing Merger Consideration;
(b) The Closing Cash Consideration that may be paid to pre-closing holders of Talkspace’s stock and vested options pursuant to the foregoing is equal to (i) the amount of cash held by us in our trust account (after reduction for the aggregate amount of cash payable in respect of any HEC stockholder redemptions), plus (ii) the amounts received by us upon consummation of the PIPE Investment and the transactions contemplated under the HEC Forward Purchase Agreement, (iii) $250,000,000, minus (iv) the transaction expenses of the parties to the Merger Agreement;
(c) The maximum number of shares of our common stock that may be issued to pre-closing holders of the Talkspace’s stock and options, including our common stock underlying any assumed options, pursuant to the foregoing is equal to a number determined dividing (a) (i) the Closing Merger Consideration minus (ii) the Closing Cash Consideration, minus (iii) the Sponsor Share Amount, minus (iv) the transaction expenses of the parties to the Merger Agreement, by (b) $10.00.
Additionally, on January 12, 2021, concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement, we entered into the Subscription Agreements with the PIPE Investors, pursuant to, and on the terms and subject to the conditions of which, the PIPE Investors have collectively subscribed for 30,000,000 shares of our common stock
for an aggregate purchase price equal to $300 million. The PIPE Investment will be consummated substantially concurrently with the Closing. The Subscription Agreements will terminate with no further force and effect upon the earliest to occur of: (i) the termination of the Merger Agreement in accordance with its terms, (ii) the mutual written agreement of the parties to such Subscription Agreement, (iii) the failure to satisfy any of the closing conditions set forth in such Subscription Agreements by the closing date, or (iv) the failure to close within seven months from the date of signing.
The parties to the Merger Agreement have made customary representations, warranties and covenants, including, among others, with respect to the conduct of the businesses of Talkspace and HEC during the period between execution of the Merger Agreement and the consummation of the Proposed Business Combination.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and, following the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a business combination and completing activities related to the Merger Agreement. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of an initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing our initial business combination.
For the period from February 6, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,558,095, which consists of operating costs of $1,776,306 and a provision for income taxes of $10,070, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $228,281.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On June 11, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 41,400,000 units, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 5,400,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $414,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 10,280,000 Private Placement Warrants to our sponsor at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $10,280,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $414,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $23,353,182 in transaction costs, including $8,280,000 of underwriting fees, $14,490,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $583,182 of other offering costs.
For the period from February 6, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $261,316. Net loss of $1,558,095 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $228,281, formation costs paid by our sponsor of $2,125 and changes in operating assets and liabilities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $414,228,281. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less taxes payable and deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our initial business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies. During the period ended December 31, 2020, we did not withdraw any interest income from the trust account.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $1,178,377 of cash held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with our initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Going Concern
We have until June 11, 2022 to consummate an initial business combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate an initial business combination by this time. If an initial business combination is not consummated by this date, we may require additional capital or there may be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, suspending the pursuit of a business combination. We cannot provide assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. Management has determined that the liquidity condition, should an initial business combination not occur, raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with un entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative services to us. We began incurring these fees on June 8, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of our initial business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $14,490,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be forfeited by the underwriters in the event that the Company fails to complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
In addition, we entered into a forward purchase agreement with HEC Fund pursuant to which HEC Fund committed to purchase from us up to 5,000,000 Forward Purchase Units, for $10.00 per unit, or an aggregate amount of up to $50,000,000, in a private placement that will close concurrently with the closing of an initial business combination. The proceeds from the sale of these Forward Purchase Units, together with the amounts available to us from the trust account (after giving effect to any redemptions of public shares) and any other equity or debt financing obtained by us in connection with the initial business combination, will be used to satisfy the cash requirements of the initial business combination, including funding the purchase price and paying expenses and retaining specified amounts to be used by the post-business combination company for working capital or other purposes. To the extent that the amounts available from the trust account and other financing are sufficient for such cash requirements, HEC Fund may purchase less than 5,000,000 Forward Purchase Units. In addition, HEC Fund’s commitment under the forward purchase agreement will be subject to approval, prior to us entering into a definitive agreement for an initial business combination, of its investment committee. Pursuant to the terms of the forward purchase agreement, HEC Fund will have the option to assign its commitment to one of its affiliates and up to $2,500,000 to members of our management team. The forward purchase shares will be identical to the shares of Class A common stock included in the units sold in the Initial Public Offering, except that they will be subject to transfer restrictions and registration rights. The forward purchase warrants will have the same terms as the Private Placement Warrants so long as they are held by HEC Fund or its permitted assignees and transferees.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the united States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the trust account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of Class A redeemable common stock outstanding for the period. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for Class B non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the net income, less income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of Class B non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.