Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included in Part IV, Item 15. of this Annual Report. Amounts are in thousands of dollars, shares of common stock or gallons, as applicable, unless indicated otherwise.
Company Overview
TravelCenters of America Inc. is a Maryland corporation. As of December 31, 2020, we operated or franchised 271 travel centers, three standalone truck service facilities and 42 standalone restaurants. Our customers include trucking fleets and their drivers, independent truck drivers, highway and local motorists and casual diners. We also collect rents, royalties and other fees from our tenants and franchisees.
We manage our business as one segment. We make specific disclosures concerning fuel and nonfuel products and services because they facilitate our discussion of trends and operational initiatives within our business and industry. We have a single travel center located in a foreign country, Canada, that we do not consider material to our operations.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a pandemic, and, in response to the outbreak, the U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary declared a public health emergency in the United States and many states and municipalities declared public health emergencies. Various governmental responses attempting to contain and mitigate the spread of the virus have negatively impacted, and continue to negatively impact, the global economy, including the U.S. economy.
We believe that our travel centers and truck drivers that we serve are critical to sustaining a resilient supply chain to support essential services and daily consumption across the United States. Our business benefited from an increased demand for e-commerce and from being recognized by various governmental authorities as a provider of services essential to businesses, which allowed us to continue operating our travel centers through the pandemic. Further, we also benefited from increased initial demand by businesses and households to stock up on certain products in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in increased trucking activity to transport those goods across the United States. However, if there is another economic downturn, demand for the transporting of products across the United States by trucks may decline, possibly significantly. If that occurs, our business, results of operations and financial position may become increasingly negatively impacted. Further, these economic conditions may result in trucking companies being unable to continue as going concerns.
We experienced increased diesel fuel sales volume during the three months ended March 31, 2020, as compared to the three months ended March 31, 2019, due to an initial increase in demand for certain products as businesses and households stocked up on those products as the implications of the COVID-19 pandemic began to be more widely understood. Although the initial increase in demand began to decline during April 2020, we recognized an increase in diesel fuel sales volume during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, particularly due to improved market conditions within the freight industry and our belief that our marketing initiatives were successful. Due to governmental stay in place orders, social distancing and other reductions in activity, demand for gasoline during the second half of March 2020 through December 31, 2020, declined sharply, resulting in reduced gasoline sales volume sold by us during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, and demand for certain of our nonfuel products and services have declined. In addition, in March 2020, we temporarily closed most of our FSRs and limited our product offerings at some of our restaurants and travel centers. As a result, we experienced a decrease in total nonfuel revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. As governments began to lift stay in place orders, we recognized increases in our truck service and store and retail services revenues for the three months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the three months ended December 31, 2019, and we began to reopen many of our restaurants.
For a discussion of and the risks relating to the COVID-19 pandemic and its aftermath on us and our business, see elsewhere in this Annual Report, including "Warning Concerning Forward-Looking Statements", Part I, Item 1. "Business" and Part I, Item 1A. "Risk Factors" in this Annual Report.
Executive Summary of Financial Results
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we generated a loss before income taxes of $21,082 and income before income taxes of $37,808, respectively. The $58,890 decrease in our income before income taxes was primarily due to the following factors:
•site level gross margin in excess of site level operating expense decreased $39,434, which primarily resulted from the $70,229 benefit recognized in connection with the federal biodiesel blenders' tax credit during 2019, which included approximately $34,000 of benefit for 2018, and decreases in fuel and nonfuel gross margin of $45,366 and $67,702, respectively, as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020, partially offset by a decrease in site level operating expense of $73,481 and the $29,521 benefit recognized in connection with the federal biodiesel blenders' tax credit during 2020; and
•depreciation and amortization expense increased $27,529, which primarily resulted from the $13,715 held for sale impairment charge related to QSL during 2020, the $8,072 write off of certain assets related to programs that were canceled during 2020, $6,574 of impairment charges relating to certain low performing standalone QSL restaurants during 2020, the $3,046 goodwill impairment charge recognized during 2020 with respect to our QSL business and the $834 write off of intangible assets associated with three franchised QSL standalone restaurants that closed during 2020, partially offset by the $2,369 of impairment charges relating to certain low performing standalone QSL restaurants during 2019.
The above factors were partially offset by:
•selling, general and administrative expense decreased $10,436, which primarily resulted from the elimination of approximately 130 positions as part of the Reorganization Plan during 2020, approximately 120 corporate employees furloughed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020, as well as a reduction in marketing and travel related expenses, partially offset by $5,364 of non-recurring restructuring costs associated with the Reorganization Plan and other separation costs and expenses related to executive officer retirement and separation agreements during 2020; and
•real estate rent expense decreased $2,019, primarily the result of our acquisition in January 2019 of 20 travel centers from SVC that we previously leased from SVC, which reduced our annual minimum rent due to SVC, a decrease in percentage rent due to SVC as a result of the decrease in our nonfuel revenues during 2020 as compared to 2019 and $579 of impairment charges to our operating lease assets relating to certain low performing standalone QSL restaurants during 2019, partially offset by $1,262 of impairment charges to our operating lease assets related to certain low performing standalone QSL restaurants during 2020.
Effects of Fuel Prices and Supply and Demand Factors
Our revenues and income are subject to fluctuations, sometimes material, as a result of market prices and the availability of, and demand for, diesel fuel and gasoline. These factors are subject to the worldwide petroleum products supply chain, which historically has experienced price and supply volatility as a result of, among other things, severe weather, terrorism, political crises, military actions and variations in demand that are often the result of changes in the macroeconomic environment. Also, concerted efforts by major oil producing countries and cartels to influence oil supply, as well as other actions by governments regarding trade policies, may impact fuel prices.
Over the past several years there have been significant changes in the cost of fuel. During the year ended December 31, 2020, fuel prices trended downward, ending at a lower price than at the start of the year. During the year ended December 31, 2019, fuel prices trended slightly upward, ending at a higher price than at the start of the year. The average fuel price during the year ended December 31, 2020, was 37.4% below the average fuel price during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in average fuel prices for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily resulted from a 52.7% decrease in March and April 2020 as a result of the sharp decrease in demand resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and the related economic downturn. We generally are able to pass changes in our cost for fuel products to our customers, but typically with a delay, such that during periods of rising fuel commodity prices, fuel gross margin per gallon tends to be lower than it otherwise may have been and during periods of falling fuel commodity prices, fuel gross margin per gallon tends to be higher than it otherwise may have been. Increases in the prices we pay for fuel can have negative effects on our sales and profitability and increase our working capital requirements. Since December 31, 2020, average fuel prices have been generally increasing and if average fuel prices continue to increase, these increases may have an impact on our fuel gross margin.
Due to the volatility of our fuel costs and our methods of pricing fuel to our customers, we believe that fuel revenues are not a reliable metric for analyzing our results of operations from period to period. Solely as a result of changes in fuel prices, our fuel revenues may materially increase or decrease, in both absolute amounts and on a percentage basis, without a comparable change in fuel sales volume or in fuel gross margin, as evidenced in 2020. We therefore consider fuel sales volume and fuel gross margin to be better measures of our performance.
We believe that demand for fuel by trucking companies and motorists for a constant level of miles driven will continue to decline over time because of technological innovations that improve fuel efficiency of motor vehicle engines, other fuel conservation practices and alternative fuels and technologies. Although we believe these factors, combined with competitive pressures, impact the level of fuel sales volume we realize, fuel sales volume increased both on a consolidated and same site basis during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. These increases primarily resulted from improved market conditions within the freight industry and the success of our marketing initiatives.
Factors Affecting Comparability
COVID-19 Pandemic
See our discussion regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on us and our business above.
Reorganization Plan
On April 30, 2020, we committed to and initiated the Reorganization Plan to improve the efficiency of our operations. As part of the Reorganization Plan, we reduced our headcount and eliminated certain positions, which we expect to result in approximately $13,100 of net annual savings in selling, general and administrative expense. In addition, we have made certain changes in our leadership and their roles and created both a corporate development team and a procurement team. The costs of the Reorganization Plan were $4,288, which were comprised primarily of severance, outplacement services, stock based compensation expense associated with the accelerated vesting of previously granted stock awards for certain employees and fees for recruitment of certain executive positions. These costs were recognized in selling, general and administrative expense in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income. Please refer to Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15. of this Annual Report for more information about the Reorganization Plan.
Growth and Cost Control Strategies
We have commenced numerous initiatives across our organization under our Transformation Plan for the purpose of expanding our travel center network, improving and enhancing operational efficiencies and profitability and in support of our core mission to "Return every traveler to the road better than they came." We believe these and certain other initiatives will expand our franchise base, increase diesel fuel and gasoline gross margin and fuel sales volume, increase market share in the truck service industry, improve merchandising and gross margin in store and retail services and improve operating effectiveness in our food service offerings while focusing on opportunities to continue to control costs in field operations.
Since the beginning of 2019, we entered into franchise agreements covering 33 travel centers to be operated under our travel center brand names, including 21 new agreements in 2020. Four of these franchised travel centers began operations during 2019, 10 began operations during 2020, one began operations thus far in 2021 and we anticipate 18 franchised travel centers will begin operations by the end of the 2022 first quarter.
Federal Biodiesel Blenders' Tax Credit
In December 2019, the U.S. government retroactively reinstated the federal biodiesel blenders' tax credit for 2018 and 2019, as well as approved the federal biodiesel blenders' tax credit through 2022. As a result, we recognized a benefit to our fuel cost of goods sold of $70,229 in the fourth quarter of 2019 that related to the federal biodiesel blenders' tax credit for both 2018 and 2019 and a benefit to our fuel cost of goods sold of $29,521 during 2020.
Lease Amendments and Travel Center Purchases
In January 2019, we acquired from SVC 20 previously leased travel centers for $309,637, which amount includes $1,437 of transaction related costs, and amended our five existing leases with SVC such that: (i) the 20 purchased travel centers were removed from the applicable leases and our annual minimum rent was reduced by $43,148; (ii) the term of each of the leases was extended by three years; (iii) the amount of the deferred rent obligation to be paid to SVC was reduced from $150,000 to $70,458 and we began to pay that amount in 16 equal quarterly installments commencing on April 1, 2019 and ending January 1, 2023; and (iv) commencing with the year ended December 31, 2020, we began pay to SVC an additional amount of percentage rent equal to one-half percent (0.5%) of the excess of the annual nonfuel revenues at leased sites over the nonfuel revenues for each respective site for the year ending December 31, 2019. These lease amendments are further described in Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15. of this Annual Report.
Results of Operations
We present our results of operations on a consolidated basis. Currently all of our company operated locations are same site locations with the exception of two standalone truck service facilities and one standalone restaurant. Same site operating results would not provide materially different information from our consolidated results and are not presented as part of this discussion and analysis.
Consolidated Financial Results
The following table presents changes in our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
(1) The amounts for 2020 and 2019 include $29,521 and $70,229, respectively, of benefits from the federal biodiesel blenders' tax credit. The U.S. government retroactively reinstated this tax credit for 2018 and 2019 in December 2019, which resulted in the recognition of credits in December 2019 that were earned in 2018 and 2019. The 2019 amount includes a $2,840 one time benefit due to the reversal of loyalty award accruals recognized in connection with introducing a revised customer loyalty program.
Year Ended December 31, 2020, As Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Fuel Revenues. Fuel revenues for 2020 decreased by $1,162,746, or 27.4%, as compared to 2019. The decrease in fuel revenues for 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in market prices for fuel, partially offset by an increase in fuel sales volume. The table below presents the factors causing the changes in total fuel sales volume and revenues between periods. See "Effects of Fuel Prices and Supply and Demand Factors" for more information regarding the impact market prices for fuel has on our financial results.
Nonfuel Revenues. Nonfuel revenues for 2020 decreased by $108,729, or 5.9%, as compared to 2019, primarily as a result of a decrease in revenues at both our FSRs in our travel centers and standalone restaurants due to the temporary closure or limitation of services, as well as decreases in our truck service and store and retail services businesses due to a reduction in trucking activity and consumer travel, all of which were a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, in 2019 we benefited from a particularly strong financial performance in truck service and store and retail services as a result of the extreme cold weather experienced during the beginning of 2019, as compared to unseasonably mild weather experienced during the beginning of 2020. These decreases were partially offset by increases in DEF sales as a result of an increase in newer trucks on the road that require DEF and our QSRs which benefited from certain FSR closures and our marketing initiatives.
Rent and Royalties from Franchisees Revenues. Rent and royalties from franchisees revenues for 2020 increased by $153, or 1.1%, as compared to 2019, primarily as a result of 14 franchised travel centers and seven franchised standalone QSL restaurants that began operations since the beginning of 2019, partially offset by the closure of five franchised standalone QSL restaurants, our purchase of one standalone QSL restaurant from a former franchisee since the beginning of 2019, and the temporary closures of certain franchised standalone QSL restaurants as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Fuel Gross Margin. Fuel gross margin for 2020 decreased by $45,366, or 12.0%, as compared to 2019, primarily as a result of the $70,229 benefit recognized in 2019 in connection with the federal biodiesel blenders' tax credit earned in 2018 and 2019, and a $2,840 one time benefit due to the reversal of loyalty award accruals recognized in connection with introducing a revised customer loyalty program during 2019, partially offset by a more favorable fuel purchasing environment, primarily in the first and second quarters of 2020, the $29,521 benefit recognized in connection with the federal biodiesel blenders' tax credit in 2020 and an increase in fuel sales volume.
Nonfuel Gross Margin. Nonfuel gross margin for 2020 decreased by $67,702, or 6.0%, as compared to 2019 due to the decrease in nonfuel revenues as a result of the factors noted above. Nonfuel gross margin percentage for 2020 declined slightly to 60.8% from 60.9% for 2019.
Site Level Operating Expense. Site level operating expense for 2020 decreased by $73,481, or 7.8%, as compared to 2019, primarily due to the furloughing of approximately 4,300 field employees in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and a decrease in nonlabor costs such as maintenance, certain utilities and supplies, partially offset by cash bonuses we paid to certain employees who continued to work at our locations during the COVID-19 pandemic. Site level operating expense as a percentage of nonfuel revenues for 2020 improved to 49.8% from 50.8% for 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense. Selling, general and administrative expense for 2020 decreased by $10,436, or 6.7%, as compared to 2019, which primarily resulted from the elimination of approximately 130 positions as part of the Reorganization Plan during 2020, approximately 120 corporate employees furloughed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020, as well as a reduction in marketing and travel related expenses, partially offset by $5,364 of non-recurring restructuring costs associated with the Reorganization Plan and other separation costs and expenses related to executive officer retirement and separation agreements during 2020.
Real Estate Rent Expense. Real estate rent expense for 2020 decreased by $2,019, or 0.8%, as compared to 2019, primarily the result of our acquisition in January 2019 of 20 travel centers from SVC that we previously leased from SVC, which reduced our annual minimum rent due to SVC, a decrease in percentage rent due to SVC as a result of the decrease in our nonfuel revenues during 2020 as compared to 2019 and $579 of impairment charges to our operating lease assets relating to certain low performing standalone QSL restaurants during 2019, partially offset by $1,262 of impairment charges to our operating lease assets related to certain low performing standalone QSL restaurants during 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense. Depreciation and amortization expense for 2020 increased by $27,529, or 27.5%, as compared to 2019, which primarily resulted from the $13,715 held for sale impairment charge related to QSL during 2020, the $8,072 write off of certain assets related to programs that were canceled during 2020, $6,574 of impairment charges relating to certain low performing standalone QSL restaurants during 2020, the $3,046 goodwill impairment charge recognized during 2020 with respect to our QSL business and the $834 write off of intangible assets associated with three franchised QSL standalone restaurants that closed during 2020, partially offset by the $2,369 of impairment charges relating to certain low performing standalone QSL restaurants during 2019.
Benefit (Provision) for Income Taxes. We had a benefit for income taxes of $6,178 in 2020 and a provision for income taxes of $4,339 for 2019. The change in our benefit (provision) for income taxes was primarily due to a pretax loss in 2020 as compared to pretax income in 2019, and a reduction in certain income tax credits. Please refer to Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15. of this Annual Report for more information about our income taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal liquidity requirements are to meet our operating and financing costs and to fund our capital expenditures, acquisitions and working capital requirements. Our principal sources of liquidity to meet these requirements are our:
•cash balance;
•operating cash flow;
•our revolving Credit Facility with a current maximum availability of $200,000 subject to limits based on our qualified collateral;
•sales to SVC of improvements we make to the sites we lease from SVC;
•potential issuances of new debt and equity securities; and
•potential financing or selling of unencumbered real estate that we own.
We believe that the primary risks we currently face with respect to our operating cash flow are:
•the potential continuing negative impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, including if the United States experiences a prolonged and significant decline in economic activity that continues to reduce demand for our products and services;
•continuing decreased demand for our fuel products resulting from regulatory and market efforts for improved engine fuel efficiency, fuel conservation and alternative fuels and technologies;
•decreased demand for our products and services that we may experience as a result of competition or otherwise;
•the fixed nature of a significant portion of our expenses, which may restrict our ability to realize a sufficient reduction in our expenses to offset a reduction in our revenues;
•the costs and funding that may be required to execute our growth initiatives;
•the possible inability of acquired or developed properties to generate the stabilized financial results we expected at the time of acquisition or development;
•increasing labor costs;
•increases in our cost of capital that may result if there is a return to increasing market interest rates;
•increased costs we may need to incur to operate our business in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including enhancing sanitation and other preventative measures; and
•the negative impacts on our gross margins and working capital requirements if there were a return to the higher level of prices for petroleum products we experienced in prior years or due to increases in the cost of our fuel or nonfuel products resulting from inflation generally.
Our business requires substantial amounts of working capital, including cash liquidity, and our working capital requirements can be especially large because of the volatility of fuel prices. Our growth strategy of selectively acquiring additional properties and businesses and developing new sites requires us to expend substantial capital for any such properties, businesses or developments. In addition, our properties are high traffic sites with many customers and large trucks entering and exiting our properties daily, requiring us to expend capital to maintain, repair and improve our properties. Although we had a cash balance of $483,151 at December 31, 2020, and net cash provided by operating activities of $244,408 in 2020, we cannot be certain that we will maintain sufficient amounts of cash, that we will generate future profits or positive cash flows or that we will be able to obtain additional financing, if and when it becomes necessary or desirable to pursue business opportunities. We believe we have sufficient financial resources to fund operations and required capital expenditures for greater than 12 months.
Our Investment and Financing Liquidity and Resources
Term Loan Facility
On December 14, 2020, we entered into a $200,000 Term Loan Facility which is secured by a pledge of all the equity interests of substantially all of our wholly owned subsidiaries and a pledge of substantially all of our other assets and the assets of such wholly owned subsidiaries. We expect to use the $190,062 in net proceeds from our Term Loan Facility for general business purposes, including the funding of deferred capital expenditures, updates to key information technology infrastructure and growth initiatives consistent with our Transformation Plan. Interest on amounts outstanding under the Term Loan Facility are calculated at LIBOR, with a LIBOR floor of 100 basis points, plus 600 basis points and matures on December 14, 2027. Our Term Loan Facility requires monthly interest payments and quarterly principal payments of $500, or 1.0% of the original principal amount annually. Remaining principal amounts outstanding under the Term Loan Facility may be prepaid beginning on December 14, 2022.
Underwritten Public Equity Offering
On July 6, 2020, we received net proceeds of $79,980, after $296 of offering costs and $5,124 of underwriting discounts and commissions, from the sale and issuance of 6,100 shares of common stock in an underwritten public equity offering. We intend to use the net proceeds from this offering to fund deferred maintenance and other capital expenditures necessary to enhance property conditions and implement growth initiatives, for working capital and for general corporate purposes.
Distribution from Affiliates Insurance Company
Until its dissolution on February 13, 2020, we, ABP Trust, SVC and four other companies to which RMR provides management services each owned 14.3% of Affiliates Insurance Company, or AIC, an Indiana insurance company. In connection with its dissolution, we and each of the other AIC shareholders received a capital distribution of $286 and $9,000 in June 2020 and December 2019, respectively.
West Greenwich Loan
On February 7, 2020, we entered into a 10 year term loan for $16,600 with The Washington Trust Company, or the West Greenwich Loan. The West Greenwich Loan is secured by a mortgage encumbering our travel center located in West Greenwich, Rhode Island. The interest rate is fixed at 3.85% for five years based on the five year Federal Home Loan Bank rate plus 198 basis points, and will reset thereafter. The West Greenwich Loan requires us to make principal and interest payments monthly. The proceeds from the West Greenwich Loan were used for general business purposes. We may, at our option with 60 days prior written notice, repay the loan in full prior to the end of the 10 year term plus, if repaid prior to February 7, 2023, a nominal penalty.
Revolving Credit Facility
On December 14, 2020, in connection with entering into the Term Loan Credit Agreement, we and certain of our subsidiaries, as borrowers or guarantors entered into an amendment, or the Amendment No. 4, to our Credit Facility dated as of October 25, 2011, with Wells Fargo Capital Finance LLC, as administrative agent for various lenders, or the ABL Credit Agreement. The Amendment No. 4 amended the ABL Credit Agreement to, among other things: (i) permit the incurrence of the term loan credit facility and (ii) increase the unused line fee by 12.5 basis points.
On July 19, 2019, we and certain of our subsidiaries, as borrowers or guarantors, entered into an amendment, or the Amendment No. 3, to our Credit Facility. The Amendment No. 3, among other things: (i) extended the maturity of the Credit Facility from December 19, 2019, to July 19, 2024; (ii) reduced the applicable margins on borrowings and standby letter of credit fees by 25 basis points and on commercial letter of credit fees by 12.5 basis points; (iii) made certain adjustments to the limitations on investments, dividends and stock repurchases under the Credit Facility in a manner favorable to us; (iv) reduced the sublimit for issuance of letters of credit under the Credit Facility from $170,000 to $125,000; and (v) made certain adjustments to the borrowing base calculation in a manner we believe to be favorable to us.
Under the Credit Facility, a maximum of $200,000 may be drawn, repaid and redrawn until maturity. The availability of this maximum amount is subject to limits based on qualified collateral. Subject to available collateral and lender participation, the maximum amount of this Credit Facility may be increased to $300,000. The Credit Facility may be used for general business purposes and allows for the issuance of letters of credit. Generally, no principal payments are due until maturity. Under the terms of the Credit Facility, interest is payable on outstanding borrowings at a rate based on, at our option, LIBOR or a base rate, plus a premium (which premium is subject to adjustment based upon facility availability, utilization and other matters). At December 31, 2020, based on our qualified collateral, a total of $86,833 was available to us for loans and letters of credit under the Credit Facility. At December 31, 2020, there were no of borrowings under the Credit Facility and $16,815 of letters of credit issued under that facility, which reduced the amount available for borrowing under the Credit Facility, leaving $70,018 available for our use as of that date. As of February 25, 2021, there were no borrowings outstanding under the Credit Facility and approximately $70,000 available under the Credit Facility for our use as of that date.
Senior Notes
As of December 31, 2020, we had outstanding the following Senior Notes, as defined below:
We refer to the 2030 Senior Notes, 2029 Senior Notes and 2028 Senior Notes collectively as our Senior Notes, which are our senior unsecured obligations. The Senior Notes are callable by us at par plus accrued interest, if any, and without penalty at any time. The total annual cash payments for interest expense on the current outstanding aggregate principal amount under our Senior Notes is $26,675. The indenture governing our Senior Notes does not limit the amount of indebtedness we may incur. We may issue additional debt from time to time.
IHOP Secured Advance Note
Concurrent with entering into the IHOP Agreement, we entered into a Secured Advance Note with IHOP, or the IHOP Note, pursuant to which we can borrow up to $10,000 in connection with the costs to convert our FSRs to IHOP restaurants. As of December 31, 2020, there were no loans outstanding under the IHOP Note.
QSL Business Sale
We have entered an agreement to sell our QSL business for approximately $5,000, excluding costs to sell and certain closing adjustments. This sale is expected to close during the first quarter of 2021; however, it is subject to certain conditions. Accordingly, we cannot be certain that we will complete this sale, that this sale will not be delayed or that the terms will not change.
Lease Amendments and Travel Center Purchases
In January 2019, we acquired from SVC 20 previously leased travel centers for $309,637, which amount includes $1,437 of transaction related costs, and amended our five existing leases with SVC providing for, among other things, a $43,148 reduction in our annual minimum rent payments and payment in 16 equal quarterly installments, which began on April 1, 2019; of deferred rent that aggregate to $70,458 to fully satisfy and discharge our previous deferred rent obligation.
For more information about our investments and debt financing, please refer to the Note 3, 7, 8, 9, 11 and 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15. of this Annual Report.
Sources and Uses of Cash
The following is a summary of our sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, as reflected in our consolidated statements of cash flows:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities. The change was due to the collection during 2020 of $70,100 of the federal biodiesel blenders' tax credit recognized during 2019, an increase in cash generated from working capital and an increase in other operating cash flow.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities. The change primarily resulted from the purchase for $309,637 of 20 travel centers we previously leased from SVC during 2019 and a reduction in capital expenditures during 2020 as compared to 2019. Please refer to Notes 3 and 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15. of this Annual Report for more information about our acquisitions and transactions with SVC, respectively.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the current economic conditions, we reduced our capital expenditure plan for 2020 from an initial budget of $118,905 to approximately $55,000 in order to preserve our liquidity. Our capital expenditure plan for 2021 contemplates aggregate gross investments in the range of $175,000 to $200,000 targeted towards improving and growing our core travel center business, but these amounts may be increased or decreased, possibly substantially, depending upon the opportunities we are presented, and specific circumstances that we face, including business and competitive demands, during 2021. Some of the investments we plan to make during 2021 may be improvements at leased sites of the type we typically have sold to SVC for an increase in rent; in 2021, we plan to continue to limit the amount of such sales to SVC in order to limit the related rent increases, but similar to our capital expenditure plan for 2021 generally, the amounts we actually sell to SVC may differ substantially from our current plan. SVC is not obligated to purchase any improvements that we may request it to buy.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities. The change primarily resulted from the $190,062 net proceeds received from the Term Loan Facility, $79,980 net proceeds received from the underwritten public equity offering and $16,600 proceeds received under the West Greenwich Loan during 2020, partially offset by a $7,900 repayment of our borrowings under our Credit Facility during 2020.
We believe we have adequate financial resources from our existing cash flows from operations, together with cash on hand and amounts available under our Credit Facility to support our business for at least the next 12 months.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off balance sheet arrangements that have had or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Related Party Transactions
We have relationships and historical and continuing transactions with SVC, RMR and others related to them. For further information about these and other such relationships and related party transactions, see Notes 3, 8, 12 and 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15. of this Annual Report and the section captioned "Business - Our Leases with SVC" above in Part I, Item 1. of this Annual Report, which are incorporated herein by reference, our other filings with the SEC and our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. For further information about the risks that may arise as a result of these and other related party transactions and relationships, see elsewhere in this Annual Report, including "Warning Concerning Forward-Looking Statements" and Part I, Item 1A. "Risk Factors." We may engage in additional transactions with related persons, including businesses to which RMR LLC or its subsidiaries provide management services.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make reasonable estimates and assumptions that may involve the exercise of significant judgment. For any estimate or assumption used, there may be other reasonable estimates or assumptions that may have been used. However, based on the available facts and circumstances inherent in the estimates and assumptions reflected in our consolidated financial statements, management believes it is unlikely that applying other reasonable estimates and assumptions would have caused materially different amounts to have been reported. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Impairment of Long Lived Assets. We review definite lived assets for indicators of impairment during each reporting period. We recognize impairment charges when (i) the carrying value of a long lived asset or asset group to be held and used in the business is not recoverable and exceeds its fair value and (ii) when the carrying value of a long lived asset or asset group to be disposed of exceeds the estimated fair value of the asset less the estimated cost to sell the asset. Our estimates of fair value are based on our estimates of likely market participant assumptions, including our current expectations for projected fuel sales volume, nonfuel revenues, fuel and nonfuel gross margins, site level operating expense and real estate rent expense. If the business climate deteriorates, our actual results may not be consistent with these assumptions and estimates. The discount rate is used to measure the present value of projected future cash flows and is set at a rate we believe is likely to be used by a market participant using a weighted average cost of capital method that considers market and industry data as well as our specific risk factors. The weighted average cost of capital is our estimate of the overall after tax rate of return required by equity and debt holders of a business enterprise. We use a number of assumptions and methods in preparing valuations underlying impairment tests, including estimates of future cash flows and discount rates and in some instances we may obtain third party appraisals. We recognize impairment charges in the period during which the circumstances surrounding an asset or asset group to be held and used have changed such that the carrying value is no longer recoverable, or during which a commitment to a plan to dispose of the asset or asset group is made. We perform our impairment analysis for substantially all of our property and equipment and operating lease assets at the individual site level because that is the lowest level of asset and liability groupings for which the cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities.
Impairment of Definite Lived Intangible Assets. We assess intangible assets with definite lives for impairment annually as of November 30 or whenever events or changes in circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining period of amortization. Definite lived intangible assets primarily include our agreements with franchisees. For 2020, definite lived intangible assets were assessed using a qualitative analysis that was performed by assessing certain trends and factors, including actual sales, collection of royalties from franchisees and any changes in the manner in which the assets were used that could impact the values of the assets.
Impairment of Indefinite Lived Intangible Assets and Goodwill. We assess intangible assets with indefinite lives for impairment annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable using either a quantitative or qualitative analysis. Indefinite lived intangible assets consisted of trademarks and their fair value was determined using a relief from royalty method. We subject goodwill and indefinite lived assets to further evaluation and recognize impairment charges when events and circumstances indicate the carrying value of the goodwill or indefinite lived intangible asset exceeds the fair market value of the asset. For 2020, indefinite lived intangible assets were assessed using a qualitative analysis that was performed by assessing certain trends and factors, including actual sales and operating profit margins, discount rates, industry data and other relevant qualitative factors. These trends and factors were compared to, and based on, the assumptions used in the most recent quantitative assessment.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level annually as of July 31, or more frequently if the circumstances warrant. We have two reporting units, travel centers and the QSL reporting unit. In May 2020, in conjunction with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we evaluated our travel centers and QSL reporting units for potential indicators of impairment, which included evaluating financial trends and industry and market conditions and assessing the reasonableness of the assumptions used in the most recent quantitative analysis. Based on our analyses, we determined that the decline in site level gross margin in excess of site level operating expense for our QSL reporting unit was an indicator of impairment. Accordingly, we performed an impairment assessment of the goodwill in our QSL reporting unit using the same quantitative analysis approach that we historically followed for our goodwill impairment assessments.
Impairment testing for the travel centers reporting unit for 2020 was performed using a quantitative analysis under which the fair value of our reporting unit was estimated using both an income approach and a market approach. The income approach considered discounted forecasted cash flows that were based on our long term operating plan. A terminal value was used to estimate the cash flows beyond the period covered by the operating plan. The discount rate is an estimate of the overall after tax market rate of return we believe may be required by equity and debt holders of a business enterprise. The market approach considered the estimated fair values of possible comparable publicly traded companies. For each comparable publicly traded company, value indicators, or pricing multiples, were considered to estimate the value of our business enterprise. However, due to the lack of comparable publicly traded companies within the travel center industry, we relied solely on the fair value estimated under the income approach. These analyses require the exercise of significant judgments, including judgments about appropriate discount rates, perpetual growth rates and the timing of expected future cash flows, including revenue growth rates and operating cash flow margins, of the respective reporting unit. For the travel centers reporting unit, we determined a discount rate and perpetual growth rate of 10.5% and 2.5%, respectively, was appropriate as of July 31, 2020. The fair value estimates are sensitive and actual rates and results may differ materially. Applying different assumptions could lead to different results.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations was included in our analyses. However, we are unable to predict the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic and as a result, we are unable to determine what the ultimate impact will be on our financial results and financial position. We will continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the fair value of our travel centers reporting unit.
Customer Loyalty Programs. We offer travel center trucking customers and casual restaurant diners the option to participate in customer loyalty programs. Our customer loyalty programs provide customers with the right to earn loyalty awards on qualifying purchases that can be used for discounts on future purchases of goods or services. We apply a relative standalone selling price approach to our outstanding loyalty awards whereby a portion of each sale attributable to the loyalty awards earned is deferred and will be recognized as revenue in the category in which the loyalty awards are redeemed upon the redemption or expiration of the loyalty awards. Significant judgment is required to determine the standalone selling price for loyalty awards. Assumptions used in determining the standalone selling price include the historic redemption rate and the use of a weighted average selling price for fuel to calculate the revenues attributable to the loyalty awards. To the extent an estimate is inaccurate, our liabilities, expenses and net (loss) income attributable to common stockholders may be understated or overstated.
Income Tax Matters. As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we estimate income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This process involves estimating actual current tax expense along with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for financial statement and tax reporting purposes. These temporary differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are recorded in our consolidated balance sheets. We are required to record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets if we are not able to conclude that it is more likely than not these assets will be realized. In measuring our deferred tax assets, we consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, to determine whether, based on the weight of that evidence, a valuation allowance is needed for all or a portion of the deferred tax assets. Judgment is required in considering the relative impact of negative and positive evidence. The weight given to the potential effect of negative and positive evidence is commensurate with the extent to which it can be objectively verified. We continue to maintain a valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets related to certain net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards in certain federal, state and foreign jurisdictions. To the extent our estimates and assumptions prove inaccurate, we may need to recognize additional amounts of valuation allowance, which would increase our income tax expense and reduce our net (loss) income attributable to common stockholders in future periods.
Accounting for Leases. With respect to accounting for leases, each time we enter a new lease or materially modify an existing lease we evaluate its classification as either a finance lease or an operating lease. The classification of a lease as finance or operating affects whether and how the transaction is reflected in our consolidated balance sheets, as well as our recognition of rental payments as rent or interest expense. For all leases with a term greater than 12 months, we recognize a lease asset and liability in our consolidated balance sheet. Certain of our leases include renewal options and purchase options. Renewal periods are included in calculating our lease assets and liabilities when they are reasonably certain. We calculate our lease assets and liabilities using the discount rate implicit in the SVC Leases and our incremental borrowing rate for all other leases. These evaluations require us to make estimates of, among other things, the remaining useful life and residual value of leased properties, appropriate discount rates and future cash flows that may be realized from the leased properties. Incorrect assumptions or estimates may result in misclassification of our leases or the understatement or overstatement of our lease assets and liabilities. Our lease accounting policies involve significant judgments based upon our experience, including judgments about current valuations, estimated useful lives and salvage or residual values. In the future, we may need to revise our assessments to incorporate information which is not known at the time of our previous assessments, and such revisions could increase or decrease our depreciation expense related to properties that we lease, result in the classification of some of our leases as other than operating leases or decrease the carrying values of some of our assets.
Business Combinations. We account for our acquisitions of businesses as business combinations, which requires that the assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recognized at their respective fair values as of the acquisition date. Fair value is defined as the price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the acquisition date. We record any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value of the net assets as goodwill. Our accounting for business combinations involves significant judgments about valuations of assets and liabilities in the current market and the assignment of estimated useful lives. We may adjust our accounting for business combinations to reflect information that is unknown at the time of our respective acquisitions for up to one year after each purchase. Acquisition related transaction costs, such as legal fees, due diligence costs and closing costs, are not included as a component of consideration transferred in an acquisition but are expensed as incurred. The operating results of acquired businesses are reflected in our consolidated financial statements from the date of the acquisition.
Self Insurance Accruals. We are exposed to losses under insurance programs for which we pay deductibles and for which we are partially self insured up to certain stop loss amounts, including claims under our general liability, workers' compensation, motor vehicle and group health benefits policies and programs. Accruals are established under these insurance programs for both estimated losses on known claims and potential claims incurred but not asserted, based on claims histories and using actuarial methods. The most significant risk of this methodology is its dependence on claims histories, which are not always indicative of future claims. To the extent an estimate is inaccurate, our liabilities, expenses and net (loss) income attributable to common stockholders may be understated or overstated.
Contingencies. We establish or adjust environmental contingency accruals when the responsibility to remediate becomes probable and the amount of associated costs is reasonably determinable and we record legal contingency accruals when our liability becomes probable and when we can reasonably estimate the amount of our contingent loss. We also have a receivable for expected recoveries of certain of our estimated future environmental expenditures. The process of determining both our estimated future costs of environmental remediation and our estimated future recoveries of costs from insurers or others involves a high degree of management judgment based on past experiences and current and expected regulatory and insurance market conditions. The process of estimating our liability for legal matters involves a high degree of management judgment, which is based on facts and circumstances specific to each matter and our prior experiences with similar matters that may not be indicative of future results. To the extent an estimate is inaccurate, our liabilities, expenses and net (loss) income attributable to common stockholders may be understated or overstated.
Environmental and Climate Change Matters
Legislation and regulation regarding climate change, including greenhouse gas emissions, and other environmental matters and market reaction to any such legislation or regulation or to climate change concerns, may decrease the demand for our fuel products, may require us to expend significant amounts and may otherwise negatively impact our business. For instance, federal and state governmental requirements addressing emissions from trucks and other motor vehicles, such as the U.S. EPA's gasoline and diesel sulfur control requirements that limit the concentration of sulfur in motor fuel, as well as new fuel efficiency standards for medium and heavy duty commercial trucks, have caused us to add certain services and provide certain products to our customers at a cost to us that we may be unable to pass through to our customers. Also, various private initiatives and government regulations to promote fuel efficiency and control air pollutant emissions from the trucking industry may raise the cost of trucking as compared to other types of freight transport, as a result decreasing the demand for our fuel products and negatively impacting our business.
For example, in August 2016 the EPA and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration established final regulations intended to phase in more stringent greenhouse gas emission and fuel efficiency standards for medium and heavy duty trucks. Under the Trump Administration, the EPA and the U.S. Department of Transportation rolled back various rules relating to greenhouse gas emissions and fuel efficiency standards for trucks and other motor vehicles, including portions of the rule discussed above. President Biden has signed executive orders requiring federal agencies to review certain actions taken by the Trump Administration with respect to fuel efficiency standards, but it is difficult to predict what, if any, changes to existing rules will occur under the Biden Administration or as a result of federal legislative action or due to related legal challenges and, if changes occur, what impact those changes would have on our industry, us or our business. In addition, the California Air Resources Board, or CARB, routinely considers rulemaking activity the purpose of which is to make heavy duty truck fleets operating in the state more fuel efficient and less polluting. The Trump Administration challenged CARB's ability to take such actions, and legal challenges remain to the enforceability of CARB's rulemaking. Because of the size of the California market and economy, fleet rules adopted by CARB frequently have influence throughout the United States. We may not be able to completely offset the loss of business we may suffer as a result of increasing engine efficiency and other fuel conservation and pollution reduction efforts under federal or state rules or as a result of other existing or future regulation or changes in customer demand.
Some observers believe severe weather activities in different parts of the country over the last few years are evidence global climate change. Such severe weather may have an adverse effect on individual properties we own, lease or operate, or the volume of business at our locations. We mitigate these risks by owning, leasing and operating a diversified portfolio of properties, by procuring insurance coverage we believe adequately protects us from material damages and losses and by attempting to monitor and be prepared for such events. However, we cannot be certain that our mitigation efforts will be sufficient or that future storms, rising sea levels or other changes that may occur due to future climate change or otherwise could not have a material adverse effect on our business.
For further information about these and other environmental and climate change matters, and the related risks that may arise, please refer to the disclosure under the heading "Environmental Contingencies" in Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15. of this Annual Report, "Warning Concerning Forward-Looking Statements," "Regulatory Environment - Environmental Regulation" in Part I, Item 1. and Part I, Item 1A. "Risk Factors."