Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our “Selected Financial Data” and our financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including, but not limited to, those discussed under the section titled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on 10-K. See the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this Annual Report on 10-K.
Overview
Our Business
We are a late clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of therapeutic candidates to address large market opportunities initially in ophthalmic conditions where there are limited treatment alternatives. Our lead product candidate, TP-03, is a novel therapeutic in Phase 2b/3 that is being developed for the treatment of blepharitis caused by the infestation of Demodex mites, which is referred to as Demodex blepharitis. Blepharitis (“Blephar” is a reference to eyelid and “itis” is a reference to inflammation) is a condition characterized by inflammation of the eyelid margin, redness and ocular irritation, including a specific type of eyelash dandruff called collarettes. The healthy interaction of the eyelid and the surface of the eyeball is crucial to ocular health. Poorly controlled and progressive blepharitis can lead to worsening of corneal damage over time and, in extreme cases, blindness.
According to published studies, there are an estimated 20 million patients in the United States who suffer from blepharitis, with approximately 45% or nine million of cases caused by Demodex infestation. Further, the possible number of Demodex blepharitis cases may be as high as approximately 25 million, based on our internal research indicating approximately 58% of patients presenting to eye care clinics have collarettes and a published study estimating that at least 45 million people annually visit an eye care clinic.
We believe that TP-03 has the potential to be the first FDA-approved therapeutic for the treatment of Demodex blepharitis and become the standard of care. The active pharmaceutical ingredient ("API") of TP-03, lotilaner, is designed to paralyze and eradicate mites and other parasites through the inhibition of parasite-specific gamma-aminobutyric acid-gated chloride ("GABA-Cl") channels).
To date, we have completed four Phase 2 trials for TP-03 in Demodex blepharitis, all of which met their primary, secondary and/or exploratory endpoints, as applicable, and during which TP-03 was well tolerated. Our Phase 2b/3 trial, Saturn-1, commenced in September 2020 and was fully enrolled by the first quarter of 2021. We expect to begin our second pivotal trial, Saturn-2, in the second quarter of 2021. Saturn-1 and Saturn-2 have primary and secondary endpoints consistent with those of our Europa and Io Phase 2 trials. We expect these TP-03 pivotal trials to support our submission of a new drug application ("NDA") with the United States Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") for the treatment of Demodex blepharitis.
We intend to further advance our pipeline with lotilaner API to address several diseases across therapeutic categories in human medicine, including eye care, dermatology, and other diseases. These targeted diseases with high unmet medical need currently include Meibomian Gland Disease ("MGD"), rosacea, Lyme disease, and malaria.
Recent Business and Clinical Highlights
TP-03 Type C Meeting: In December 2020, we had a Type C meeting with the FDA for TP-03 in the treatment of Demodex blepharitis. This meeting confirmed our planned NDA pathway with respect to the data and information required in the NDA filing.
TP-03 Pivotal Trials: Saturn-1 enrollment was completed in the first quarter of 2021. We expect to initiate our second pivotal trial, Saturn-2, in the second quarter 2021.
TP-03 Out-License: On March 26, 2021, we executed the LianBio Agreement with LianBio, granting exclusive commercial rights of TP-03 for the treatment of Demodex blepharitis and MGD within The People’s Republic of China, Macau, Hong Kong, and Taiwan (the "Territory"). We are contractually entitled to receive (i) an aggregate $25 million by June 30, 2021, (ii) regulatory and sales milestone receipts totaling $75 million and $100 million, respectively, (iii) tiered royalties in the low double-digits on the net sales of TP-03 within the Territory, and (iv) a minority interest in LianBio. We expect to receive $70 million from these contractual milestones during the next 12 months.
Corporate and Financial Overview
We were incorporated as a Delaware corporation in November 2016, and our headquarters is located in Irvine, California. Since our inception in November 2016, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to organizing and staffing our company, acquiring intellectual property, clinical development of our product candidates, building our research and development capabilities, raising capital, and enhancing our corporate infrastructure.
To date we have financed our operations through private placements of preferred stock and convertible promissory notes. From inception through September 2020, we have raised net proceeds of approximately $101.0 million through private placements of preferred stock.
On October 20, 2020, we completed our initial public offering ("IPO") through an underwritten sale of 5,500,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $16.00 per share. The aggregate net proceeds from the offering (after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses), inclusive of an additional 825,000 common shares sold upon the full exercise of the underwriters’ purchase option, were $91.7 million. Concurrent with the IPO, all then-outstanding shares of our convertible preferred stock outstanding (see Note 4) automatically converted into an aggregate of 11,107,018 issued common shares.
In advance of the IPO, on October 8, 2020, our board of directors approved a 1-for-7.4276 reverse stock split of our capital stock. All share and per share information included in the accompanying financial statements has been adjusted to reflect this reverse stock split.
We have incurred significant net operating losses in every year since our inception and expect to continue to incur significant operating expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future. Our net losses were $26.8 million and $4.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year and could be substantial. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had an accumulated deficit of $32.8 million and $6.0 million, respectively, from research and development and general and administrative activities since our inception. We anticipate that our operating expenses will increase significantly as we:
•conduct additional clinical trials of our lead product candidate, TP-03, for the treatment of Demodex blepharitis including our Phase 2b/3 trial, Saturn-1, and our Phase 3 trial, Saturn-2;
•advance the clinical development of TP-03 for the treatment of MGD, TP-04 for the potential treatment of rosacea and TP-05 for potential Lyme prophylaxis and community malaria reduction;
•seek regulatory and marketing approvals for product candidates that successfully complete clinical development, if any;
•establish our own sales force in the United States to commercialize our products for which we obtain regulatory approval;
•engage with contract manufacturers to ensure a sufficient supply chain capacity to provide commercial quantities of any products for which we may obtain marketing approval;
•maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•hire additional staff, including clinical, scientific, technical, regulatory, marketing, operations, financial, and other support personnel, to execute our business plan; and
•add information systems and personnel to support our product development and potential future commercialization efforts, and to enable us to operate as a public company.
We do not have any products approved for sale and we have not yet generated any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate revenues from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for a product candidate and commercially launch such product. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through private or public equity or debt
financings, or collaborations, strategic alliances, or licensing arrangements with third parties. Adequate funding may not be available to us when needed on acceptable terms, or at all. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances, or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our intellectual property, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional capital or enter into such agreements as and when needed, we could be forced to significantly delay, scale back, or discontinue our product development and/or commercialization plans, which would negatively and adversely affect our financial condition.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with drug product development, we are unable to accurately predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate revenue from product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels.
As of December 31, 2020, our aggregate cash and cash equivalents was $168.1 million - see “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on our Operations
Efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19 in the United States (including in California where our corporate headquarters and laboratory facility are located) and other countries have included quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and various other government restrictions in order to control the spread of this virus.
We have been carefully monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic as it continues to progress and its potential impact on our business. We have taken important steps to ensure the workplace safety of our employees when working within our laboratory and administrative offices, or when traveling to our clinical trial sites. We have also implemented an interim work-from-home policy and we may take further actions as may be required by federal, state or local authorities.
To date, we have been able to continue our key business activities and advance our clinical programs. However, in the future, it is possible that our clinical development timelines and business plans could be adversely affected. We maintain regular communication with our vendors and clinical sites to appropriately plan for, and mitigate, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations. Specifically, for our Phase 2b/3 Saturn-1 trial, we have instituted various protocols for our sites, including increasing health screening of individuals and providing enhanced communication and training to staff regarding COVID-19. We have also over-enrolled trial participants and identified additional clinical sites in case there are site closures due to COVID-19. However, the ultimate effect from this pandemic on our development timelines for TP-03 and our other product candidates is inherently uncertain.
See the section titled “Risk Factors” in this report for a further discussion of the potential adverse impact of COVID-19 on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Components of our Results of Operations
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses since inception have consisted solely of research and development expenses and general and administrative expenses.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in connection with the development of our product candidates, including:
•fees paid to third parties to conduct certain research and development activities on our behalf, including under agreements with CROs;
•payments under licensing agreements, such as our upfront in-license fee for lotilaner;
•consulting costs and certain allocated payroll and employee-related expenses (including stock-based compensation and salaries) for personnel engaged in research and development functions;
•costs related to compliance with clinical regulatory requirements;
•costs of procuring drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials; and
•facilities expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent of our laboratory.
We expense both internal and external research and development expenses as incurred or as certain upfront or milestone payments become contractually due to licensors upon achievement of clinical or regulatory events. We recognize external research and development costs based on an evaluation of the progress-to-completion of (i) specific tasks performed or deliverables provided by CROs and contract manufacturing organizations ("CMOs") and (ii) patient visits for dosing or other follow-up. To estimate period expense for recognition, we use information provided to us by our service providers and we then apply the corresponding fee schedule.
We track our external research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis, such as fees paid to CROs, CMOs, and research laboratories in connection with our pre-clinical development, process development, manufacturing and clinical development activities. However, we do not currently track employee time on a program-by-program basis. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, substantially all of our external and internal research and development expenses are attributable to our TP-03 program for Demodex blepharitis.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially in the future, as we seek to initiate and progress additional clinical trials for our product candidates, including TP-03 for the potential treatment of MGD, TP-04 for the potential treatment of rosacea, and TP-05 for potential Lyme prophylaxis and community malaria reduction. We expect to complete our clinical programs for these product candidates, and as appropriate, pursue regulatory approval and prepare for the possible commercialization for each.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses consist of personnel-related costs including payroll, benefits, and stock-based compensation for our executive, finance, and other administrative functions. Other general and administrative expenses include consulting fees, legal services, rent and other facilities costs, and other general operating expenses not otherwise classified as research and development expenses.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase substantially in the future as a result of expanding our operations, including hiring personal, preparing for potential commercialization of our product candidates, and additional facility occupancy costs, as well various incremental costs associated with being a public company (including increased legal and accounting fees, regulatory costs associated with maintaining compliance with the rules of the Nasdaq Stock Market and SEC regulations, investor relations activities, directors and officers liability insurance premiums, and other accompanying compliance and governance costs).
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of (i) interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents and (ii) interest expense on convertible promissory notes (converted to equity instruments in December 2019; comprised of coupon interest, amortization of debt issuance costs, and non-cash accretion of its estimated discount at issuance).
Income Tax Provision
Since our inception, we have not recorded any U.S. federal or state income tax benefits for the net operating losses we have incurred in each year, or for our earned research and development tax credits, due to our uncertainty of realizing a benefit from either. As a result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, net operating losses (for U.S. income tax purposes) generated prior to December 31, 2018 can be carried forward for up to 20 years, while net operating losses generated after December 31, 2017 can be carried forward indefinitely, but are limited to 80% utilization against taxable income. Our California net operating losses will begin to expire in 2037. The federal research and development tax credits begin to expire in 2037 unless previously utilized, and the California credit carryforwards are available indefinitely.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $15.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to (i) an upfront payment to our licensor (in the form of our common stock) then valued at $3.1 million as consideration for the September 2020 expansion of our in-license for lotilaner to cure or treat all diseases and conditions in humans (beyond that of the eye or skin for which we already held exclusive rights to treat with lotilaner), (ii) TP-03 clinical milestone achievement in September 2020, requiring a $1.0 million payment to our licensor, (iii) increased manufacturing, development, and research activities of $10.7 million to conduct our clinical studies for TP-03, and (iv) increased payroll and personnel-related expenses (including stock-based compensation) of $1.7 million due to additional clinical and formulation development employees to drive our product development initiatives.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by 7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to (i) $2.5 million increase in payroll and personnel-related expenses (including stock-based compensation) for employee additions, (ii) $2.2 million increase in legal service costs and market research activities, and (iii) $2.3 million increase in consulting, insurance, and other administrative expenses.
Interest Income (Expense), Net
The change in interest income (expense), net was primarily due to convertible promissory notes issued to our co-founders and certain other related parties, aggregating $2.0 million in principal value (see below). During the year ended December 31, 2019, interest expense recognized on these notes was $0.1 million and was partially offset by interest income from our bank deposits and money market fund investments. These convertible promissory notes were all converted in December 2019 and we therefore had no interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss on Extinguishment of Convertible Notes
The loss on extinguishment of convertible notes was due to the extinguishment of convertible promissory notes issued to our co-founders and certain other related parties, aggregating $2.0 million in principal value (see section below). On December 13, 2019 we completed the issuance of Series B preferred stock upon which the then-outstanding notes, along with accrued interest, converted into 2.0 million shares of Series B preferred stock. Since these notes were converted in December 2019, no change in fair value of derivative liabilities was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
During May, August, and October 2019, we issued convertible promissory notes to our co-founders and certain other related parties, aggregating $2.0 million in principal value. These notes contained stock-settled redemption features that were required to be separately accounted for as derivative liabilities on the balance sheet until December 13, 2019 when we completed a qualified equity financing.
These then-outstanding notes converted at the option of the holder into 2.0 million shares of Series B preferred stock. Change in fair value of derivative liabilities consists of non-cash changes in the fair value of these stock-settled redemption features. We classified the rights as a derivative liability on our balance sheet that was initially recorded at fair value and that we remeasured to fair value at December 13, 2019, and we recognized changes in the fair value of the derivative associated with the rights as a component of other income (expense) in our statement of operations. Since these notes were converted in December 2019, no change in fair value of derivative liabilities was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception in 2016 and through December 31, 2020, our operations have been substantially financed by cash proceeds of $61.0 million from private placements of Series A and Series B preferred stock. In September 2020, we issued 2,857,079 shares of our Series C preferred stock for cash proceeds of $39.8 million. On October 20, 2020, we completed our IPO through an underwritten sale of 5,500,000 shares of its common stock at a price of $16.00 per share. The aggregate proceeds from the IPO, inclusive of an additional 825,000 common shares sold upon the full exercise of the underwriters’ purchase option, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other IPO expenses, were $91.7 million.
We will continue to be dependent upon equity, debt financing, and/or other forms of capital raises at least until we are able to generate significant positive cash flows from our operations. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $168.1 million. We have no ongoing material financing commitments, such as lines of credit or guarantees, that are expected to affect our liquidity over the next five years.
Funding Requirements
Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenditures. These consist of research and development expenses (including activities within our pre-clinical, clinical, regulatory, and drug manufacturing initiatives) and general and administrative expenses. Our use of cash is impacted by the timing and extent of the required payments for each of these activities.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents of $168.1 million as of December 31, 2020, and our expected $70 million of initial proceeds from our March 2021 out-license of TP-03 in the China territory (see above and Note 11), will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the first half of 2023. We have based this cash runway estimate on our current assumptions. These assumptions may require future adjustments as part of our ongoing business decisions within pipeline development and other corporate initiatives. Accordingly, we may require additional capital resources earlier than we currently expect.
To date, we have not generated any product revenue. We do not expect to generate any product revenue unless and until we (1) complete development of any of our product candidates; (2) obtain applicable regulatory approvals; and (3) successfully commercialize or enter into other collaborative agreements for our product candidates. We do not know with certainty when, or if, any of these items will ultimately occur. However, we expect to recognize "license fee revenue" in the first quarter of 2021 for our TP-03 out-license in the China territory.
We expect to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future, and for these losses to further increase, as we ramp up our clinical development programs and begin activities for commercial launch readiness. We may also encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other currently unknown factors that could adversely affect our business.
We will likely require additional capital to fully develop our product candidates and to execute our business strategy. Our requirements of a future capital raise will depend on many factors, including:
•the scope, timing, rate of progress and costs of our drug discovery efforts, preclinical development activities, laboratory testing and clinical trials for our product candidates;
•the number and scope of clinical programs we decide to pursue;
•the cost, timing and outcome of preparing for and undergoing regulatory review of our product candidates;
•the scope and costs of development and commercial manufacturing activities;
•the cost and timing associated with commercializing our product candidates, if they receive marketing approval;
•the amount of revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates, should any of our product candidates receive marketing approval;
•the achievement of milestones or occurrence of other developments that trigger payments under any collaboration agreements we might have at such time;
•the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•our ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all;
•our efforts to enhance operational systems and our ability to attract, hire and retain qualified personnel, including personnel to support the development of our product candidates and, ultimately, the sale of our products, following FDA approval;
•our implementation of various computerized information systems;
•impact of COVID-19 on our clinical development or operations; and
•the costs associated with being a public company.
A change in the outcome of any of these or other variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. Furthermore, our operating plans may change in the future, and we will continue to require additional capital to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience dilution. Any future debt financing into which we enter may impose upon us additional covenants that restrict our operations, including limitations on our ability to incur liens or additional debt, pay dividends, repurchase our common stock, make certain investments or engage in certain merger, consolidation or asset sale transactions. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders.
Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. Our potential inability to raise capital when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategies. If we are unable to raise additional funds as required, we may need to delay, reduce, or terminate some or all development programs and clinical trials. We may also be required to sell or license our rights to product candidates in certain territories or indications that we would otherwise prefer to develop and commercialize ourselves. If we are required to enter into collaborations and other arrangements to address our liquidity needs, we may have to give up certain rights that limit our ability to develop and commercialize our product candidates or may have other terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders, which could materially and adversely affect our business and financial prospects. See the section of this Annual Report on 10-K titled “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Convertible Notes
From May 2019 through October 2019, we issued convertible promissory notes with an aggregate principal amount of $2.0 million. These notes were all converted into an aggregate of 268,056 shares of Series B preferred stock in December 2019 (see Note 4).
Summary Statement of Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash for each of the periods presented below:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $21.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily attributable to our net loss of $26.8 million, partially offset by non-cash items (i.e., accounting for stock-issuance costs at IPO and stock-based compensation) totaling $4.2 million, and a net increase in liabilities of $1.5 million associated with accounts payable and accrued bonuses.
Net cash used in operating activities was $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which primarily attributable to our net loss of $4.7 million, partially offset by non-cash items totaling $0.5 million and a net increase in liabilities of $0.5 million associated with accounts payable and accrued bonuses.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of property and equipment purchases and tenant improvements to our leased laboratory and administrative offices.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which consisted of property and equipment purchases and tenant improvements to our leased laboratory and administrative offices.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $131.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to our issuance of Series C preferred stock for net proceeds of $39.8 million and net proceeds from the IPO of $91.7 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $59.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to our issuance of Series B preferred stock for net proceeds of $57.5 million and issuance of convertible promissory notes for proceeds of $2.0 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)The operating lease obligations are related to facility leases for our corporate headquarters and research and development facilities in Irvine, California, expiring April 30, 2022 and January 31, 2024.
(2)Milestone obligations are contingent upon our achievement of specified development, regulatory and sales milestones. Given the unpredictability of the drug development process, and the impossibility of predicting the success of current and future clinical trials and the timing of achievement (if at all) of sales milestones, these values assume that all development, regulatory, and sales milestones under our in-license agreement with Elanco, as amended, are successfully met. These values in each column represent the composite best estimates for each achievement date. If any or all milestones are met, we believe that the corresponding increase in value from the related drug program will exceed the amount of our milestone obligation.
(3)Purchase obligations represent the amount of open purchase orders and contractual commitments to vendors for products and services that have not been delivered or rendered, as of December 31, 2020. We enter contracts in the normal course of business with clinical research organizations and clinical sites and with contract manufacturers for pre-clinical and clinical drug supply, as well as with various other vendors in operating our business. These contracts generally provide for termination provisions with notice. The values in each column represent the obligations that are non-cancelable as of December 31, 2020.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with (i) clinical research organizations and clinical sites, (ii) contract manufacturers for pre-clinical and clinical drug supply, (iii) regulatory consultants and (iv) various other vendors in operating our business. These contracts generally provide for termination provisions with notice, and therefore we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements were not material as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our financial statements also included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe these critical accounting policies are the most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred or as certain upfront or milestone payments become contractually due to licensors upon the achievement of clinical or regulatory events. These expenses also include internal costs directly attributable to in-development programs, including cost of certain salaries, payroll taxes, employee benefits, and stock-based compensation expense, as well as laboratory and clinical supplies, pre-clinical and clinical trial related expenses, and the cost of services provided by outside contractors.
We have entered, and may continue to enter into, license agreements to access and utilize certain technology. In each case, we evaluate if the assets acquired in a transaction represent the acquisition of an asset or a business, as defined under applicable GAAP. Our only executed in-license agreement was evaluated and determined to represent an asset acquisition. Because this asset had not yet received regulatory approval and has no alternative future use, its fair value was immediately recognized as research and development expense.
We make research and development expense accrual estimates as of each balance sheet date, based on facts known to us at that time. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers, including CROs, and record adjustments, if necessary. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock options based on the estimated fair value of the award on the grant date. We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to estimate the fair value of awarded stock options. The fair value is recognized as expense on a straight-line or ratable basis over the requisite or implicit service period.
The determination of the grant date fair value of our issued stock options is affected principally by our model assumptions, including (a) the expected term of the stock option until its exercise by the recipient, (b) our assumed stock price volatility through a designated peer group of publicly-traded companies for a period equal to the expected option term, (c) the prevailing risk-free interest rate over the expected term, and (d) any expected dividend payments over the expected term. If any of these assumptions change, our stock-based compensation expense for future grants could materially differ.
Stock-based compensation expense for equity awards granted to our employees and members of our Board of Directors is recognized on a straight-line basis over each award’s vesting period. We account for forfeitures as they occur. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options (as of the date of grant).
The recognition of stock-based compensation expense and the initial calculation of stock option fair value requires uncertain assumptions, including (a) the expected term that the stock option will remain outstanding, (b) our stock price volatility over the expected term, and (c) the prevailing risk-free interest rate for the period matching the expected term.
Expected Term - The expected term is calculated using the simplified method which is used when there is insufficient historical data about exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior. The simplified method is based on the vesting period and the contractual term for each grant, or for each vesting-tranche for awards with graded vesting. The mid-point between the vesting date and the maximum contractual expiration date is used as the expected term under this method. For awards with multiple vesting-tranches, the times from grant until the mid-points for each of the tranches may be averaged to provide an overall expected term.
Expected Volatility - We estimate the volatility of our common stock on the date of grant based on our designated peer group of publicly-traded companies for a period equal to the expected option term.
Expected Dividend Rate - We have not paid and do not anticipate paying any dividends in the near future. Accordingly, we estimate the dividend yield to be zero.
Risk-Free Interest Rate - We estimate the risk-free interest rate based upon the U.S. Department of the Treasury yields in effect at award grant for a period equaling the expected term of the stock option.
Common Stock Valuations prior to our IPO
Prior to the IPO our valuations of our common stock were determined in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, or the Practice Aid. The assumptions underlying these valuations represented management’s best estimate, which involved inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if we had used different assumptions or estimates, the fair value of our common stock and our stock-based compensation expense could have been materially different.
Common Stock Valuations following our IPO
Subsequent to the IPO, the fair value of our common stock is based on the closing quoted market price of our common stock as reported by the Nasdaq Global Select Market on the date of grant.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recent accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows is disclosed in the notes to which they relate within our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since our inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Indemnification Agreements
As permitted under Delaware law and in accordance with our bylaws, we indemnify our officers and directors for certain events or occurrences while the officer or director is or was serving in such capacity. We are also party to indemnification agreements with our officers and directors. We believe the fair value of the indemnification rights and
agreements is minimal. Accordingly, we have not recorded any liabilities for these indemnification rights and agreements as of December 31, 2020.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
The JOBS Act permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have irrevocably elected to opt out of this provision and, as a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards as required when they are adopted.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (1) the last day of our first fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion or (c) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million of the prior June 30th and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.