ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION.
This annual report on Form 10-K contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). These forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates and projections about our industry, our beliefs and our assumptions. Forward looking statements are often identified by words such as “will”, “may”, “projects”, “anticipate,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “seeks” and “estimates” and variations of these words and similar expressions or import are intended to identify forward-looking statements but are not intended to constitute the exclusive means of identifying such statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those described in “Risk Factors” contained below in this annual report, some of which are beyond our control and difficult to predict and could cause actual results, performance or achievements, or industry results to differ materially from any future results, performance or achievements, expressed or implied, by such forward-looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which apply only as of the date of this Form 10-K. Investors should carefully consider all of such risks before making an investment decision with respect to the Company’s stock. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements for Tauriga Sciences, Inc. Such discussion represents only the best present assessment from our Management.
COMPARISON OF THE YEAR ENDED MARCH 31, 2021 TO THE YEAR ENDED MARCH 31, 2020
Results of Operations
Revenue
For the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had recognized net revenue of $285,319 compared to $234,389, for the same period in the prior year. The Company’s increased sales came from and increased focus on e-commerce sales through marketing initiatives and new product offerings. The Company recognized no sales through it distribution channel and dramatically lower wholesale business due in large part by restriction on travel and the ability to cultivate distribution networks as a result of the 2020 Coronavirus global pandemic.
Sales of by sales channel for the years ended March 31,
Cost of Goods Sold:
For the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had cost of goods sold in the amount of $162,627 and $180,154, respectively as a result of sales to e-commerce customers, distributors and wholesale clients. The lower cost of goods sold from higher sales was the result of increased sales from higher margin e-commerce business.
Cost of Goods Sold by sales channel for the years ended March 31,
Operating Expenses:
Marketing and advertising expense
For the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, marketing and advertising expense from continuing operations was $273,305 and $188,129, respectively. The increase of $85,176 was largely due to increase marketing spend on promotions, advertising and social media campaigns. The Company has retained a freelance Chief Marketing Officer to focus on the growth of this sales channel.
Research and development
For the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, research and development expense was $273,305 compared to $6,923 for the same period in the prior fiscal year. The current year increased expense was due to the expenditures around our IND Tauri-GumTM pharmaceutical trial. The Company also had increased expense in the development of Tauri-GumTM CBD commercial product lines.
General and Administrative Expense
For the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, general and administrative expenses were $2,857,220 and $1,855,229, respectively. This increase of $1,001,991 was primarily attributable to increased stock-based compensation in the amount of $450,178, larger consulting fees of $239,146, greater accounting fees of $126,650, increased salary expense of $69,450, increased fulfillment cost of $64,469 and increased press release cost of $53,266 and customer service cost of $30,193 offset by lower travel and conference fee cost. Many of the increased expenses were higher as a result the Company’s ongoing pharmaceutical development efforts in preparation for clinical studies.
Depreciation and amortization
For the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, depreciation and amortization expense was $1,737 compared to $914 during the prior fiscal year. Depreciation expense increase of $823 due to the acquisition of office furniture for our new corporate office and phone and computer acquisition for customer services.
Net Income (Loss)
The Company generated a net loss from continuing operations of $3,389,474 for the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to $2,093,245 during the prior fiscal year. The increased loss in the amount of $1,350,464 was largely due to increased General and Administrative expense of $1,001,991, increased research and development cost of $266,462, impairment loss on investments of $244,706, increased interest expense of $190,843, offset by an unrealized gain on trading securities of $1,093,071 compared to a loss of $219,200 in the prior year and $85,176 increase in marketing and advertising expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At March 31, 2021, we had cash of $49,826 and $1,246,050 of trading securities compared to the prior fiscal year of $5,348 of cash and $101,200 of marketable securities. We have historically met our cash needs through a combination of proceeds from private placements of our securities, loans and convertible notes. Our cash requirements are generally for selling, general and administrative activities. We believe that our cash balance is not sufficient to finance our cash requirements for expected operational activities, capital improvements, and partial repayment of debt through the next 12 months.
For operating activities, we used cash of $2,554,578 for the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to $1,510,562 during the prior fiscal year. The principal elements of cash flow from operations for the year ended March 31, 2021 were $1,019,814 common stock issued and issuable for services (including stock based compensation), $645,832 amortization of debt discount, $1,023,600 of unrealized gain on trading securities offset by an increase in inventory on hand and prepaid inventory of $495,861, increased accounts payable of $314,892 and a loss on impairment of investments of $244,706. The principal elements of cash flow from operations for the year ended March 31, 2020 were $569,636 common stock issued and issuable for services (including stock based compensation), $687,486 amortization of debt discount, $219,200 of unrealized loss on trading securities offset by an increase in inventory of $117,839, increased accounts receivable of $106,726 and a gain on extinguishment of debt in the amount of $113,468.
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended March 31, 2021 was $369,854 compared $108,212 from investing activities in the prior fiscal year. In the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, the Company invested $240,000 to exercise warrants of VTGN as well as $278,212 in Aegea Biotechnologies Inc. The Company as invested a combined $138,375 in two private Companies (Paz Gum LLC and SciSpark LTD - see Note 12 - INVESTMENTS -COST BASED INVESTMENTS. The Company received $302,827 proceed from the sale of securities. The Company invested $16,094 in equipment and leasehold improvements. In the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, the Company invested $37,500 in warrants of VTGN as well as $68,100 in Küdzoo Inc. The Company also invested $2,612 in the purchase of property and equipment.
Cash provided by financing activities was $2,968,910 for the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to $1,238,179 during the prior fiscal year. During the year ended March 31, 2021 the Company received $482,000 in proceeds from notes payable, $692,800 proceeds from convertible notes and $1,665,211 proceeds from the sale of common stock. The Company received proceeds of $400,515 from registered shares and investment agreement with Tangiers. The Company also repaid a loan from Chief Executive Officer, Seth Shaw in the amount of $50,159. During the year ended March 31, 2020 the Company received $971,100 in proceeds from notes payable, $244,420 proceeds from the sale of common stock and $50,159 from a loan from Chief Executive Officer, Seth Shaw. The Company used $27,500 to repay principal on convertible notes payable.
As of March 31, 2021, current assets exceeded our current liabilities by $1,291,211 compared to current liabilities exceeding our current assets by $334,832 at March 31, 2020. As of March 31, 2021, current assets were $2,396,567 compared to $607,894 at March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to the increase in inventory and prepaid inventory $624,572, increase in the carrying value of trading securities of $1,144,850. Current liabilities were $1,167,356 at March 31, 2021 compared to $942,726 at March 31, 2020. The increase in current liability was mainly due to an increase in accounts payable of $314,892.
Going Concern
During the fourth quarter of the year ended March 31, 2019, the Company began sales and marketing efforts for its Mint flavored Tauri-GumTM product. During the year ended March 31, 2021, the Company recognized net sales of $285,319 and a gross profit of $122,692, compared to net sales of $239,388 and a gross profit of $54,235 for the same period during the same period in the prior year. At March 31, 2021, the Company had a working capital surplus of $1,291,211 compared to a working capital deficit of $334,832 for the year ended March 31, 2020. The improvement is largely resultant from increased inventory levels and an increase in value of trading securities. Although the Company has a working capital surplus, there is no guarantee that this will continue therefore it still believes that there is uncertainty with respect to continuing as a going concern.
On July 1, 2019, months after the NYC Department of Heath announced a ban on cannabidiol in foods and beverages (mainly focused on restaurants and baked goods), the result of which was that the updated New York City Health Code now includes an embargoing of CBD-infused Edible(s) Products (including packaged products). The Company is hopeful that due to the recent regulatory regime for cannabinoid products implemented by the NYDPH, the New York City Council will remove the current CBD ban and implement regulations surrounding CBD products in a logical and prompt manner. The Company believes it is well positioned under the current regulatory structure, and has taken a conservative approach towards its products, including, for example, ensuring that its product manufacturer periodically tests for compliance with the Agricultural Improvement Act of 2018, such as utilizing CBD oils from hemp plants which contain 0.3% or less THC content. Subsequent to the balance sheet date, the State of New York has determined that it is allowable to sell CBD Infused Edible products in the forms of both food and drink (inclusive of chewing gum). It was also determined that no time can CBD be sold in products that contain either alcohol or tobacco. Additionally, the State of New York also said that NO CBD product may be sold if it contains more than 0.3% (1/333rd by Composition) THC. No Individual food or beverage product may contain more than 25mg of Hemp-Extracted Cannabinoids (“CBD” or “CBG”) per serving. Food and drink infused with CBD and Other Hemp Extracts must be packaged by the manufacturer and extracts cannot be added at the retail level. The Company’s entire product line will comply with these standards.
The Company, in the short term, intends to continue funding its operations either through cash-on-hand or through financing alternatives. Management’s plans with respect to this include raising capital through equity markets to fund future operations as well as the possible sale of its remaining marketable securities which had a market value of $1,246,050 at March 31, 2021. In the event the Company cannot raise additional capital to fund and/or expand operations or fails to raise adequate capital and generate adequate sales revenue, or if the regulatory landscape were to become more difficult or result in regulatory enforcement, it could result in the Company having to curtail or cease operations.
Additionally, even if the Company does raise sufficient capital to support its operating expenses and generate adequate revenues in the short term, there can be no assurances that the revenues will be sufficient to enable it to develop business to a level where it will generate profits and cash flows from operations to achieve profitability thereby eliminating its reliance on alternative sources of funding. Although management believes that the Company continues to strengthen its financial position over time, there is still no guarantee that profitable operations with sufficient cashflow to sustain operations can or will be achieved without the need of alternative financing, which is limited. These matters still raise significant doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern as determined by management. The Company believes that there is uncertainty with respect to continuing as a going concern until the operating business can achieve sufficient sales to maintain profitable operations and sustain cash flow to operate the Company for a period of twelve months. In the event the Company does need to raise additional capital to fund operations or engage in a transaction, failure to raise adequate capital and generate adequate sales revenues could result in the Company having to curtail or cease operations.
Even if the Company does raise sufficient capital to support its operating expenses, acquire new license agreements or ownership interests in life science companies and generate adequate revenues, or the agreements entered into recently are successful, there can be no assurances that the revenues will be sufficient to enable it to develop business to a level where it will generate profits and cash flows from operations. These matters raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern as determined by management. However, the accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
In an effort to support the Company’s future capital needs, on January 21, 2020, the Company entered into a $5,000,000 equity line financing agreement with Tangiers, as well as a registration right agreement related thereto. The financing is over a maximum of 36 months. Pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, a maximum of 76,000,000 shares of our common stock, par value $.00001 per share that we may sell to Tangiers from time to time will be registered by us on Form S-1 with the Securities and Exchange Commission under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, for this financing. As a result of the Company’s Collaboration Agreement with Aegea, whereby seventy percent (70%) of the Net Proceeds from the sale of the initial 10,000,000 shares of stock of Tauriga using the ELOC were transferred to and invested in Aegea for the purchase of common stock of Aegea. Additionally, the Company has excluded 4,000,000 shares under this agreement to cover liabilities and expenses related to the establishment and maintenance of this agreement. (See earlier in this Note for a more complete description under Investment Agreement and Registration Rights Agreement). As of March 31, 2021, the Company has issued 3,910,000 of the excluded 4,000,000 shares. On January 8, 2021, the Company filed a Post-Effective Amendment to its January 21, 2020 S-1 Investment Agreement and Registration Rights Agreement to terminate the effectiveness of the Registration Statement and to remove from registration all securities registered but not sold under the Registration Statement.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared a global pandemic related to the virus known as COVID-19. The expected impact on domestic and global commerce have been and are anticipated to continue to be far reaching. To date there have been significant stock market declines and the movement of people and goods worldwide has become severely restricted. Management is actively monitoring the situation and is taking appropriate steps as needed to ensure minimal disruption to the Company’s operations. There is a risk the COVID-19 pandemic will disrupt the Company’s operations and the movement of goods and services, as well as its investments in personnel, expansion, marketing and sales generally.
Contractual Obligations
On January 6, 2021, the Company relocated its corporate headquarters from New York City to Wappingers Falls, NY. The Company has entered into a two-year lease, with one two-year extension for its new location at $1,600 per month for the term of the lease.
Per Os Bio has contracted with the Company as the sole manufacturer of its Tauri-GumTM and are under contract to produce our product when ordered at approximately $4 per blister pack. Per OS is also required to have each batch independently tested to ensure that each piece of chewing gum must contain 10 milligrams (“mg”) of CBD Isolate, has 0% THC Content and is clear for all microbiology.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of March 31, 2021, the Company had no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-07, “Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting” which addresses accounting for issuance of all share-based payments on the same accounting model. Previously, accounting for share-based payments to employees was covered by ASC Topic 718 while accounting for such payments to non-employees was covered by ASC Subtopic 505-50. As it considered recently issued updates to ASC 718, the FASB, as part of its simplification initiatives, decided to replace ASC Subtopic 505-50 with Topic 718 as the guidance for non-employee share-based awards. Under this new guidance, both sets of awards, for employees and non-employees, will essentially follow the same model, with small variations related to determining the term assumption when valuing a non-employee award as well as a different expense attribution model for non-employee awards as opposed to employee awards. The ASU is effective for public business entities beginning in 2019 calendar years and one year later for non-public business entities. The Company does not believe there is a material impact on their consolidated financial position and results of operations as a result of this standard.
In February 2016, FASB issued ASU 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842).” The new standard requires lessees to apply a dual approach, classifying leases as either finance or operating leases based on the principle of whether or not the lease is effectively a financed purchase by the lessee. This classification will determine whether lease expense is recognized based on an effective interest method or on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. A lessee is also required to record a right-of-use asset and a lease liability for all leases with a term of greater than 12 months regardless of their classification. Leases with a term of 12 months or less will be accounted for similar to existing guidance for operating leases. The new guidance will be effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within that reporting period and is applied retrospectively. Early adoption is permitted. The Company has adopted this standard as of April 1, 2019 and does not believe there will be a material impact on the adoption of this guidance on their consolidated financial statements.
There are several other new accounting pronouncements issued or proposed by the FASB. Each of these pronouncements, as applicable, has been or will be adopted by the Company. Management does not believe any of these accounting pronouncements has had or will have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial position or operating results.
Critical Accounting Policies
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). This standard provides a single set of guidelines for revenue recognition to be used across all industries and requires additional disclosures. The updated guidance introduces a five-step model to achieve its core principal of the entity recognizing revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers at an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The Company adopted the updated guidance effective October 1, 2017 as the Company commenced sales of HerMan® using the full retrospective method. The new standard did not have a material impact on its financial position and results of operations, as it did not change the manner or timing of recognizing revenue.
Under ASC 606, in order to recognize revenue, the Company is required to identify an approved contract with commitments to preform respective obligations, identify rights of each party in the transaction regarding goods to be transferred, identify the payment terms for the goods transferred, verify that the contract has commercial substance and verify that collection of substantially all consideration is probable. The adoption of ASC 606 did not have an impact on the Company’s operations or cash flows.
On March 29, 2018 the Company, through Tauriga BDC, entered into an independent sales representative agreement with Blink to be a non-exclusive independent sales representative. Under the agreement with Blink, the Company may solicit orders from potential customers for EV charging station placement. This sales agreement is a three-tier model based on whether Tauriga BDC contracts the new customer to purchase equipment outright from Blink or enter into one of two revenue-sharing agreements. In the case Tauriga BDC effectuates a sale of Blink equipment it will receive a one-time sales commission based on the sales price of the equipment sale. In the case where Tauriga BDC secures a revenue sharing agreement with a customer where Blink remains the owner, Tauriga BDC will be paid an on-going commission based off of gross charger revenue, subject to which party paid for the installation. Commission payments under the revenue sharing agreement are subject to minimum revenue generation hurdles.
On June 29, 2018, the Company purchased four Blink Level 2 - 40” pedestal chargers for permanent placement in a retail location or locations whereby the Company will pay a variable annual fee based on 7% of total revenue per charging unit. The remainder of the proceeds will be split 80/20 between the Company and the host location owner or its assignee. The host location owner to will pay for the cost of providing power to these unit as well as installation costs.
As of March 31, 2020, the Tauriga BDC has not installed any of these machines in any locations, and no revenue has been generated through the Blink contract.
The Company recognizes revenue upon the satisfaction of the performance obligation. The Company considers the performance obligation met upon shipment of the product or delivery of the product. For ecommerce orders, the Company’s products are shipped by a fulfillment company and payment is made in advance of shipment either through credit card or PayPal. The Company also delivers the product to its customers that they market to in the metropolitan New York Tri-State area that are not covered under any existing distribution agreements. The Company generally collects payment within 30 to 60 days of completion of its performance obligation, and the Company has no agency relationships.
Investment in Trading Securities
Investment in trading securities consist of investments in shares of common stock of companies traded on public markets as well as publicly traded warrants of these companies should there be a market for them. These securities are carried on the Company’s balance sheet at fair value based on the closing price of the shares owned on the last trading day before the balance sheet date of this report. Fluctuations in the underlying bid price of the stocks result in unrealized gains or losses. The Company recognizes these fluctuations in value as other income or loss.
For investments sold, the Company recognizes the gains and losses attributable to these investments as realized gains or losses in other income or loss.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for Stock-Based Compensation under ASC 718 “Compensation-Stock Compensation,” which addresses the accounting for transactions in which an entity exchanges its equity instruments for goods or services, with a primary focus on transactions in which an entity obtains employee services in share-based payment transactions. ASC 718-10 requires measurement of cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award (with limited exceptions). Incremental compensation costs arising from subsequent modifications of awards after the grant date must be recognized.
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation awards to non-employees in accordance with ASC 505-50, “Equity-Based Payments to Non-Employees.” Under ASC 505-50, the Company determines the fair value of the warrants or stock-based compensation awards granted on the grant date as either the fair value of the consideration received, or the fair value of the equity instruments issued, whichever is more reliably measurable. Any stock options or warrants issued to non-employees are recorded in expense and an offset to additional paid-in capital in stockholders’ equity over the applicable service periods using variable accounting through the vesting dates based on the fair value of the options or warrants at the end of each period.
The Company issues stock to consultants for various services. The costs for these transactions are measured at the fair value on the grant date of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instruments issued, whichever is more reliably measurable. The Company recognized consulting expense and a corresponding increase to additional paid-in-capital related to stock issued for services over the term of the related services.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, primarily fixed assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets might not be recoverable. The Company will perform a periodic assessment of assets for impairment in the absence of such information or indicators. Conditions that would necessitate an impairment assessment include a significant decline in the observable market value of an asset, a significant change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used, or a significant adverse change that would indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or group of assets is not recoverable. For long-lived assets to be held and used, the Company would recognize an impairment loss only if its carrying amount is not recoverable through its undiscounted cash flows and measures the impairment loss based on the difference between the carrying amount and estimated fair value.
Fair Value Measurements
ASC 820 “Fair Value Measurements” defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted accounting principles and expands disclosure about fair value measurements.
The following provides an analysis of financial instruments that are measured subsequent to initial recognition at fair value, grouped into Levels 1 to 3 based on the degree to which fair value is observable:
Level 1- fair value measurements are those derived from quoted prices (unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities);
Level 2- fair value measurements are those derived from inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly (i.e. as prices) or indirectly (i.e. derived from prices); and
Level 3- fair value measurements are those derived from valuation techniques that include inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data (unobservable inputs).
Financial instruments classified as Level 1 - quoted prices in active markets include cash.
These consolidated financial instruments are measured using management’s best estimate of fair value, where the inputs into the determination of fair value require significant management judgment to estimation. Valuations based on unobservable inputs are highly subjective and require significant judgments. Changes in such judgments could have a material impact on fair value estimates. In addition, since estimates are as of a specific point in time, they are susceptible to material near-term changes. Changes in economic conditions may also dramatically affect the estimated fair values
Fair value estimates discussed herein are based upon certain market assumptions and pertinent information available to management for the respective periods. The respective carrying value of certain financial instruments approximated their fair values due to the short-term nature of these instruments. These financial instruments include cash, investments, short-term notes payable, accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Share settled debt
The general measurement guidance in ASC 480 requires obligations that can be settled in shares with a fixed monetary value at settlement to be carried at fair value unless other accounting guidance specifies another measurement attribute. The Company has determined that ASC 835-30 is the appropriate accounting guidance for the share-settled debt, which is what was done by setting up the debt discount which is to be amortized to interest expense over the term of the instrument. Amortization of discounts are to be amortized using the effective interest method over the term of the note.
ASC 480-10-25-14 requires liability accounting for (1) any financial instrument that embodies and unconditional obligation to transfer a variable number of shares or (2) a financial instrument other than an outstanding share that embodies a conditional obligation to transfer a variable number of shares, provided that the monetary value of the obligation is based solely or predominantly on any of the following: 1. A fixed monetary amount known at inception (e.g. stock settled debt); 2. Variations in something other than the fair value of the issuer’s equity shares (e.g. a preferred share that will be settled in a variable number of common shares with tits monetary value tied to a commodity price); and 3. Variations in the fair value of the issuer’s equity shares, but the monetary value to the counterparty moves inversely to the value of the issuer’s shares (e.g. net share settled written put options, net share settled forward purchase contracts).
Notwithstanding the fact that the above instruments can be settled in shares, FASB concluded that equity classification is not appropriate because instruments with those characteristics do not expose the counterparty to risks and rewards similar to those of an owner and, therefore do not create a shareholder relationship. The issuer is instead using its shares as the currency to settle its obligation.
The Company has multiple notes that contain discount provisions whereby the holder can exercise conversion rights at a discount to the market price for a 15-day trailing period based on the market volume average weighted price. ASC 470-20 defines this as a beneficial conversion feature which that shall be recognized separately at issuance by allocating a portion of the proceeds equal to the intrinsic value, not to exceed the face value of the note, to additional paid in capital. This segmented value, is to be amortized using the effective interest method over the term of the note.
Segment information
The Company has adopted provisions of ASC 280-10 Segment Reporting for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020. This standard requires that companies disclose operating segments based on the manner in which management disaggregates the Company in making internal operating decisions. The Company and its Chief Operating Decision Makers determined that the Company’s operations consist of two segments: (i) The first division consists of all retail, wholesale and e-commerce product sales of CBD/CBG Tauri-GumTM, Tauri-GummiesTM, and other CBD/CBG products, and (ii) the second segment will be a research and development division that consist of liabilities and results from any activity relative to the progress in the development of the Company’s FDA IND application for Phase II Trial of its proposed pharmaceutical grade version of Tauri-Gum™. The cost basis investment in Aegea has been treated as a non-operating asset and will therefore not be reported as a part of the research and development division.
Research and development
The Company expenses research and development costs as incurred. Research and development costs were $273,385 and $6,923 for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company is continually evaluating products and technologies, and incurs expenses relative to these evaluations, including in the natural wellness space, such as Tauri-Gum™ product development of new flavor formulations and other CBD delivery products, as well as development of a Cannabigerol (“CBG”) Isolate Infused version of its Tauri-Gum™ brand. We also incur expenses relative to collaboration agreements and any activity relative to the progress in the development of the Company’s FDA IND application for Phase II Trial of its proposed pharmaceutical grade version of Tauri-Gum™, as well as intellectual property or other related technologies. As the Company investigates and develops relationships in these areas, resultant expenses for trademark filings, license agreements, website and product development and design materials will be expensed as research and development. Some costs will be accumulated for subsidiaries prior to formation of any new entities.