ITEM 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The objective of this section is to help readers understand our views on our results of operations and financial condition. You should read this discussion in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We have historically operated as a traditional thrift institution. The significant majority of our assets consist of long-term, fixed-rate residential mortgage loans and mortgage-backed securities, which we have funded primarily with deposit inflows, cash balances at the Federal Reserve Bank, loan and securities repayments, advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank, proceeds from securities sold under agreements to repurchase and proceeds from loan and security sales. As a result, we may be vulnerable to increases in interest rates, as our interest-bearing liabilities mature or reprice more quickly than our interest-earning assets.
We have continued our focus on originating one- to four-family residential real estate loans. Our emphasis on conservative loan underwriting has resulted in continued low levels of nonperforming assets. Our nonperforming assets, which can include nonaccrual loans and real estate owned, totaled $4.4 million, or 0.21% of total assets at December 31, 2020, compared to $736,000, or 0.04% of total assets at December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, nonperforming assets consisted of 12 mortgage loans with a principal balance of $4.4 million. Our provisions for loan losses were $1.6 million and $61,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in the loan loss provision occurred primarily from an increase in the qualitative factors use to calculate the allowance for loan losses. The qualitative factors were raised because of loan payment deferrals related to the COVID-19 pandemic and Hawaii’s unemployment rate increase due to layoffs that resulted from government mandates to minimize the spread of COVID-19.
Our operations are affected by our efforts to manage our interest rate risk position. In 2020 and 2019, we sold $43.8 million and $10.1 million, respectively, of fixed-rate mortgage loans. In 2020 and 2019, we obtained $21.0 million and $19.0 million, respectively, of long-term public deposits. In 2020, we restructured $82.0 million of FHLB advances to lower the average cost of FHLB advances and extended the average maturity date. In 2019, we increased our long-term FHLB borrowings by $121.0 million, to help manage our interest rate risk. See “-Management of Market Risk” for a discussion of the actions we have taken in managing interest rate risk.
All of Territorial Savings Bank’s investments in mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations have been issued by Freddie Mac or Fannie Mae, which are U.S. government-sponsored enterprises, or Ginnie Mae, which is a U.S. government agency. These agencies guarantee the payment of principal and interest on the Bank’s mortgage-backed securities. We do not own any preferred stock issued by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our additional borrowing capacity at the FHLB of Des Moines was $807.2 million and $727.5 million, respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We consider accounting policies that require management to exercise significant judgment or discretion or make significant assumptions that have, or could have, a material impact on the carrying value of certain assets or on income, to be critical accounting policies. We consider the following to be our critical accounting policies:
Allowance for Loan Losses. We maintain an allowance for loan losses at an amount estimated to equal all credit losses incurred in our loan portfolio that are both probable and reasonable to estimate at a balance sheet date. To estimate credit losses on impaired loans (in accordance with the Receivables topic of the FASB ASC), we evaluate numerous factors, as described below in “-Allowance for Loan Losses.” Based on our estimate of the level of allowance for loan losses required, we record a provision for loan losses to maintain the allowance for loan losses at an amount that provides for all losses that are both probable and reasonable to estimate.
Since we cannot predict with certainty the amount of loan charge-offs that will be incurred and because the eventual level of loan charge-offs is affected by numerous conditions beyond our control, a range of loss estimates can
reasonably be used to determine the allowance for loan losses and the related provisions for loan losses. In addition, as an integral part of their examination processes, the bank regulators will periodically review our allowance for loan losses. The bank regulators may require that we recognize additions to the allowance for loan losses based on their analysis of information available to them at the time of their examination. Accordingly, actual results could differ materially from those estimates.
Deterioration in the Hawaii real estate market could result in an increase in loan delinquencies, additional increases in our allowance for loan losses and provision for loan losses, as well as an increase in loan charge-offs.
Securities Impairment. We periodically perform analyses to determine whether there has been an other-than-temporary decline in the value of our securities. Our held-to-maturity securities consist primarily of debt securities for which we have a positive intent and ability to hold to maturity, and are carried at amortized cost. Available-for-sale securities are carried at fair value. We conduct a quarterly review and evaluation of the securities portfolio to determine if the value of any security has declined below its cost or amortized cost, and whether such decline is other-than-temporary. If such decline is deemed other-than-temporary, we would adjust the cost basis of the security by writing down the security for any credit losses through a charge on the income statement. The market values of our securities are affected by changes in interest rates as well as shifts in the market’s perception of the issuers. The fair value of investment securities is usually based on pricing models that consider bid and ask prices and prices at which similar securities traded.
We evaluated our $8.1 million investment in FHLB stock for other-than-temporary impairment as of December 31, 2020. Considering the long-term nature of this investment and the liquidity position of the FHLB of Des Moines, our FHLB stock was not considered to be other-than-temporarily impaired. As of December 31, 2020, the FHLB of Des Moines has met all of its regulatory capital requirements. Moody’s Investor Services has given the FHLB of Des Moines a long-term credit rating of Aaa.
We evaluated our $3.1 million investment in FRB stock for other-than-temporary impairment as of December 31, 2020. Based on the long-term nature of this investment and the liquidity position of the FRB of San Francisco, our FRB stock was not considered to be other-than-temporarily impaired.
Deferred Tax Assets. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carryforwards. A valuation allowance may be required if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In determining whether a valuation allowance is necessary, we consider the level of taxable income in prior years, to the extent that carrybacks are permitted under current tax laws, as well as estimates of future taxable income and tax planning strategies that could be implemented to accelerate taxable income if necessary. If our estimates of future taxable income were materially overstated or if our assumptions regarding the tax consequences of tax planning strategies were inaccurate, some or all of our deferred tax assets may not be realized, which would result in a charge to earnings.
Defined Benefit Retirement Plan. Defined benefit plan obligations and related assets of our defined benefit retirement plan are presented in Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Effective December 31, 2008, the defined benefit retirement plan was frozen and all plan benefits were fixed as of that date. Plan assets, which consist primarily of marketable equity securities and mutual funds, are typically valued using market quotations. Plan obligations and the annual pension expense are determined by independent actuaries through the use of a number of assumptions. Key assumptions in measuring the plan obligations include the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. In determining the discount rate, we utilize a yield that reflects the top 50% of the universe of bonds, ranked in the order of the highest yield. These bonds provide cash flows that match the timing of expected benefit payments. Asset returns are based upon the anticipated average rate of earnings expected on the invested funds of the plans.
At December 31, 2020, we used weighted-average discount rates of 3.30% and 2.50% for calculating annual pension expense and projected plan liabilities, respectively, and an expected long-term rate of return on plan assets of 7.00% for calculating annual pension expense. At December 31, 2019, we used weighted-average discount rates of 4.30% and 3.30% for calculating annual pension expense and projected plan liabilities, respectively, and an expected long-term rate of return on plan assets of 7.25% for calculating annual pension expense. For both the discount rate and
the asset return rate, a range of estimates could reasonably have been used, which would affect the amount of pension expense and pension liability recorded.
A decrease in the discount rate or an increase in the asset return rate would have reduced our pension expense in 2020, while an increase in the discount rate or a decrease in the asset return rate would have the opposite effect. A 25 basis point decrease in the discount rate assumptions would have decreased our 2020 pension expense by $14,000 and would have increased our year-end 2020 pension liability by $682,000, while a 25 basis point decrease in the asset return rate would have increased our 2020 pension expense by $47,000.
Balance Sheet Analysis
Assets. At December 31, 2020, our assets were $2.1 billion, an increase of $24.5 million, or 1.2%, from December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily caused by a $318.7 million increase in cash and cash equivalents, which was partially offset by a $177.8 million decrease in net loans receivable and a $121.3 million decrease in total investment securities. The increase in cash and cash equivalents occurred as loan and security repayments and sales exceeded the amount of new loan originations.
Cash and Cash Equivalents. At December 31, 2020, we had $363.5 million of cash and cash equivalents compared to $44.8 million at December 31, 2019. During 2020, cash and cash equivalents increased by $318.7 million primarily due to a $177.8 million decrease in net loans receivable, a $121.3 million decrease in total investment securities and a $27.9 million increase in deposits.
Loan Portfolio Composition. The following table sets forth the composition of our loan portfolio at the dates indicated.
The loan portfolio decreased from $1.6 billion at December 31, 2019 to $1.4 billion at December 31, 2020 as loan repayments, sales and a loan securitization transaction exceeded new loan originations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we securitized fixed-rate first mortgage loans with a book value of $9.4 million into Freddie Mac mortgage-backed securities to increase liquidity.
Loan Portfolio Maturities and Yields. The following table summarizes the scheduled maturities of our loan portfolio at December 31, 2020. Demand loans, loans having no stated repayment schedule or maturity, and overdraft loans are reported as being due in one year or less.
The following table sets forth the scheduled repayments of fixed- and adjustable-rate loans at December 31, 2020 that are contractually due after December 31, 2021.
Securities. At December 31, 2020, our securities portfolio totaled $251.2 million, or 11.9% of assets and included $247.6 million of held-to-maturity securities and $3.6 million of available-for-sale securities. All of the mortgage-backed securities were issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac or Ginnie Mae. At December 31, 2020, none of the underlying collateral consisted of subprime or Alt-A loans (traditionally defined as nonconforming loans having less than full documentation). At December 31, 2020, we held no common or preferred stock of Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac.
The following table sets forth the amortized cost and estimated fair value of our securities portfolio at the dates indicated.
(1) All of our collateralized mortgage obligations have been issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac or Ginnie Mae.
The securities portfolio decreased from $372.5 million at December 31, 2019 to $251.2 million at December 31, 2020 as securities repayments exceeded the amount of securities acquired in the loan securitization transaction.
Our remaining trust preferred security investment was sold in 2019. A gain of $2.7 million was recognized on the sale.
Any unrealized loss on individual mortgage-backed securities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 was caused by increases in market interest rates. All of our mortgage-backed securities are guaranteed by U.S. government-sponsored enterprises or a U.S. government agency. Since the decline in market value has been attributable to changes in interest rates and not credit quality, we continue to have the intent not to sell these investments, and it is not more likely than not that we will be required to sell such investments prior to the recovery of the amortized cost basis, we have not considered these investments to be other-than-temporarily impaired as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
At December 31, 2020, we had no investments in a single company (other than U.S. government sponsored enterprises) or entity that had an aggregate book value in excess of 10% of our consolidated stockholders’ equity.
Portfolio Maturities and Coupons. The composition and maturities of the investment securities portfolio at December 31, 2020 are summarized in the following table. Maturities are based on the final contractual payment dates, and do not reflect the impact of prepayments or early redemptions that may occur. No tax-equivalent adjustments have been made, as we did not hold any tax-free investment securities at December 31, 2020.
(1) All of our collateralized mortgage obligations have been issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac or Ginnie Mae.
Bank-Owned Life Insurance. We invest in bank-owned life insurance to provide us with a funding source for our benefit plan obligations. Bank-owned life insurance also generally provides us noninterest income that is nontaxable. Interagency federal guidance generally limits our investment in bank-owned life insurance to 25% of the Bank’s Tier 1 capital plus our allowance for loan losses. At December 31, 2020, this limit was $60.9 million, and we had invested $45.6 million in bank-owned life insurance at that date.
Deposits. At December 31, 2020, deposits totaled $1.7 billion or 89.1% of total liabilities. We offer a variety of deposit accounts with a range of interest rates and terms. Our deposit accounts consist of savings accounts, certificates of deposit, money market accounts, commercial and regular checking accounts and Super NOW accounts. Historically, we have not accepted, and do not currently have, brokered deposits. We accept deposits primarily from the areas in which our offices are located. We rely on our competitive pricing and products, convenient locations and quality customer service to attract and retain deposits.
Interest rates paid, maturity terms, service fees and withdrawal penalties are established on a periodic basis. Deposit rates and terms are based primarily on current operating strategies, market interest rates, liquidity requirements and our deposit growth goals.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our deposits grew by $27.9 million, or 1.7%. The growth in deposits was primarily due to increases of $102.7 million in savings and $53.4 million in checking accounts, which were partially offset by a $142.2 million decrease in certificates of deposit for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in savings accounts and the decrease in certificates of deposit occurred as some customers with matured certificates of deposit transferred their funds to savings accounts as interest rates on certificates of deposit declined. The decrease in certificates of deposit also included an $81.6 million decrease in public deposits.
At December 31, 2020, we had a total of $321.8 million in certificates of deposit, of which $221.6 million had remaining maturities of one year or less. Based on historical experience and our current pricing strategy, we believe we will retain a significant portion of these accounts upon maturity.
The following tables set forth the distribution of our average total deposit accounts (including interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing deposits), by account type, for the periods indicated.
As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate amount of outstanding certificates of deposit in amounts greater than or equal to $250,000 was $172.7 million. As of December 31, 2020, certificates of deposit owned by state and local governments in amounts greater than or equal to $250,000 was $126.1 million. The following table sets forth the maturity of those certificates as of December 31, 2020.
Borrowings. Our borrowings consist of advances from the FHLB and funds borrowed under securities sold under agreements to repurchase. At December 31, 2020, our FHLB advances totaled $141.0 million, or 7.6% of total liabilities, and our securities sold under agreements to repurchase totaled $10.0 million, or 0.5% of total liabilities. At December 31, 2020, we had the capability to borrow up to $807.2 million in the form of additional advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our total borrowings decreased by $15.0 million or 9.0%. The decrease was due to the maturing of FHLB advances. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we restructured $82.0 million of FHLB advances. This transaction lowered the average cost of FHLB advances from 2.28% to 1.52% and extended the average maturity date by 1.9 years. The restructuring was accounted for as a continuation of the existing borrowings with any prepayment fees recognized as an adjustment to the future cost of the restructured advances. We primarily funded our operations with additional deposits, borrowings, proceeds from loan and security sales and principal repayments on loans and mortgage-backed securities.
The following table sets forth information concerning balances and interest rates on our FHLB advances at the dates and for the years indicated.
The following table sets forth information concerning balances and interest rates on our securities sold under agreements to repurchase at the dates and for the years indicated.
Stockholders’ Equity. At December 31, 2020, our stockholders’ equity was $248.7 million, an increase of $4.8 million, or 2.0%, from $243.9 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in stockholders’ equity occurred as our net
income, the increase in capital from the exercise of stock options and allocation of ESOP shares exceeded dividends declared and share repurchases.
Average Balances and Yields
The following tables set forth average balance sheets, average yields and rates, and certain other information for the years indicated. No tax-equivalent yield adjustments were made, as we did not hold any tax-free investments. All average balances are daily average balances. Nonaccrual loans were included in the computation of average balances, but have been reflected in the table as loans carrying a zero yield. The yields set forth below include the effect of net deferred costs, discounts and premiums that are amortized or accreted to interest income.
(footnotes on following page)
(1) Average balance includes loans or investments held to maturity and available for sale, as applicable.
(2) Net interest rate spread represents the difference between the yield on average interest-earning assets and the cost of average interest-bearing liabilities.
(3) Net interest-earning assets represent total interest-earning assets less total interest-bearing liabilities.
(4) Net interest margin represents net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table presents the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income for the years indicated. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume column shows the effects attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate). The total column represents the sum of the prior columns. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately based on the changes due to rate and the changes due to volume.
Comparison of Operating Results for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
General. Net income decreased by $3.4 million, or 15.4%, to $18.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $22.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net income was primarily due to a $1.6 million increase in loan loss provisions, a $1.0 million decrease in noninterest income, a $975,000 decrease in net interest income and a $404,000 increase in income taxes, which were partially offset by a $581,000 decrease in noninterest expense.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income decreased by $975,000, or 1.7%, to $57.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $58.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest income decreased by $5.8 million, or 7.7%, to $69.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $75.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income occurred primarily because of the $64.6 million decrease in the
average outstanding balance of total loans, the $44.0 million decrease in the average outstanding balance of investment securities and a 32 basis point decrease in the average yield on interest-earning assets. Interest expense decreased by $4.8 million, or 28.4%, to $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest expense was due to a 28 basis point decrease in the average cost of interest-bearing liabilities and a $38.1 million decrease in the average outstanding balance of certificates of deposit. The interest rate spread and net interest margin were 2.76% and 2.85%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2.80% and 2.93%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decreases in the interest rate spread and net interest margin were primarily due to the decrease in the yield on interest-earning assets, which was partially offset by a decrease in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities.
Interest Income. Interest income decreased by $5.8 million, or 7.7%, to $69.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $75.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest income on loans decreased by $4.0 million, or 6.3%, to $59.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $63.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income on loans occurred because the average balance of loans decreased by $64.6 million, or 4.1%, as loan repayments, sales and securitizations exceeded new loan originations. The decrease in interest income that occurred because of the decrease in the loan portfolio was augmented by a nine basis point decrease in the average loan yield to 3.88% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 3.97% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the average yield on loans occurred primarily because of the origination of new loans with lower yields. Interest income on investment securities decreased by $1.8 million, or 16.1%, to $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $11.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income on securities occurred primarily because of a $44.0 million decrease in the average securities balance and a 15 basis point decrease in the average yield on securities. The decrease in the average securities balance occurred as repayments and security sales exceeded loan securitizations.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased by $4.8 million, or 28.4%, to $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest expense on certificates of deposits decreased by $2.3 million, or 26.7%, to $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $8.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest expense on certificates of deposit occurred because of a 39 basis point decrease in the average cost of certificates of deposit and an $38.1 million decrease in the average balance of certificates of deposit. Interest expense on savings accounts decreased by $2.1 million, or 45.9%, to $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest expense on savings accounts occurred because of a 23 basis point decrease in the average cost of savings accounts, which was partially offset by a $7.3 million increase in the average balance of savings accounts.
Provision for Loan Losses. Based on our analysis of the factors described in “-Allowance for Loan Losses,” we recorded provisions for loan losses of $1.6 million and $61,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in loan loss provisions from 2019 to 2020 is primarily due to an increase in the qualitiative factors used to calculate the allowance for loan losses. The qualitative factors were raised because of loan payment deferrals related to the COVID-19 pandemic and Hawaii’s unemployment rate increase due to layoffs that resulted from the government mandates to minimize the spread of COVID-19. The provisions for loan losses included net charge-offs of $75,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and net recoveries of $9,000 for year ended December 31, 2019. The provisions recorded resulted in ratios of the allowance for loan losses to total loans of 0.30% and 0.17% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Nonaccrual loans totaled $4.4 million and $736,000 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. To the best of our knowledge, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had provided for all losses that are both probable and can be reasonably estimated at those respective dates.
Noninterest Income. The following table summarizes changes in noninterest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Noninterest income decreased by $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. We sold $19.2 million and $5.7 million of mortgage-backed securities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and recorded gains of $1.3 million and $193,000, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we also sold our investment in a trust preferred security and recognized a gain of $2.7 million. The sale of this trust preferred security, which had a significant deterioration in the issuer’s credit rating, is in accordance with the Investments - Debt and Equity Securities topic of the FASB ASC and does not taint management’s assertion of its intent to hold the remaining securities in the held-to-maturity portfolio to maturity. Other income decreased primarily due to bank-owned life insurance proceeds received in 2019. The increase in service fees on loan and deposit accounts was primarily due to an increase in broker fee income. The broker fee income was earned when we referred mortgage loan applications to other financial institutions and mortgage bankers. This increase in service fees was partially offset by a decrease in automated teller machine fees. These fees were waived for several months during the first half of the year in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Noninterest Expense. The following table summarizes changes in noninterest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Noninterest expense decreased by $581,000 to $37.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $38.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Salaries and employee benefits expense decreased by $839,000 for the year primarily due to increases in deferred salary expenses for originating new loans and a decrease in employee stock ownership plan expense. The decrease in employee stock ownership plan expense occurred because of a decline in our stock price. Other general and administrative expenses decreased by $573,000 primarily due to a decrease in advertising and external auditing fees. Equipment expense increased by $483,000 primarily due to an increase in data processing expenses. Occupancy expense increased by $284,000 primariliy due to an increase in rent expense and office repairs and maintenance expense.
Income Tax Expense. Income tax expense for 2020 was $6.7 million with an effective tax rate of 26.5% compared to $6.3 million with an effective tax rate of 22.3% in 2019. Income tax expense for 2019 included a $402,000 tax benefit that occurred when we filed an amended 2017 corporate tax return that included an increase in depreciation expense. The additional depreciation expense occurred when we conducted a study that reduced the asset lives used to calculate depreciation. We filed an amended return and were able to deduct the increase in depreciation expense at the 2017 federal corporate tax rate of 35% rather than the current 21% federal corporate tax rate. Income tax expense for
2020 and 2019 included $63,000 and $297,000, respectively, of tax benefits from the exercise of stock options. In addition, we received $118,000 and $419,000 of proceeds on bank-owned life insurance in 2020 and 2019, respectively, that were not taxable and which lowered the effective tax rate.
Nonperforming and Problem Assets
When a residential mortgage loan or home equity line of credit is 15 days past due, we attempt personal, direct contact with the borrower to determine when payment will be made. On the first day of the following month, we mail a letter reminding the borrower of the delinquency, and will send an additional letter when a loan is 60 days or more past due. If necessary, subsequent late notices are issued and the account will be monitored on a regular basis thereafter. By the 121st day of delinquency, unless the borrower has made arrangements to bring the loan current, we will refer the loan to legal counsel to commence foreclosure proceedings.
Commercial business loans, commercial real estate loans and consumer loans are generally handled in the same manner as residential mortgage loans or home equity lines of credit. All commercial business loans that are 15 days past due are immediately referred to our senior lending officer. In addition, we generate past due notices and attempt direct contact with a borrower when a consumer loan is 10 days past due. Because consumer loans are generally unsecured, we may commence collection procedures earlier for consumer loans than for residential mortgage loans or home equity lines of credit.
Loans are placed on nonaccrual status when payment of principal or interest is more than 90 days contractually delinquent or when, in the opinion of management, collection of principal or interest in full appears doubtful. When loans are placed on a nonaccrual status, unpaid accrued interest is fully reversed. The payments received on nonaccrual loans are recorded as a reduction of principal. The loan may be returned to accrual status if both principal and interest payments are brought current and full payment of principal and interest is expected.
Nonperforming Assets. The table below sets forth the amounts and categories of our nonperforming assets (loans and real estate owned) at the dates indicated.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, gross interest income that would have been recorded had our nonaccruing loans been current in accordance with original terms was $132,000. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized no interest income on such nonaccruing loans on a cash basis during the year. For the year ended December 31, 2020, gross interest income due and collected on our accruing restructured loans was $33,000.
We had five troubled debt restructurings totaling $1.0 million as of December 31, 2020 that were considered to be impaired. These five loans were one- to four-family residential mortgage loans. Three of the loans, totaling $565,000, were performing in accordance with their restructured terms and accruing interest at December 31, 2020. Two of the loans, totaling $467,000, were performing in accordance with their restructured terms but not accruing interest at December 31, 2020. We had six troubled debt restructurings totaling $1.2 million as of December 31, 2019 that were considered to be impaired. This total included five one- to four-family residential mortgage loans totaling $1.1 million and one home equity loan for $64,000. Three of the loans, totaling $577,000, were performing in accordance with their restructured terms and accruing interest at December 31, 2019. Three of the loans, totaling $589,000, were performing in accordance with their restructured terms but not accruing interest at December 31, 2019. There were no new troubled debt restructurings in 2020 or 2019. The Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act provides relief to financial institutions from categorizing eligible loan modifications as troubled debt restructurings over the remaining life of the modified loan. In addition, Interagency Statements were issued on March 22, 2020 and April 7, 2020 by bank regulatory agencies to encourage financial institutions to work prudently with borrowers. We will be using the provisions of the CARES Act and the Interagency Statements to account for the loans receiving modifications. On December 21, 2020, the President signed legislation that extended the troubled debt restructuring relief provisions of the CARES Act to January 1, 2022.
Delinquent Loans. The following table sets forth our loan delinquencies by type and by amount at the dates indicated. Loans with a formal loan payment deferral plan in place are not considered contractually past due or delinquent if the borrower is in compliance with the loan payment deferral plan.
Real Estate Owned. Real estate acquired by us as a result of foreclosure or by deed in lieu of foreclosure is classified as real estate owned. When property is acquired it is recorded at estimated fair value at the date of foreclosure less the cost to sell, establishing a new cost basis. Estimated fair value generally represents the price a buyer would be willing to pay on the basis of current market conditions, including normal terms from other financial institutions. Holding costs and declines in estimated fair value result in charges to expense after acquisition. At December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017, and 2016, we had no real estate owned.
Classification of Assets. Our policies, consistent with regulatory guidelines, provide for the classification of loans and other assets as substandard, doubtful or loss. An asset is considered substandard if it is inadequately protected by the current net worth and paying capacity of the obligor or the fair value of collateral pledged, if any. Substandard assets include those assets characterized by the distinct possibility that we will sustain some loss if the deficiencies are not corrected. Assets classified as doubtful have all of the weaknesses inherent in those classified substandard with the added characteristic that the weaknesses present make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions and values, highly questionable and improbable. Assets (or portions of assets) classified as loss are those considered uncollectible and of such little value that their continuance as assets is not warranted.
We maintain an allowance for loan losses at an amount estimated to equal all credit losses incurred in our loan portfolio that are both probable and can be reasonably estimated at a balance sheet date. Our determination as to the classification of our assets and the amount of our loan loss allowance is subject to review by bank regulators, who can require that we establish additional loss allowances. We regularly review our asset portfolio to determine whether any assets require classification in accordance with applicable regulations. On the basis of our review of our assets at December 31, 2020, we had substandard assets of $4.6 million and no loss or doubtful assets. Substandard assets at December 31, 2020 included $664,000 of troubled debt restructurings and $3.9 million of nonperforming loans. At December 31, 2019 we had substandard assets of $1.1 million, loss assets of $1,000 and no doubtful assets. Substandard assets at December 31, 2019 included $788,000 of troubled debt restructurings and $360,000 of nonperforming loans. We classify any loan that is delinquent 90 days or more as substandard. Loans which have been delinquent for fewer days may also be classified as substandard.
In addition to classifying assets as substandard, doubtful or loss, we also categorize assets as special mention. A special mention asset has potential weaknesses that deserve management’s close attention. If left uncorrected, these potential weaknesses may result in the deterioration of the repayment prospects for the asset or in the Bank’s credit position at some future date. We designate any loan that is 30 to 89 days delinquent as special mention. Loans which have been delinquent for fewer days may also be categorized as special mention. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, special mention assets were $507,000 and $973,000, respectively.
Allowance for Loan Losses
We provide for loan losses based upon the consistent application of our documented allowance for loan loss (ALLL) methodology. All loan losses are charged to the allowance for loan losses and all recoveries are credited to it. Additions to the allowance for loan losses are provided by charges to income based on various factors which, in our judgment, deserve current recognition in estimating probable losses. We regularly review the loan portfolio and make provisions for loan losses in order to maintain the allowance for loan losses in accordance with GAAP.
General allowances are established for loan losses on a portfolio basis for loans that do not meet the definition of impaired in accordance with current accounting standards. The portfolio is grouped into similar risk characteristics, primarily loan type and loan-to-value ratios. We apply an estimated loss rate to each loan group. The loss rates applied are primarily based upon our loss experience adjusted, as appropriate, for the qualitative and environmental factors discussed below. This evaluation is inherently subjective, as it requires material estimates that may be susceptible to significant revisions based upon changes in economic and real estate market conditions. Actual loan losses may be significantly more than the allowance for loan losses we have established, which could have a material negative effect on our financial results. The loans on which the Company has granted loan deferrals are included in the ALLL calculation.
Residential mortgage loans represent the largest segment of our loan portfolio. All of the residential mortgage loans are secured by a first mortgage on residential real estate in Hawaii, consist primarily of fixed-rate mortgage loans that have generally been underwritten to Freddie Mac guidelines and have similar risk characteristics. The loan loss allowance is determined by first calculating the historical loss rate for this segment of the portfolio. The loss rate may be adjusted for qualitative and environmental factors. The allowance for loan loss is calculated by multiplying the adjusted loss rate by the total loans in this segment of the portfolio.
The adjustments to historical loss experience are based on an evaluation of several qualitative and environmental factors, including:
● changes in lending policies and procedures, including changes in underwriting standards and collections, charge-off and recovery practices;
● changes in international, national, and local economic trends;
● changes in the bank’s internal loan review system;
● changes in the experience and ability of personnel in the mortgage loan origination and loan servicing departments;
● changes in the number and amount of delinquent loans and classified assets;
● changes in the type and volume of loans being originated;
● changes in the value of underlying collateral for collateral dependent loans;
● changes in any concentration of credit; and
● external factors such as competition, legal and regulatory requirements on the level of estimated credit losses in the existing loan portfolio.
In 2020, we granted loan payment deferrals to customers who were experiencing financial difficulties because of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. We established additional loan loss provisions in 2020 because of these loan payment deferrals and the higher unemployment rate that occurred because of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We also use historical loss rates adjusted for qualitative and environmental factors to establish loan loss allowances for the following portfolio segments:
● home equity loans and lines of credit; and
● consumer and other loans.
We have a limited loss experience for the construction, commercial and other mortgage segment of the loan portfolio. The loan loss allowance on this portfolio segment is determined using the loan loss rate of other financial institutions in the State of Hawaii. The allowance for loan loss is calculated by multiplying the loan loss rate of other financial institutions in the state by the total loans in this segment of the loan portfolio.
The allocation of a portion of the allowance to one category of loans does not preclude its availability to absorb losses in other categories. The unallocated allowance is established to provide for probable losses that have been incurred as of the reporting date but are not reflected in the allocated allowance.
We evaluate our loan portfolio on a quarterly basis and the allowance is adjusted accordingly. While we use the best information available to make evaluations, future adjustments to the allowance may be necessary if conditions differ substantially from the information used in making the evaluations. In addition, as an integral part of their examination process, the bank regulators will periodically review the allowance for loan losses. The bank regulators may require us to increase the allowance based on their analysis of information available at the time of their examination.
The State of Hawaii was severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2020, the State of Hawaii mandated the temporary closure of non-essential businesses, imposed a temporary stay-at-home mandate and implemented a quarantine program for passengers arriving in the state. With tourism being the largest sector of Hawaii’s economy, the reduction in visitors to the state and the stay-at-home mandate resulted in the layoff and furlough of workers and significantly increased the state’s unemployment rate compared to the pre-pandemic unemployment rate.
To assist customers during the COVID-19 pandemic, we have:
•Provided payment deferrals to borrowers who have experienced financial difficulties
because of the COVID-19 pandemic;
• Originated 23 Paycheck Protection Program loans totaling $1.7 million; and
• Waived early withdrawal penalties on certificates of deposit.
To qualify for the Bank’s loan payment deferral program, a borrower’s financial difficulties must be related to the COVID-19 pandemic and the loan must not have been more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019. For residential mortgage loans, the deferred interest will be payable within five years after the end the deferral period. The term of the loan is extended to allow the loan to fully amortize. During the loan payment deferral period, the borrowers are required to continue to make their escrow payments, which include insurance and property tax payments. At January 31, 2021, we had 209 mortgage loans in the payment deferral program. 206 of these mortgage loans have made their escrow payments.
As of January 31, 2021, we had outstanding loan payment deferrals on $127.5 million of loans, representing 9.2% of total loans receivable as of that date. $122.9 million of these loan payment deferrals are on one- to four-family residential mortgage loans, which represent 8.9% of the total loans receivable as of January 31, 2021. We believe these loans are currently well-secured as the ratio of the current loan balance to the current tax-assessed value of the property securing these mortgage loans averages 54.7%. One- to four-family residential mortgage loans represent 96.7% of the total loan portfolio balance with a ratio of the current loan balance to the current tax-assessed value of the property securing these loans averaging 46.3%. We also had outstanding loan payment deferrals on $4.5 million of commercial mortgage, commercial and industrial and home equity line of credit loans, which represent 0.3% of the total balance of loans receivable as of January 31, 2021. The total amount of loans in the payment deferral program has decreased from $167.1 million at June 30, 2020 to $127.5 million at January 31, 2021. The decrease in the loans in our payment deferral program occurred as borrowers opted out of the program and repaid any deferred loan payments.
As of January 31, 2021, $91.8 million, or 74.7%, of the total mortgage loans in the loan payment deferral program have resumed making full principal and interest payments. $24.2 million, or 19.7%, of the total mortgage loans in the loan payment deferral program are making interest-only payments. $3.0 million, or 2.4%, of the total mortgage loans in the loan payment deferral program continue to make escrow-only payments. $154,000, or 0.1%, of the total mortgage loans in the loan payment deferral program had their loan deferral period end and have not resumed making loan payments. As of January 31, 2021, $3.7 million, or 3.0%, of the total loans in the loan payment deferral program are still in their deferral period.
As of January 31, 2021, $4.1 million of the $4.5 million commercial mortgage, commercial and industrial and home equity lines of credit in the loan payment deferral program have resumed making full principal and interest payments. A $400,000 home equity line of credit is making interest-only payments.
The CARES Act provides relief to financial institutions from categorizing eligible loan modifications as troubled debt restructurings over the remaining life of the modified loan. In addition, Interagency Statements were issued on March 22, 2020 and April 7, 2020 by bank regulatory agencies to encourage financial institutions to work prudently with borrowers. We will be using the provisions of the CARES Act and the Interagency Statements to account for the qualifying loans receiving modifications. On December 21, 2020, the President signed legislation that extended the troubled debt restructuring relief provisions of the CARES Act to January 1, 2022.
During 2020, we have not seen a significant increase in loan delinquencies, significant changes in deposits or significant drawdowns on lines of credit. Loan delinquencies do not include loans requesting payment deferral because of the COVID-19 pandemic. We do not have any commercial loans to hotels, businesses in the transportation industry, restaurants or retail establishments.
The following table sets forth activity in our allowance for loan losses for the years indicated.
Allocation of Allowance for Loan Losses. The following tables set forth the allowance for loan losses allocated by loan category and the percent of loans in each category to total loans at the dates indicated. The allowance for loan losses allocated to each category is not necessarily indicative of future losses in any particular category. The allowance for loan losses for each category is affected by the national and Hawaii economies as well as other factors. The allocation of a portion of the allowance to one category of loans does not preclude its availability to absorb losses in other categories.
Management of Market Risk
General. Our most significant form of market risk is interest rate risk because, as a financial institution, the majority of our assets and liabilities are sensitive to changes in interest rates. Therefore, a principal part of our operations is to manage interest rate risk and limit the exposure of our net interest income to changes in market interest rates. Our Board of Directors has established an Asset/Liability Management Committee, which is responsible for evaluating the interest rate risk inherent in our assets and liabilities, for determining the level of risk that is appropriate, given our business strategy, operating environment, capital, liquidity and performance objectives, and for managing this risk consistent with the guidelines approved by the Board of Directors.
We have historically operated as a traditional thrift institution and a significant majority of our assets consist of long-term, fixed-rate residential mortgage loans and mortgage-backed securities, which we have funded primarily with checking and savings accounts and short-term borrowings. There is also little demand for adjustable-rate mortgage loans in the Hawaii market area. This has resulted in our being particularly vulnerable to increases in interest rates, as our interest-bearing liabilities mature or reprice more quickly than our interest-earning assets.
We continue our efforts to reduce interest rate risk. In 2020 and 2019, we sold $43.8 million and $10.1 million, respectively, of fixed-rate mortgage loans. In 2020 and 2019, we obtained $21.0 million and $19.0 million, respectively, of long-term public deposits. In 2020, we restructured $82.0 million of FHLB advances which extended our average maturity date and in 2019, we increased our long-term FHLB borrowings by $121.0 million to reduce our interest rate risk. In addition, we may utilize the following strategies to further reduce our interest rate risk:
● Continuing our efforts to increase our core checking and savings accounts, which are less rate-sensitive than certificates of deposit and which provide us with a stable, low-cost source of funds;
● Continuing to repay short-term borrowings;
● Maintaining overnight cash balances at the Federal Reserve Bank or a portfolio of short-term investments;
● Purchasing mortgage-backed securities with shorter durations;
● Selling a portion of the fixed-rate mortgage loans we originate to Freddie Mac or Fannie Mae;
● Extending the maturity of our liabilities by obtaining longer-term fixed-rate public deposits, FHLB advances and securities sold under agreements to repurchase;
● Subject to the maintenance of our credit quality standards, originating commercial loans and home equity lines of credit, which have adjustable interest rates and shorter average lives than first mortgage loans; and
● Maintaining relatively high regulatory capital ratios.
Our policies do not permit hedging activities, such as engaging in futures, options or swap transactions, or investing in high-risk mortgage derivatives, such as collateralized mortgage obligation residual interests, real estate mortgage investment conduit residual interests or stripped mortgage-backed securities. We do not have any current plans to sell loans classified as held-for-investment.
Economic Value of Equity. We use an interest rate sensitivity analysis that computes changes in the economic value of equity (EVE) of our cash flows from assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet items in the event of a range of assumed changes in market interest rates. EVE represents the market value of portfolio equity and is equal to the present value of assets minus the present value of liabilities, with adjustments made for off-balance sheet items. This analysis assesses the risk of loss in market-risk-sensitive instruments in the event of an instantaneous and sustained 100 to 400 basis point increase or a 100 basis point decrease in market interest rates with no effect given to any steps that we might take to counter the effect of that interest rate movement. A basis point equals one-hundredth of one percent, and 100 basis points equals one percent. An increase in interest rates from 3% to 4% would mean, for example, a 100 basis point increase in the “Change in Interest Rates” column below. Given the current relatively low level of market interest rates, an EVE calculation for an interest rate decrease of greater than 100 basis points has not been prepared.
The following table presents our internal calculations of the estimated changes in our EVE as of December 31, 2020 that would result from the designated instantaneous changes in the interest rate yield curve.
(1) Assumes an instantaneous uniform change in interest rates at all maturities.
(2) EVE is the difference between the present value of an institution’s assets and liabilities.
(3) Present value of assets represents the discounted present value of incoming cash flows on interest-earning assets.
(4) EVE Ratio represents EVE divided by the present value of assets.
Certain shortcomings are inherent in the methodologies used in determining interest rate risk through changes in EVE. Modeling changes in EVE requires making certain assumptions that may or may not reflect the manner in which actual yields and costs respond to changes in market interest rates. In this regard, the EVE table presented assumes that the composition of our interest-sensitive assets and liabilities existing at the beginning of a period remains constant over the period being measured and assumes that a particular change in interest rates is reflected uniformly across the yield curve regardless of the duration or repricing of specific assets and liabilities. Accordingly, although the EVE table provides an indication of our interest rate risk exposure at a particular point in time, such measurements are not intended to and do not provide a precise forecast of the effect of changes in market interest rates on our EVE and net interest income and will differ from actual results.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability to meet current and future financial obligations. Territorial Savings Bank’s primary sources of funds consist of deposit inflows, cash balances at the FRB, loan and security repayments, advances from the FHLB, securities sold under agreements to repurchase and proceeds from loan and security sales. We also have the capability of securitizing mortgage loans that conform to Freddie Mac loan underwriting standards into mortgage-backed securities. These securities can either be sold or pledged as collateral for public deposits and borrowings to increase the Bank’s cash on hand. While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans and securities are predictable sources of funds, deposit flows and mortgage prepayments are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions and competition. We have established an Asset/Liability Management Committee, consisting of our President and Chief Executive Officer, our Vice Chairman and Co-Chief Operating Officer, our Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer and our Vice President and Controller, which is responsible for establishing and monitoring our liquidity targets and strategies in order to ensure that sufficient liquidity exists for meeting the borrowing needs and deposit withdrawals of our customers as well as unanticipated contingencies. We believe that we have enough sources of liquidity to satisfy our short- and long-term liquidity needs as of December 31, 2020.
We regularly monitor and adjust our investments in liquid assets based upon our assessment of:
(i) expected loan demand;
(ii) purchases and sales of investment securities;
(iii) expected deposit flows and borrowing maturities;
(iv) yields available on interest-earning deposits and securities; and
(v) the objectives of our asset/liability management program.
Excess liquid assets are invested generally in interest-earning deposits or securities and may also be used to pay off short-term borrowings.
Our most liquid asset is cash. The amount of this asset is dependent on our operating, financing, lending and investing activities during any given period. At December 31, 2020, the Company’s cash and cash equivalents totaled $363.5 million.
If we require funds beyond our ability to generate them internally, borrowing agreements exist with the FHLB, which provide an additional source of funds. We also utilize securities sold under agreements to repurchase as another borrowing source. At December 31, 2020, we had the ability to borrow up to an additional $807.2 million from the FHLB. Advances from the FHLB and securities sold under agreements to repurchase were $141.0 million and $10.0 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020. In 2020, FHLB advances decreased by $15.0 million while securities sold under agreements to repurchase remained constant.
At December 31, 2020 we did not have any standby letters of credit from the FHLB. At December 31, 2019, we had $55.0 million in standby letters of credit from the FHLB pledged as collateral for State of Hawaii deposits.
Our cash flows are derived from operating activities, investing activities and financing activities as reported in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows included in our Consolidated Financial Statements.
At December 31, 2020, we had $21.3 million in loan commitments outstanding, most of which were for fixed-rate loans. In addition to commitments to originate loans, we had $20.7 million in unused lines of credit to borrowers. Certificates of deposit due within one year of December 31, 2020 totaled $221.6 million, or 13.4% of total deposits. If these deposits do not remain with us, we may be required to seek other sources of funds, including loan sales, brokered deposits, securities sold under agreements to repurchase and FHLB advances. Depending on market conditions, we may be required to pay higher rates on such deposits or other borrowings than we currently pay on the certificates of deposit due on or before December 31, 2021. We believe, however, based on past experience that a significant portion of such deposits will remain with us. We have the ability to attract and retain deposits by adjusting the interest rates offered.
Our primary investing activities are originating loans and purchasing mortgage-backed securities. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we originated $292.3 million and $249.1 million of loans, respectively. In 2020 we did not purchase any securities. In 2019, we purchased $9.2 million of securities.
Financing activities consist primarily of activity in deposit accounts, FHLB advances, securities sold under agreements to repurchase, stock repurchases and dividend payments. We experienced net increases in deposits of $27.9 million and $2.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Deposit flows are affected by the overall level of interest rates, the interest rates and products offered by us and our local competitors, and by other factors.
As a separate legal entity, the Company is required to have liquidity to fund stock repurchases and dividend payments to shareholders and for other corporate purposes. As of December 31, 2020, due to the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, we have not announced a new share repurchase program. Shares repurchased reduce the amount of shares issued and outstanding. The repurchased shares may be reissued in connection with share-based compensation plans and for general corporate purposes. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company repurchased 204,324 and 59,700 shares of common stock, respectively, at an average cost of $24.47 and $26.74, respectively, as part of the repurchase programs authorized by the Board of Directors. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, on a stand-alone basis, the Company had cash in banks of $18.1 million and $22.6 million, respectively.
Territorial Savings Bank and the Company are subject to various regulatory capital requirements, including a risk-based capital measure. The risk-based capital guidelines include both a definition of capital and a framework for calculating risk-weighted assets by assigning balance sheet assets and off-balance sheet items to broad risk categories. At December 31, 2020, Territorial Savings Bank and the Company exceeded all regulatory capital requirements and are considered to be “well capitalized” under regulatory guidelines. See Note 23 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations
Commitments. As a financial services provider, we routinely are a party to various financial instruments with off-balance-sheet risks, such as commitments to extend credit and unused lines of credit. While these contractual obligations represent our potential future cash requirements, a significant portion of commitments to extend credit may expire without being drawn upon. Such commitments are subject to the same credit policies and approval process accorded to loans we make. In addition, we enter into commitments to sell mortgage loans. For additional information, see Note 22 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contractual Obligations. In the ordinary course of our operations, we enter into certain contractual obligations. Such obligations include operating leases for premises and equipment, agreements with respect to borrowed funds and deposit liabilities and agreements with respect to investments.
The following table summarizes our significant fixed and determinable contractual obligations and other funding needs by payment date at December 31, 2020. The payment amounts represent those amounts due to the recipient and do not include any unamortized premiums or discounts or other similar carrying amount adjustments.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2(w) of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
Our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. U.S. GAAP generally requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without consideration of changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The impact of inflation is reflected in the increased cost of our operations. Unlike industrial companies, our assets and liabilities are primarily monetary in nature. As a result, changes in market interest rates have a greater impact on performance than the effects of inflation.