Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes that appear elsewhere in this filing.
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Some of the statements made in this report are “forward-looking statements,” as that term is defined under Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. These forward-looking statements are based upon our current expectations and projections about future events. Whenever used in this report, the words “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “expect” and similar expressions, or the negative of such words and expressions, are intended to identify forward-looking statements, although not all forward-looking statements contain such words or expressions. The forward-looking statements in this report are primarily located in the material set forth under the headings “Description of Business,” “Risk Factors,” “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” but are found in other parts of this report as well. These forward-looking statements generally relate to our plans, objectives and expectations for future operations and are based upon management’s current estimates and projections of future results or trends. Although we believe that our plans and objectives reflected in or suggested by these forward-looking statements are reasonable, we may not achieve these plans or objectives. You should read this report completely and with the understanding that actual future results may be materially different from what we expect. We will not update forward-looking statements even though our situation may change in the future.
Some, but not all, of the factors that could cause actual results to differ from those implied by the forward-looking statements in this report are more fully described in the “Risk Factors” section of this report.
Industry data and other statistical information used in this report are based on independent publications, government publications, reports by market research firms or other published independent sources. Some data are also based on our good faith estimates, derived from our review of internal surveys and the independent sources listed above. Although we believe these sources are reliable, we have not independently verified the information.
Due to the recent outbreak of the coronavirus in the U.S. and globally, our customers may be impacted. The impact of the coronavirus on our future results could be significant and will largely depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the coronavirus, the success of actions taken to contain or treat the coronavirus, and reactions by consumers, companies, governmental entities and capital markets. It is possible we will have collection issues or customer concessions as a result.
BACKLOG
The Company’s backlog generally consists of incomplete system installations and expansion of offerings for currently installed and supported systems.
The Company had one project in its backlog at December 31, 2019. The Company had two projects in its backlog as of December 31, 2020.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the Company has three signed new contracts with customers.
The Company is currently serving gaming establishments in thirteen U.S. states, as well as countries in Central and South America, the Caribbean and Australia. The Company aims to pursue further opportunities and strategic partnerships.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Management believes that the Company has adequate cash to meet its obligations and continue operations for both existing customer contracts and ongoing product development for at least the next 12 months from the date of this filing. In February 2020, the Company obtained a $500,000 line of credit with a lender. The Company’s primary sources of liquidity are cash, receivables and potentially other current assets. In February 2021 we applied and were approved for a second draw in the amount of $473,400 of the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loan through the Small Business Administration. This loan will allow us to continue to employ all existing employees to service our client base. Management is not aware of any trends or any known demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that will result in or that are reasonably likely to result in the registrant’s liquidity increasing or decreasing in any material way.
The Company’s cash position at December 31, 2020 was $1,731,869, an increase of $468,107 from $1,263,762 at December 31, 2019. Net cash flows used by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $5,293 compared to cash provided by operating activities of $55,131 for the same period in 2019. This decrease of $60,424 was primarily due to a decrease in income from operations and net changes in accounts receivable and payables.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0 during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $28,445 for the same period in 2019. This decrease of $28,445 was due to no capital expenditures during 2020.
Net cash provided in financing activities was $473,400 during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to cash used of $53,721 for the same period in 2019. This increase of $527,121 was caused primarily by the company receiving funds from the PPP loan during 2020.
On December 31, 2020, total stockholders’ equity was $4,693,493 compared to $4,357,224 in 2019, an increase of $336,269 or 7.7%, which was primarily due to 2020 net income.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, YEAR ENDED December 31, 2020 COMPARED TO YEAR ENDED December 31, 2019
The most significant events that affected the 2020 results of operations were the Company’s (1) installation of ten casino management systems at nine operating entities; and (2) expansion in Minnesota, Nevada, Oklahoma and South Dakota.
See Note 1: Revenue, disaggregated revenues by major product line table
Total revenues decreased $3,507,020, a 44.3% decrease, due to fewer and smaller installations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 as compared to 2019. System sales decreased $2,048,180, a 56% decrease, due to the smaller amount of systems that were installed in 2020 compared to 2019. Maintenance revenue decreased $214,716, an 8% decrease, due to an increase in COVID-19 related customer credits issued during 2020. Service and other revenue, which includes promotional kiosk software sales and licensing agreements decreased $1,244,124, as a result of the one time licensing agreement with a customer in Japan that occurred in 2019.
During 2020, the Company delivered a total of ten systems in the United States. Some of the revenue for the installations did not meet our collectability criterion, and will be recognized upon receipt of customers payments. During 2019, the Company delivered 29 systems.
Cost of sales decreased to $1,073,523 in 2020 from $2,457,077 in 2019. The decrease of $1,383,554 was primarily due to fewer and smaller installations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The following table summarizes our cost of sales:
The gross profit in 2020 was $3,327,918 or 76% of sales compared with $5,451,384 or 69% of sales in 2019. This decrease is primarily due to the number of smaller unit sales in 2020 verses 2019.
Total operating expenses decreased to $3,670,912 in 2020 from $4,528,567 in 2019. This 19% decrease of $857,655 was primarily due to the decrease in marketing and sales activities in 2020 compared to 2019 as a result of COVID-19.
The income tax benefit was $97,000 in 2020, for an effective rate of -46.21%, compared to income tax expense of $174,000 for an effective rate of 17.8% in 2019. The decrease in effective rates is primarily due to the nontaxability of the Paycheck Protection Program loan forgiveness.
Other income was $473,400 in 2020 as compared to $0 in 2019. This increase was comprised of the PPP loan forgiveness income.
The net income for 2020 was $ 306,893 compared to net income of $ 805,265 for 2019, which is a decrease of $498,372.
The basic and diluted earnings per share in 2020 were $ 0.07 compared to basic and diluted earnings per share of $ 0.18 in 2019.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
None.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The Company’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon its financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, the Company evaluates these estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, bad debts, inventory valuation, intangible assets, and income taxes. The Company bases these estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The estimates and judgments that the Company believes have the most effect on its reported financial position and results of operations are as follows:
Revenue Recognition
The Company derives revenues from the sales of systems, licenses and maintenance fees, services, and rental agreements.
System Sales
Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products and services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. We enter into contracts that can include various combinations of products and services, which are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations. Revenue is recognized net of any taxes collected, when applicable from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer, and is a unit of account in ASC 606. A majority of the Company’s systems sales have multiple performance obligations including an obligation to deliver a casino management system and another to provide maintenance services. For system sales with multiple performance obligations, the Company allocates revenue to each performance obligation based on its SSP. See discussion with in the significant judgement paragraph regarding our determination of SSP. At contract inception, management assesses whether it is probable that the company will collect substantially all of the consideration to determine whether the contract meets the criterion for collectability. The revenue allocated to the casino management system is recognized upon installation. The Company occasionally enters into contracts that include multiple sites; management has determined that each site installation is a separate performance obligation. In these instances, the Company recognizes revenue upon completion of each performance obligation. In addition, the Company has a contract with a reseller who purchases and resells the Company’s products; monthly the reseller notifies the Company of their successful installations, and submits an invoice to the Company for those installations. The Company also analyzes its standard business practice of using long-term contracts and the history of collecting on extended payment term contracts which include a significant financing component which is usually a market interest rate. The associated interest income is reflected accordingly on the statement of operations.
Management’s assessment of collectability at both contract inception and on an ongoing basis resulted in the determination that some of our contracts did not meet the criterion for collectability. The balance of these contracts are not included as part of accounts receivable on the balance sheet. Accordingly, for these contracts whereby the collectability criterion has not been met, revenue will be recognized as payments are received.
Maintenance Revenue
Maintenance revenue is recognized ratably over the contract period. The SSP for maintenance is based upon the renewal rate for contracted services.
Service Revenue and Other Revenue
Service revenue is recognized upon completion of the services and are billed in arrears. The SSP for service revenue is established based upon actual selling prices for the services or prior similar arrangements.
The Company offers qualified customers a licensing agreement. Licensing revenue is recognized after the intellectual property (CMS system), the performance obligation, is delivered and in its operational and functional state. The stand-alone selling price for licensing revenue is established based upon actual selling prices for the license.
See also Note 1.
Accounts Receivable / Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable are initially recorded at the invoiced amount and carried on the balance sheet at net realizable value as of each balance sheet date. For receivables related to contracts that contain an interest rate, interest is recorded upon receipt to interest income on the statements of operations. An allowance for doubtful accounts is recorded when the Company believes the amounts may not be collected. Management believes that receivables, net of the allowance for doubtful accounts, are fully collectible. Accounts receivable are written off when management determines collection is no longer likely. While the ultimate result may differ, management believes that any write-off not allowed for will not have a material impact on the Company’s financial position.
Inventory
Inventory, consisting of finished goods, is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. The average cost method (which approximates first in, first out method) is used to value inventory. Inventory is reviewed annually for the lower of cost or net realizable value and obsolescence. Any material cost found to be above market value or considered obsolete is written down accordingly. The Company had $45,045 and $0 of obsolescence reserves at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are provided for using the liability method of accounting. A deferred tax asset or liability is recorded for all temporary differences between financial and tax reporting. Temporary differences are the differences between the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax basis. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted for the effect of changes in tax laws and rates on the date of enactment.