ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, include forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Investors in our securities should review Item 1A. “Risk Factors” for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Our goal is to slow the progression of chronic kidney disease, or CKD, through the treatment of metabolic acidosis. We are a pharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of our investigational drug candidate, veverimer (also known as TRC101), a non-absorbed, orally-administered polymer designed to treat metabolic acidosis by binding and removing acid from the gastrointestinal tract. Metabolic acidosis is a serious condition commonly caused by CKD and is believed to accelerate the progression of kidney deterioration. It can also lead to bone loss, muscle wasting and impaired physical function. Metabolic acidosis in patients with CKD is typically a chronic disease and, as such, requires long-term treatment to mitigate its deleterious consequences.
There are currently no therapies approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, for treating chronic metabolic acidosis. We estimate that metabolic acidosis affects approximately 3 million patients with CKD in the United States, and we believe that treating metabolic acidosis and slowing the progression of CKD in patients with metabolic acidosis and CKD represents a significant unmet medical need and market opportunity.
Veverimer is an in-house discovered, new chemical entity. We have a broad intellectual property estate that we believe will provide patent protection for veverimer until at least 2038 in the United States, at least 2035 in Europe and Russia, and at least 2034 in Australia, China, Hong Kong, Israel, Japan, Mexico and certain other markets.
Veverimer is a low-swelling, spherical polymer bead that is approximately 100 micrometers in diameter. It is a single, high molecular weight, crosslinked polyamine molecule. The size of veverimer prevents systemic absorption from the GI tract. The high degree of cross-linking within veverimer limits swelling and the overall volume in the GI tract, with the goal of facilitating good GI tolerability. The high amine content of veverimer provides proton binding capacity of approximately 10 mEq/gram of polymer. The size exclusion built into the three-dimensional structure of the polymer enables preferential binding of chloride versus larger inorganic and organic anions, including phosphate, citrate, fatty acids and bile acids. This size exclusion mechanism allows a majority of the binding capacity to be used for hydrochloric acid binding.
We submitted our New Drug Application, or NDA, for veverimer through the Accelerated Approval Program as a chronic treatment for metabolic acidosis and slowing of kidney disease progression in patients with metabolic acidosis associated with CKD, for review by the FDA in August 2019. Results from our Phase 3, 12-week efficacy trial, TRCA-301, and a follow-on 40-week extension trial, TRCA-301E, formed the primary basis of our NDA submission. The TRCA-301 trial met both its primary and secondary endpoints in a highly statistically significant manner (p < 0.0001 for both the primary and secondary endpoints). The TRCA-301E trial met its primary and all secondary endpoints. The Lancet published the results of the TRCA-301 trial in March 2019 and the results of the TRCA-301E trial in June 2019.
In August 2020, we received a Complete Response Letter, or CRL, from the FDA related to our NDA for veverimer. According to the CRL, the FDA is seeking additional data beyond the TRCA-301/TRCA-301E trial regarding the magnitude and durability of the treatment effect of veverimer on the surrogate marker of serum bicarbonate and expressed concern regarding whether the demonstrated effect size would be reasonably likely to predict clinical benefit. In addition, the CRL questioned the applicability of the treatment effect to the U.S. population and the practice of medicine in the United States. The FDA also expressed concern as to the reliability of the findings given that the findings for the TRCA-301/TRCA-301E trial, were driven by a single, high-enrolling trial site located in Eastern Europe. The CRL did not raise any concerns related to FDA’s completed inspection of the highest enrolling clinical trial site in the TRCA-301/TRCA-301E trial and there was no FDA Form 483 issued. There were no safety, clinical pharmacology/biopharmaceutics, CMC, or non-clinical issues identified in the CRL. The CRL provided multiple options for resolving the identified deficiencies, including submission of the data from at least one
additional adequate and well-controlled trial demonstrating the efficacy of veverimer for the treatment of metabolic acidosis associated with CKD.
We held an End-of-Review Type A meeting, or Type A meeting, with the FDA's Division of Cardiology and Nephrology, or the Division, in October 2020. The Division agreed, in principle, that an interim analysis of serum bicarbonate data from the VALOR-CKD trial proposed by Tricida could address the Division's concerns regarding the reliability of the TRCA-301/TRCA-301E trial data and the relevance of those trial findings to the U.S. population provided certain conditions were met. Based on other feedback from the FDA during the Type A meeting, we believed the Division would also require evidence of veverimer's effect on CKD progression from a near-term interim analysis of the VALOR-CKD trial for accelerated approval and that the FDA would be unlikely to rely solely on serum bicarbonate data for determination of efficacy. Accordingly, we submitted a Formal Dispute Resolution Request, or FDRR, solely requesting that the Office of New Drugs, or OND, find that the magnitude of serum bicarbonate change seen in the TRCA-301/TRCA-301E trial is reasonably likely to predict clinical benefit in the treatment of metabolic acidosis associated with CKD and that it can therefore serve as the basis for accelerated approval.
In February 2021, the OND issued a decision on our FDRR. While the OND acknowledged that the TRCA-301 and TRCA-301E trials met their serum bicarbonate endpoints with statistical significance, the OND denied the appeal. In its Appeal Denied Letter, or ADL, the OND not only addressed the issue of magnitude of serum bicarbonate change, but cited all of the deficiencies in the CRL in concluding that the data provided in support of the veverimer NDA did not support approval through the Accelerated Approval Program. The OND concluded that the magnitude of the increases in serum bicarbonate levels shown in the TRCA-301/TRCA-301E trial was not of sufficient size or duration to establish that treatment with veverimer would be reasonably likely to provide a discernible reduction in CKD progression. In addition, the OND found that the intended confirmatory trial, VALOR-CKD (also known as TRCA-303), was underpowered to detect a 13% reduction in slowing of CKD progression. This finding was based on information included in the initial NDA submission including the placebo-subtracted LS mean change from baseline in serum bicarbonate observed in the TRCA-301/TRCA-301E trial and the original Predictive MA Model. The OND also raised concerns regarding the robustness of the study results given that the veverimer NDA was supported by a single registrational trial (TRCA-301/TRCA-301E), which must, alone, provide persuasive evidence of benefit. Specifically, the OND noted concerns around adequate blinding, the trial results being strongly influenced by a single site, and the majority of sites for the TRCA-301/TRCA-301E trial being in Eastern Europe, where differences in patient management, including concomitant medications and diet, might affect the treatment response to veverimer and raise a concern of the applicability to a U.S. patient population. The OND also stated that, while trial results in the TRCA-301/TRCA-301E trial showed improvement in two patient-reported measures, the KDQOL Physical Functioning Survey and the Repeated Chair Stand Test, the OND viewed this subjective data from a single trial with skepticism in the absence of data from a second trial with similar results, and noted that both endpoints would require rigorous blinding to support robust conclusions. However, the OND noted that both of these changes, if eventually established by one or more additional trials, would indicate a potentially meaningful benefit of veverimer treatment-especially in CKD patients who have physical functional impairments. Separate from the ADL, we previously received feedback from the Division of Clinical Outcome Assessment, or DCOA, that reliance on these physical function endpoints for approval may require further validation.
Based on the ADL, we believe that we now have greater clarity on the potential approval of veverimer through the Accelerated Approval Program. The OND suggested that we meet with the Division to discuss submission of Week 52 serum bicarbonate results from the full randomized trial population of VALOR-CKD and that the trial should include a substantial portion of patients from the United States or from regions with “U.S.-like” patients. If the results of this trial were to demonstrate that veverimer provides a meaningfully larger treatment effect than seen in the TRCA-301/TRCA-301E trial, then this trial, along with the results from the TRCA-301/TRCA-301E trial, could address the concerns raised in the CRL regarding the limitations and the size of the treatment response observed in the TRCA-301/TRCA-301E trial. However, whether the extent of increase in serum bicarbonate in any subsequent submission based on VALOR-CKD would support accelerated approval will remain a review issue, and will, in part, reflect the Division’s assessment of the adequacy (i.e., power) of VALOR-CKD to detect the anticipated treatment effect of CKD progression in a reasonable timeframe.
Although the ADL provides greater clarity on the potential path for approval of veverimer through the Accelerated Approval Program, we believe the timeline to meet the requirements for accelerated approval as suggested in the ADL may not result in the most rapid development path for veverimer. For example, if either of the planned interim analyses in VALOR-CKD for early stopping for efficacy results in positive renal outcomes data, this data could be available before the week 52 serum bicarbonate data from the fully enrolled VALOR-CKD trial
suggested in the ADL and could serve as the basis for resubmission of the NDA. We are evaluating several options with respect to the VALOR-CKD trial that are focused on obtaining, prior to the end of 2022, additional data on the effect of veverimer on (1) CKD progression; (2) physical functioning; and (3) serum bicarbonate. We may explore the possibility of stopping the trial early for administrative reasons, which would allow analysis of the data using all alpha remaining at that time. In any event, we believe data from VALOR-CKD will be very important in furthering our understanding of the regulatory path for approval of veverimer. As such, we intend to continue the execution of the VALOR-CKD trial with consideration of both the accelerated and traditional approval pathways. Resubmission of the veverimer NDA may require additional clinical data beyond that provided by the VALOR-CKD trial.
Our ongoing VALOR-CKD trial is a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled time-to-event trial. The primary endpoint event in VALOR-CKD is defined as renal death, end-stage renal disease (ESRD) or a confirmed ≥ 40% reduction in estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) (DD40). We anticipate randomizing approximately 1,600 subjects in VALOR-CKD and the trial is currently designed to terminate when the independent blinded Clinical Endpoint Adjudication Committee (CEAC) has positively adjudicated 511 subjects with primary endpoint events, which is anticipated to occur in the first half of 2024. The VALOR-CKD trial also includes interim analyses for early stopping for efficacy after 150 primary endpoint events (anticipated in the second half of 2021, based on the current rate of event accrual) and 250 primary endpoint events (anticipated in mid-2022, based on the current rate of event accrual) have accrued. These interim analyses will be conducted by an independent unblinded Interim Analysis Committee. If the independent unblinded Interim Analysis Committee does not recommend stopping the trial early for efficacy, we will receive no information from these interim analyses. The VALOR-CKD trial also includes, as its first two secondary efficacy endpoints, evaluation of the effect of veverimer versus placebo after one year of treatment on patient-reported and objective measures of physical functioning, using the KDQOL Physical Functioning Survey and the Repeated Chair Stand test, respectively. Although not part of any efficacy endpoints, the VALOR-CKD trial will also provide information regarding the change from baseline in serum bicarbonate in veverimer and placebo-treated subjects.
We initiated enrollment in the VALOR-CKD trial in the fourth quarter of 2018 and have established sites throughout North America, Europe, Latin America and Asia-Pacific. As of February 22, 2021, the VALOR-CKD trial has randomized 1,433 of 1,600 subjects with an average treatment duration of approximately one year and has accrued 69 subjects with positively adjudicated primary endpoint events. In November 2020, based on feedback from the FDA, recruitment for VALOR-CKD was closed in all regions except for the United States, Canada and Western Europe. At the end of recruitment, we anticipate approximately 67% of subjects to be enrolled at Eastern European sites, 19% at U.S., Western European and Canadian sites, 7% at Latin American sites, and 7% at sites in the Asia-Pacific region. Our goal is to complete enrollment by the end of 2021; to meet this goal we may need to reopen recruitment at sites outside of the United States, but we will not reopen recruitment at sites in Eastern Europe. We intend to ensure that no single site in the VALOR-CKD trial provides ≥ 5% of the total number of trial subjects. The FDA’s acceptance of the VALOR-CKD data in support of an NDA resubmission, including its assessment of the magnitude and durability of the veverimer treatment effect across the various geographical regions where the study is conducted and the acceptability of the data from non-U.S. countries or regions which will comprise a substantial proportion of the data from the trial, will ultimately be a review issue.
Together with our investigators, contract research organizations, or CROs, and other contract service providers, we are regularly assessing the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on recruitment and retention of subjects in, and power of, our ongoing VALOR-CKD trial. At this time, safety monitoring activities, adjudication of endpoint events and provision of clinical trial supplies have not been materially affected by COVID-19. The annualized rate of all-cause mortality in VALOR-CKD is higher than we estimated when designing the trial, in part due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We estimated the study would have an annualized study discontinuation rate, which comprises deaths, subjects lost to follow up and those who withdraw their consent to continue to participate and be followed in the study, of 5%; currently the annualized study discontinuation rate is 6%. While we do not believe the ongoing VALOR-CKD trial has been materially affected to date by the COVID-19 pandemic, to the extent current trends continue, there may be negative impacts on the trial in the future, including but not limited to patient recruitment, retention or powering. We have provided investigators additional guidance per general FDA and European Medicines Agency, or EMA, recommendations on clinical trial conduct during COVID-19 to ensure the ongoing VALOR-CKD trial is effectively conducted with the utmost attention to trial subject and investigator safety while maintaining compliance with applicable clinical trial regulations and GCP and minimizing risks to the trial’s integrity. We will continue to monitor the potential impact that COVID-19 may have on our ongoing VALOR-CKD trial.
At this time, we believe we have sufficient drug substance and access to sufficient drug product manufacturing capacity to supply the anticipated demand of our ongoing VALOR-CKD trial through conclusion of the trial. Veverimer drug substance manufacturing is conducted for us by Patheon Austria GmbH & Co KG, or Patheon, in their Linz, Austria facility. We are in regular communication with Patheon and PCI Pharma Services, our drug product manufacturer and, to our knowledge, there have not been business disruptions at these sites due to COVID-19 affecting the production of veverimer drug substance and drug product. At this time, we have not experienced any material disruption in the distribution network for veverimer, including the provision of raw materials, the shipping of drug substance and drug product and the provision of clinical trial supplies to trial participants.
We have no products approved for marketing, and we have not generated any revenue from product sales or other arrangements. From our inception in 2013 through December 31, 2020, we have primarily funded our operations through the sale of $152.4 million of convertible preferred stock, net proceeds of $237.7 million from our initial public offering, or IPO, on July 2, 2018, net proceeds of $217.9 million from our underwritten public offering on April 8, 2019, net proceeds of $193.3 million from the issuance of Convertible Senior Notes on May 22, 2020 and net borrowing of $72.1 million after fees of $2.9 million under the Loan and Security Agreement, or Term Loan, entered into with Hercules Capital Inc., or Hercules, on February 28, 2018. We have incurred losses in each year since our inception in 2013. Our net losses were $264.8 million, $176.8 million and $102.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $633.8 million. Substantially all of our operating losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with advancing veverimer through development activities and general and administrative costs associated with pre-commercialization activities and administrative functions. At this time, COVID-19 has not materially impacted our current financial resources or our outlook.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year. We expect our expenses will continue in connection with our ongoing activities as we:
•conduct clinical studies of veverimer, including the ongoing VALOR-CKD trial;
•continue to optimize the manufacturing processes and manufacture drug substance and drug product to support the ongoing VALOR-CKD trial and the commercial launch, if approved;
•increase our research and development efforts;
•create additional infrastructure to support our product development;
•seek regulatory approval for veverimer, including any activities necessary for the resubmission of the NDA for veverimer;
•maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
•maintain operational, financial and management information systems to support ongoing operations, including operating as a public company.
We do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for veverimer. If we obtain regulatory approval for veverimer, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. Accordingly, we will seek to fund our operations through available cash from our prior equity offerings, the Convertible Senior Note issuance and financing under the Hercules facility, and, as necessary, through additional public or private equity or debt financings or other sources. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and ability to develop veverimer.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense consists primarily of costs associated with the development of veverimer and includes salaries, bonuses, benefits, travel and other related costs, including stock-based compensation
expense, for personnel engaged in research and development functions; expenses incurred under agreements with CROs, investigative sites and consultants that conduct our nonclinical and clinical studies; manufacturing processes optimization and the cost of manufacturing drug substance for commercial and clinical use as well as drug product to support the ongoing VALOR-CKD trial; payments to consultants engaged in the development of veverimer, including stock-based compensation, travel and other expenses; costs related to compliance with quality and regulatory requirements; research and development facility-related expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses, and other related costs. Research and development expense is charged to operations as incurred when these expenditures relate to our research and development efforts and have no alternative future uses. Payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are capitalized until the goods or services are received.
All of our research and development expense to date has been incurred in connection with veverimer. We expect our research and development expense to increase for the foreseeable future as we optimize our manufacturing processes and advance veverimer through clinical development, including our ongoing VALOR-CKD trial. The process of conducting clinical studies necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming and the successful development of veverimer is highly uncertain. As a result, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when, and to what extent, we will generate revenue from commercialization and sale of veverimer, if approved. Therefore, we are unable to estimate with any certainty the costs we will incur in the continued development of veverimer. The degree of success, timelines and cost of development can differ materially from expectations. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for veverimer.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense consists primarily of salaries, bonuses, benefits, travel, stock-based compensation expense and facility-related expenses for personnel in finance and administrative functions. General and administrative expense also includes professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, accounting and audit services, pre-commercial preparation, medical affairs costs and recruiting services for the potential launch of veverimer and other related costs.
Restructuring Costs
The Company records expenses related to restructuring activities in operating expenses as part of research and development expense and general and administrative expense as appropriate.
On September 10, 2020, the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors approved the Tricida, Inc. 2020 Reduction in Force Severance Benefit Plan, or 2020 Restructuring Plan. On September 18, 2020, we implemented a restructuring, or Third Quarter 2020 Restructuring, under the 2020 Restructuring Plan to streamline the organization and preserve capital that included the elimination of approximately 21.5% of our workforce as of September 18, 2020 and other cost reductions. Restructuring costs of $2.4 million and $0.3 million were recorded in general and administrative expense and research and development expense, respectively, in our statements of operations and comprehensive loss during the year ended December 31, 2020.
On October 25, 2020, our Board of Directors approved and on October 28, 2020, we implemented a restructuring under the 2020 Restructuring Plan, or Fourth Quarter 2020 Restructuring, to reduce operating costs and better align our workforce with the needs of our business following the completion of the Type A meeting with the FDA in October 2020. The Fourth Quarter 2020 Restructuring resulted in the elimination of approximately 60.0% of our workforce as of October 28, 2020 and included one-time termination severance payments and other employee-related costs, and exit costs including contract termination costs and accelerated depreciation of capitalized software. Restructuring costs of $10.2 million and $0.9 million were recorded in general and administrative expense and research and development expense, respectively, in our statements of operations and comprehensive loss during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Results of Operations
The following table presents our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
N/M = Not meaningful
Research and Development Expense
The following table presents our research and development expense for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Research and development expense increased by $15.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to activities in connection with our veverimer clinical development program, resulting in increased clinical development costs of $19.1 million related to our manufacturing processes optimization and drug substance manufacturing costs related to our VALOR-CKD trial, partially offset by lower recruiting costs related to the VALOR-CKD trial and our TRCA-301E trial completed in March 2019 and the refund of the veverimer NDA application fee; increased personnel and related costs of $0.4 million related to the Fourth Quarter 2020 Restructuring and the Third Quarter 2020 Restructuring, partially offset by a decrease in bonus expense; a decrease in stock-based compensation expense of $2.6 million related to performance awards granted in 2019 and awards fully vested in 2019, partially offset by annual awards granted in February 2020; and a decrease in other research and development costs of $1.5 million, primarily related to lower travel, recruiting and office expenses.
Research and development expense increased by $47.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was due to activities in connection with our veverimer clinical development program, resulting in increased clinical development costs of $31.5 million related to our VALOR-CKD trial, scale-up costs related to the optimization of our manufacturing process and the veverimer NDA application fee, partially offset by reduced expenditures associated with our TRCA-301 trial completed in May 2018, our drug-drug interaction studies completed in March 2019 and our TRCA-301E trial completed in March 2019; increased personnel and related costs of $4.4 million related to headcount growth; increased stock-based compensation expense of $10.9 million related to headcount growth, performance awards granted in 2019 and higher fair values of awards granted; and increased other research and development costs of $0.7 million, primarily related to facilities and office expenses.
General and Administrative Expense
The following table presents our general and administrative expense for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
General and administrative expense increased by $57.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to pre-commercialization and associated administrative activities in connection with our veverimer clinical development program, resulting in increased personnel and related costs of $23.1 million primarily due to headcount growth in the first half of 2020 and costs related to the Third Quarter 2020 Restructuring and the Fourth Quarter 2020 Restructuring, partially offset by a decrease in bonus expense; increased stock-based compensation expense of $5.7 million due to additional awards in 2020, including annual awards granted in February 2020, partially offset by performance awards granted in 2019; and additional other general and administrative costs of $28.3 million, which primarily related to pre-commercialization activities, medical affairs activities, contract termination costs related to the Third Quarter 2020 Restructuring and the Fourth Quarter 2020 Restructuring, recruiting, training, business insurance premiums and legal services.
General and administrative expense increased by $27.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was due to pre-commercialization and administrative activities in connection with our veverimer clinical development program, resulting in increased personnel and related costs of $5.7 million primarily due to headcount growth; increased stock-based compensation expense of $9.1 million due to headcount growth, performance awards granted in 2019 and higher fair value of awards granted; and additional other general and administrative costs of $13.0 million, which primarily related to pre-commercialization costs, legal services and business insurance premium.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
From our inception in 2013 through December 31, 2020, we have primarily funded our operations through the sale of $152.4 million of convertible preferred stock, net proceeds of $237.7 million from our IPO on July 2, 2018, net proceeds of $217.9 million from our underwritten public offering on April 8, 2019, net proceeds of $193.3 million from the issuance of Convertible Senior Notes on May 22, 2020 and net borrowing of $72.1 million under the Term Loan. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term and long-term investments of $332.3 million.
Hercules Loan and Security Agreement
On February 28, 2018, we entered into the Term Loan with Hercules. The Term Loan provided for a loan in an aggregate principal amount of up to $100.0 million to be funded in five tranches subject to certain performance-based milestones. The first tranche, in the amount of $25.0 million, was funded on the closing date of the Term Loan.
On October 15, 2018, we entered into the second amendment to the Term Loan with Hercules, which amended certain terms of the Term Loan. After giving effect to the second amendment, the Term Loan continued to provide for a loan in an aggregate principal amount of up to $100.0 million to be funded in five tranches subject to certain performance-based milestones. The second tranche was reduced from $25.0 million to $15.0 million and was funded on December 28, 2018.
On March 27, 2019, we modified the Term Loan with Hercules by entering into the third amendment to the Term Loan. After giving effect to the third amendment, the amount available under the Term Loan is increased from up to $100.0 million to up to $200.00 million to be funded in tranches, subject to certain performance-based milestones, and the maturity of the Term Loan is extended. Under the terms of the Term Loan, as amended by the third amendment, the $40.0 million principal outstanding under the Term Loan at the date of the modification
remains outstanding, and additional tranches of $20.0 million and $15.0 million will be available for draw down prior to December 15, 2019 and December 15, 2020, respectively. An additional tranche of $75.0 million was to be available for draw down between January 1, 2020 and December 15, 2020, on the condition that we obtain final approval from the FDA of the NDA for veverimer. A final tranche of $50.0 million was to be available for draw down on or prior to December 15, 2021, upon our request and the approval of Hercules' investment committee. On December 13, 2019, the third tranche of the Term Loan was funded in the amount of $20.0 million.
On May 18, 2020, we entered into the fifth amendment to the Term Loan with Hercules. After giving effect to the fifth amendment, the additional tranche of $75.0 million was split into two separate tranches of $25.0 million and $50.0 million. The $25.0 million tranche was to be available for draw down between January 1, 2020 and December 15, 2020, on the condition that we obtained final approval from the FDA of the NDA for veverimer on or before December 15, 2020. The $50.0 million tranche was to be available for draw down between January 1, 2021 and June 30, 2021, on the condition that the $25.0 million tranche had been drawn and final approval had been received for the NDA for veverimer on or before December 15, 2020. A final tranche of $50.0 million was to be available for draw down on or prior to December 15, 2021, upon our request and the approval of Hercules' investment committee. The fifth amendment also permits us to issue certain convertible notes and cash payments to redeem or settle such convertible notes in accordance with the terms thereof. Such cash settlement or redemption is subject to a requirement that we maintain unrestricted cash in an amount not less than 100% of the outstanding obligations under the Term Loan from and after any such cash settlement or redemption, and that there be no default or event of default under the Term Loan at the time of such cash settlement or redemption. On May 19, 2020, the fourth tranche of the Term Loan was funded in the amount of $15.0 million.
The Term Loan bears interest at a floating per annum interest rate equal to the greater of either (i) 8.35% or (ii) the lesser of (x) 8.35% plus the prime rate as reported in The Wall Street Journal minus 6.00% and (y) 9.85%. The maturity date of the Term Loan is April 1, 2023 and we will initially be making interest-only payments until April 1, 2021. Upon expiration of the interest-only period, we will repay the Term Loan in equal monthly installments comprised of principal and interest, based on a 30-month amortization schedule, through maturity. We will pay an additional amount of (a) $2.6 million due on March 1, 2022 and (b) the product of 7.55% and the aggregate loans funded under the Term Loan due at maturity or on any earlier date on which the loans become due. If we prepay the Term Loan, we will be required to pay a prepayment charge equal to (i) 2.00% of the amount being prepaid at any time during the first 12 months following the effective date of the third amendment (ii) 1.50% of the amount being prepaid after 12 months but prior to 24 months following the effective date of the third amendment (iii) 1.00% of the amount being prepaid after 24 months but prior to 36 months following the effective date of the third amendment and (iv) zero if prepaid any time after 36 months following the effective date of the third amendment but prior to the maturity.
On January 6, 2021, we entered into the sixth amendment to the Term Loan with Hercules. The sixth amendment provides for, among other things, a decrease in the amount available under the Term Loan from $200.0 million to $75.0 million. The loan repayment schedule provides for interest only payments until April 1, 2022, followed by consecutive equal monthly amortization payments of principal and interest through the maturity date. The maturity date of the Loan Agreement is October 1, 2023, subject to extension to April 1, 2024 on the condition that we obtain final approval from the FDA for the NDA for veverimer on or before October 1, 2023. The sixth amendment also eliminates prepayment charges for prepayments of principal of the Term Loan made on or after March 1, 2021.
The Term Loan is secured by substantially all of our assets, except our intellectual property, which is the subject of a negative pledge; however, the collateral does consist of rights to payments and proceeds from the sale, licensing or disposition of all or any part of, or rights in, its intellectual property. Under the Term Loan, we are subject to certain covenants, including but not limited to requirements to deliver financial reports at designated times of the year and maintain a minimum level of cash. These covenants also limit or restrict our ability to incur additional indebtedness or liens, acquire, own or make any investments, pay cash dividends, repurchase stock or enter into certain corporate transactions, including mergers and changes of control.
Convertible Senior Notes
On May 22, 2020, we issued $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.50% convertible senior notes due 2027, or Convertible Senior Notes, pursuant to an indenture, dated as of May 22, 2020, or the Indenture, between us and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee, or the Trustee. The offering and sale of the Convertible Senior Notes were made by us to the initial purchasers in reliance on the exemption from registration provided by Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act, for resale by the initial purchasers to qualified institutional buyers (as defined in the Securities Act) pursuant to the exemption from registration provided by Rule 144A under the Securities Act. The issuance includes the exercise in full by the initial purchasers of their option to purchase an additional $25.0 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Senior Notes. Net proceeds from the offering were $193.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering costs of approximately $6.7 million.
Our Convertible Senior Notes are senior unsecured obligations, and interest is payable semi-annually in arrears on May 15 and November 15 of each year, beginning on November 15, 2020. The Convertible Senior Notes mature on May 15, 2027, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted and are not redeemable prior to May 20, 2024. We may redeem for cash all or any portion of the Convertible Senior Notes, at our option, on or after May 20, 2024 and on or before the 40th scheduled trading day immediately prior to the maturity date, if the last reported sale price of our common stock has been at least 130% of the conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive), including the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide notice of redemption, during any 30 consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide notice of redemption at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Senior Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. We are not required to provide and no sinking fund is provided for the Convertible Senior Notes.
The Convertible Senior Notes are convertible into cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock at our election at an initial conversion rate of 30.0978 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the Convertible Senior Notes, which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $33.23 per share of our common stock. The conversion rate is subject to customary adjustments for certain events as described in the Indenture. It is our current intent to settle conversions through combination settlement, which involves repayment of the principal portion in cash and any excess of the conversion value over the principal amount in shares of its common stock. As of December 31, 2020, the “if-converted value” did not exceed the remaining principal amount of the Convertible Senior Notes.
Holders may convert their Convertible Senior Notes, at their option, prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding February 15, 2027, only under the following circumstances:
•during any fiscal quarter commencing after the calendar quarter ending on September 30, 2020, if the last reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the last trading day of the immediately preceding calendar quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price on each applicable trading day;
•during the five consecutive business day period immediately following any ten consecutive trading day period, or the Measurement Period, in which the trading price per $1,000 principal amount of the Convertible Senior Notes, as determined following a request by a holder of notes in accordance with certain procedures described in the Indenture, for each trading day of the Measurement Period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sales price of our common stock and the conversion rate on each such trading day;
•upon the occurrence of certain corporate events or distributions of our common stock, as described in the Indenture;
•after our issuance of a notice of redemption; or
•at any time from, and including, February 15, 2027 until the close of business on the trading day immediately before the maturity date.
If we undergo a fundamental change, as described in the Indenture, subject to certain conditions, holders may require us to repurchase for cash all or any portion of their Convertible Senior Notes. The fundamental change repurchase price is equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Senior Notes to be repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest up to, but excluding, the fundamental change repurchase date. In addition, following
certain corporate events that occur prior to the maturity date or if we deliver a notice of redemption, we will increase, in certain circumstances, the conversion rate for a holder who elects to convert its Convertible Senior Notes in connection with such a corporate event or notice of redemption, as the case may be.
The Convertible Senior Notes are our senior unsecured obligations and rank senior in right of payment to any of our indebtedness that is expressly subordinated in right of payment to the Convertible Senior Notes; equal in right of payment to any of our unsecured indebtedness that is not so subordinated; effectively subordinated in right of payment to any of our secured indebtedness, including secured indebtedness under the Term Loan, to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness; and structurally subordinated to all indebtedness and other liabilities (including trade payables) of our future subsidiaries, if any.
The Indenture contains customary events of default with respect to the Convertible Senior Notes and provides that upon certain events of default occurring and continuing, the trustee may, and the trustee at the request of holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the Convertible Senior Notes shall declare all principal and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, of the Convertible Senior Notes to be due and payable. In case of certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization, involving us or a significant subsidiary, all of the principal of and accrued and unpaid interest on the Convertible Senior Notes will automatically become due and payable.
Funding Requirements
We have incurred losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception in 2013 and anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $633.8 million. We expect to incur additional losses in the future to conduct research and development and to conduct pre-commercialization activities and recognize that we may need to raise additional capital to fully implement our business plan.
Such future capital requirements are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors, including:
•the progress, outcome and results of our ongoing VALOR-CKD trial;
•the costs, timing and success of addressing the deficiencies identified by the FDA in the CRL and issues raised in the ADL related to our NDA for veverimer;
•our ability to obtain approval of our NDA for veverimer from the FDA under either traditional approval or the Accelerated Approval Program, if at all;
•the findings of the FDA during their routine inspections of our facility and the facilities of our contract manufacturers and clinical trial sites during the NDA review process and our ability to promptly and adequately address any such findings;
•the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of veverimer should we receive regulatory approval;
•our ability to maintain and enforce our intellectual property rights and defend any intellectual property-related claims;
•the costs, timing and success of the scale-up and optimization of the process of manufacturing veverimer, and our minimum and maximum commitments under the Manufacturing and Commercial Supply Agreement we entered into with Patheon on October 4, 2019, as the same may be amended from time to time;
•the costs, timing and success of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution, for veverimer if we receive regulatory approval and do not partner for commercialization;
•the cost of fulfilling our minimum contractual obligations to our suppliers and vendors; and
•the extent to which we acquire or in-license other products and technologies.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic partnerships and licensing arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include
liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic partnerships or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to veverimer, associated intellectual property, our other technologies, future revenue streams or research programs or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
However, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in securing additional funding at levels sufficient to fund our operations or on terms acceptable to us. If we are unsuccessful in our efforts to raise additional financing, we could be required to significantly reduce operating expenses and delay, reduce the scope of or eliminate some of our development programs or our future commercialization efforts, out-license intellectual property rights to our investigational drug candidates and sell unsecured assets, cease operations altogether or a combination of the above, any of which may have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and/or our ability to fund our scheduled obligations on a timely basis or at all.
On July 2, 2018, we completed our IPO and issued and sold an aggregate of 13,455,000 shares of common stock, including the underwriters’ exercise in full of their over-allotment option, a public offering price of $19.00 per share. Net proceeds were approximately $237.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions.
On April 8, 2019, we consummated an underwritten public offering and issued 6,440,000 shares of common stock, which included the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase 840,000 additional shares of common stock at an offering price of $36.00 per share for net proceeds of approximately $217.9 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $13.9 million.
On May 22, 2020, we issued $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.50% convertible senior notes due 2027, or Convertible Senior Notes, pursuant to an indenture, dated as of May 22, 2020, or the Indenture, between us and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee, or the Trustee. The offering and sale of the Convertible Senior Notes were made by us to the initial purchasers in reliance on the exemption from registration provided by Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act, for resale by the initial purchasers to qualified institutional buyers (as defined in the Securities Act) pursuant to the exemption from registration provided by Rule 144A under the Securities Act. The issuance includes the exercise in full by the initial purchasers of their option to purchase an additional $25.0 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Senior Notes. Net proceeds from the offering were $193.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering costs of approximately $6.7 million.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes the net cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $231.2 million, which consisted of a net loss of $264.8 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $38.2 million and changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $4.6 million. The non-cash charges consisted primarily of stock-based compensation of $28.3 million, accretion of Term Loan and Convertible Senior Notes of $8.3 million, depreciation and amortization of $0.9 million, non-cash operating lease costs of $0.8 million and non-cash restructuring costs of $0.7 million partially offset by changes in fair value of compound derivative liability and warrants of $0.8 million. The changes in our operating assets and liabilities were primarily due to a decrease in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $2.4 million and a decrease in accounts payable of $2.4 million, partially offset by a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of $0.2 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $129.6 million, which consisted of a net loss of $176.8 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $26.1 million and changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $21.1 million. The non-cash charges consisted primarily of stock-based compensation of $25.2 million, amortization of Term Loan discount and issuance costs of $2.2 million, amortization of operating lease right-of-use assets of $1.0 million, changes in fair value of compound derivative liability and warrants of $0.8 million and depreciation and amortization of $0.8 million, partially offset by net amortization of premiums and discounts on investments of $3.7 million. The changes in our operating assets and liabilities were primarily due to an increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $26.0 million, partially offset by a decrease in accounts payable of $2.6 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $1.5 million and a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $0.7 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, cash used in operating activities was $94.9 million, which consisted of a net loss of $102.8 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $5.8 million and changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $2.1 million. The non-cash charges consisted primarily of stock-based compensation of $5.2 million, amortization of Term Loan discount and issuance costs of $1.3 million and depreciation and amortization of $0.6 million, partially offset by net amortization of premiums and discounts on investments of $1.1 million. The changes in our operating assets and liabilities were primarily due to an increase in accounts payable of $4.6 million, partially offset by an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $1.3 million and a decrease in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $1.1 million.
Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $140.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in investing activities was $127.5 million and $148.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to proceeds from maturities and paydowns of investments of $429.6 million and proceeds from sale of investments of $41.7 million, partially offset by purchases of investments of $329.4 million and purchases of property and equipment of $1.6 million. The net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to purchases of investments of $497.5 million and purchases of property and equipment of $1.4 million, partially offset by maturities of investments of $371.4 million. The net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily due to purchases of investments of $233.9 and purchases of property and equipment of $0.9 million, partially offset by maturities of investments of $86.4 million.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $210.2 million, $238.5 million and $270.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to net proceeds from the issuance of Convertible Senior Notes of $193.3 million, Term Loan funding, net of issuance costs, of $15.0 million and proceeds from the issuance of common stock under equity incentive plans of $2.0 million. The net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily the result of net proceeds from our equity offering of $217.9 million, the Term Loan funding, net of issuance costs, of $18.6 million and proceeds from the issuance of common stock under equity incentive plans of $3.0 million, partially offset by payments of offering costs of $0.9 million. The net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily the result of net proceeds from our IPO of $237.7 million, the Term Loan funding, net of issuance costs, of $38.5 million and proceeds from the issuance of common stock under equity incentive plans of $0.6 million, partially offset by payments of offering costs of $6.6 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented, we did not have, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under the rules of the SEC.
Contractual Obligations
We have contractual obligations from our operating lease, manufacturing and service contracts, Term Loan and tenant improvement loan, and other research and development activities. The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
(1)Comprised of amounts due under the fifth amendment to the Term Loan executed on May 18, 2020. The sixth amendment to the Term Loan executed on January 6, 2021 provides for interest only payments until April 1, 2022.
(2)Comprised of interest payable and principal repayment due under the Convertible Senior Notes' Indenture.
(3)Comprised of the rent payments under the amended lease executed on August 14, 2019.
(4)The purchase obligations are comprised of our non-cancelable purchase commitments under our Manufacturing and Commercial Supply Agreement with Patheon. These amounts are based on forecasts that may include estimates of our future market demand, quantity discounts and manufacturing efficiencies.
We also enter into other contracts in the normal course of business with CROs, contract development and manufacturing organizations and other service providers and vendors. These contracts generally provide for termination on short notice and are cancelable contracts and accordingly, are not included in the contractual obligations and disclosures summarized above.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2. "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to our financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies related to (i) research and development expenses and (ii) stock-based compensation involve significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Non-refundable advance payments for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are recorded as a prepaid expense and recognized as an expense as the related goods are delivered or the related services are performed.
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing contracts and purchase orders, communicating with internal personnel and external service providers to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary.
We base our expenses related to clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions, contract research organizations that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf and contract manufacturing organizations that manage drug production on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract, and may result in
uneven payment flows and expense recognition. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual accordingly. Furthermore, all additional identified costs incurred are accrued from all outside third-party service providers.
Our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in our reporting changes in estimates in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates and the amount actually incurred. However, due to the nature of these estimates, we cannot assure you that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the status or conduct of our clinical studies or other research activity.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense represents the grant-date fair value of awards recognized over the requisite service period of the awards (usually the vesting period) on a straight-line basis or by using an accelerated attribution method for awards with a performance condition. For stock options and shares purchased under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan, or ESPP, we estimate the grant-date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. For restricted stock units, or RSUs, the grant-date fair value is the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant as reported on The Nasdaq Global Select Market.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the derivation and use of subjective assumptions to determine the estimated fair value of stock option awards. These assumptions include:
•Expected Term-We have concluded that our stock option exercise history does not provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate expected term, and therefore we use the simplified method for estimating the expected term of stock option grants. Under this approach, the weighted-average expected term is presumed to be the average of the vesting term and the contractual term of the option.
•Expected Volatility- Beginning in the fourth fiscal quarter of 2019, expected volatility is estimated using a weighted-average historical volatility for our common stock and the historical volatility of the common stock of a representative group of comparable publicly traded biopharmaceutical companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. Prior to the fourth fiscal quarter of 2019, since our common stock did not have significant trading history, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded biopharmaceutical companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty. We will continue to use comparable company information until the historical volatility of our common stock is sufficient to measure expected volatility for future option grants.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of the award.
•Dividend Yield-We have not paid dividends on our common stock and do not anticipate paying dividends for the foreseeable future, and we therefore used an expected dividend yield of zero.
In addition to the Black-Scholes assumptions, we include an estimated forfeiture rate in the calculation of stock-based compensation related to stock options and RSUs based on an analysis of our actual forfeitures. We evaluate the adequacy of the forfeiture rate based on actual forfeiture experience, analysis of employee turnover behavior and other factors at each reporting period and when we find that actual forfeitures differ materially from our estimates, we record a cumulative adjustment to stock-based compensation expense in that reporting period.
Stock-based compensation expense for stock options with performance conditions is recognized over the estimated service period required to meet performance-based targets using an accelerated attribution method when achieving the performance-based targets is deemed probable. When estimating the service period we make subjective assumptions about the probability and timing of achieving these performance-based targets.
We issue incentive and non-statutory stock options and RSUs under the 2018 Equity Incentive Plan, or 2018 Plan, to certain directors, officers, employees and consultants in consideration for services provided to us. Generally, incentive stock options and non-statutory stock options granted under the 2018 Plan have provided for
vesting over a four-year period from either the date of grant or the commencement of service. RSUs granted to directors and vest on the earlier of the one-year anniversary of the award's date of grant, or the date of the Company’s next annual meeting of stockholders that occurs following the date of grant. RSUs granted to certain employees during the year ended December 31, 2020, will vest on December 31, 2021. The 2013 Equity Incentive Plan allows the stock option holders to exercise their stock options prior to vesting. Under the 2018 Plan, exercise of stock options prior to vesting may be allowed on a grant by grant basis. Unvested common stock is issued upon the early exercise of stock options and is subject to repurchase by us at the original exercise price at our option.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For details regarding recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2. "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to our financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.