Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with “Selected Financial Data” and our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and future financial performance, includes forward-looking statements that are based upon current beliefs, plans and expectations and involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results and the timing of selected events to differ materially from those described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Please also see the section within Part I of this Annual Report entitled “Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of novel targeted therapeutics for cancer and utilizing our cost efficient, contract research organization (CRO) independent product development platform to partner with ex-U.S. companies to develop and commercialize innovative products in the United States.
In December 2019, we entered into a collaboration and clinical trial agreement (the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement) with 3D Medicines and Alphamab for the development of envafolimab, also known as KN035, an investigational PD-L1 single-domain antibody (sdAb) administered by rapid subcutaneous injection for the treatment of sarcoma in North America. In December 2020, we announced the dosing of the first patient in the ENVASARC pivotal trial which will enroll approximately 160 patients with the sarcoma subtypes of undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS) and myxofibrosarcoma (MFS). The trial includes one cohort of approximately 80 patients who receive single agent treatment with envafolimab and a second cohort of approximately 80 patients who receive envafolimab in combination with Yervoy® (ipilimumab), a checkpoint inhibitor marketed by Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS), with the primary endpoint in each of the cohorts being objective response rate (ORR). Achieving the primary endpoint of ORR could be the basis for accelerated approval of envafolimab by the FDA as a single agent and/or in combination with Yervoy. The trial will provide at least 86% power to demonstrate the primary endpoint of whether ORR is greater than 5% in each cohort, which is greater than the 4% ORR of Votrient® (pazopanib) reported in soft tissue sarcoma in its package insert. Votrient is the only approved treatment for refractory soft tissue sarcoma, which includes UPS and MFS. Nine or more objective responses among the 80 patients expected to enroll in cohort A or cohort B would be sufficient to demonstrate envafolimab or envafolimab combined with Yervoy, respectively, have an ORR that is statistically superior to the 4% ORR reported for Votrient in refractory soft tissue sarcoma.
We estimate disclosing a summary of the independent data monitoring committee decisions following reviews of interim data in 2021, and assuming sufficient patient responses in line with meeting the endpoint, we expect to apply for orphan drug designation and breakthrough therapy designation for envafolimab for the treatment of soft tissue sarcoma subtypes in the United States in 2021. Thereafter, we expect having a final response assessment in 2022, and, assuming positive data, submitting a biologics license application (BLA) to the FDA for accelerated approval in 2023. Additionally, assuming positive interim data from the ENVASARC trial, we plan to initiate a trial in multiple soft tissue sarcoma subtypes to expand the target patient population.
In November 2020, we announced the submission by our corporate partners, 3D Medicines and Alphamab, of a new drug application (NDA) for the approval of envafolimab in the indication of microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H)/dMMR cancer to the Chinese National Medical Products Administration (NMPA), and in December 2020, we announced the acceptance of the NDA. In January 2021, we announced the NMPA had granted envafolimab NDA priority review.
In September 2020, we highlighted updated clinical data from the pivotal trial of envafolimab in MSI-H/dMMR cancer patients that were presented by our corporate partners, 3D Medicines and Alphamab at the Chinese Society of Clinical Oncology (CSCO) 2020 Virtual Scientific Program. In a presentation entitled, “Subcutaneous Injection of PD-L1 Antibody Envafolimab (KN035) in Advanced Tumors with Mismatch-Repair Deficiency,” single agent envafolimab was shown to have a 32% confirmed ORR by central radiographic review in 41 patients with MSI-H/dMMR colorectal cancer (CRC) who failed a fluoropyrimidine, oxaliplatin and irinotecan, and had at least two on-study tumor assessments. The 32% ORR is nearly identical to the 28% ORR reported for Opdivo® and 33% ORR reported for Keytruda® in separate trials of MSI-H/dMMR CRC patients who failed a fluoropyrimidine, oxaliplatin and irinotecan. Duration of response (DOR) was greater than or equal to 12 months in 75% of patients and overall survival (OS) was greater than or equal to 12 months in 65% of patients. The ORR in the overall population (n=103) of MSI-H/dMMR cancer patients, including tumor types other than CRC, was 43%, DOR was greater than or equal to 12 months in 92% of patients and OS was greater than or equal to 12 months in 75% of patients.
Our other clinical stage oncology product candidates include TRC102, which is a small molecule that has been studied in Phase 1 and Phase 2 trials for the treatment of mesothelioma, lung cancer, glioblastoma and solid tumors, TRC253, which is a Phase 3 ready small molecule for the treatment of metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer that we licensed from Janssen Pharmaceutica N.V. (Janssen), and TJ004309, which is a CD73 antibody in Phase 1 clinical development for the treatment of solid tumors, that we licensed from I-Mab Biopharma (I-Mab) in November 2018.
TRC102 is a small molecule in clinical development to reverse resistance to specific chemotherapeutics by inhibiting DNA base excision repair (BER). In initial clinical trials of more than 100 patients, TRC102 has shown good tolerability and promising anti-tumor activity in combination with alkylating and antimetabolite chemotherapy for the treatment of cancer patients. TRC102 has been studied in Phase 1 or Phase 2 trials in mesothelioma patients in combination with the approved chemotherapeutic Alimta® (pemetrexed), in glioblastoma, ovarian cancer, lung and CRC patients in combination with the approved chemotherapeutic Temodar® (temozolomide) and in lung cancer patients in combination with the approved chemotherapeutics Alimta and cisplatin as well as external beam radiation (i.e., chemoradiation). All current TRC102 trials are sponsored and funded by the National Cancer Institute (NCI). We retain global rights to develop and commercialize TRC102 in all indications. In October 2020, TRC102 received orphan drug designation from the FDA for the treatment of patients with malignant glioma, including glioblastoma. MGMT deficiency is observed in about one third of glioblastoma patients, and a prior study of Temodar and TRC102 reported at the Society for Neuro-Oncology in 2018 demonstrated that two MGMT deficient glioblastoma patients had prolonged survival when treated with Temodar and TRC102 after progressing previously on Temodar and radiation therapy. We expect further development by the NCI in glioblastoma based on these data and believe a trial in first line glioblastoma of Temodar, radiation therapy and TRC102 is warranted.
In November 2020, we announced the publication of clinical data in the journal Cancer Cell that provides molecular insight into TRC102’s mechanism of action and patient populations most likely to respond to treatment. The article, entitled, “Molecular Features of Cancers Exhibiting Exceptional Responses to Treatment,” highlighted the clinical features and tumor biology of an exceptional responder patient treated with TRC102 at the NCI. The patient was diagnosed with metastatic and highly refractory CRC and received Temodar and TRC102. Following treatment, the patient was considered an exceptional responder through the achievement of a near complete response lasting 45 months at the most recent follow-up. Detailed molecular analyses of the patient’s tumor showed silencing of DNA repair pathways that may have resulted in sensitivity to the inhibition of DNA BER pathway by TRC102. Specifically, methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) expression was silenced by promoter methylation, and RAD50, a mediator of DNA double strand break repair, was silenced by genetic mutation and loss of heterozygosity. The publication authors hypothesized that the combination of Temodar and TRC102 was effective because all necessary DNA repair pathways were compromised genetically or through the activity of TRC102. MGMT expression was also assessed in biopsies from 11 colorectal patients who subsequently enrolled in an expansion cohort, one of whom demonstrated a partial response. The tumor associated with the partial response did not express MGMT, whereas each of the 10 tumors that did not respond to therapy expressed this enzyme robustly.
In May 2020, positive data from multiple TRC102 clinical trials were presented at the 2020 ASCO Virtual Scientific Program. Dr. Koczywas of City of Hope Medical Center presented Phase 1 data for TRC102 in combination with cisplatin and Alimta in patients with advanced solid tumors, and Phase 2 data for TRC102 in combination with Alimta in patients with mesothelioma refractory to Alimta and platinum therapy. Notably two of 14 mesothelioma patients who progressed previously on Alimta had objective responses following treatment with Alimta and TRC102. Multiple responses were also noted in the Phase 1 trial of Alimta, cisplatin and TRC102, with particular activity noted in parotid salivary gland tumors. Dr. Biswas of Case Comprehensive Cancer Center presented Phase 1 data of TRC102 in combination with chemoradiation for locally advanced non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer. All 15 patients demonstrated an objective response, including three patients with a complete response to treatment. The 100% ORR compares favorably to historical data of the same combination of chemoradiation without TRC102 in locally advanced lung cancer. For example, the PROCLAIM clinical trial reported an ORR of 36% and the PACIFIC clinical trial reported an ORR of 51% in locally advanced non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer patients treated with Alimta, cisplatin and thoracic radiation. We are discussing further development of TRC102 in combination with chemoradiation in advanced lung cancer and in glioblastoma with investigators at this time.
TRC253 is a product candidate for the treatment of men with prostate cancer and is a novel small molecule high affinity competitive inhibitor of wild type androgen receptor (AR) and multiple AR mutant receptors containing point mutations that cause drug resistance to currently approved treatments. In April 2020, Janssen notified us that it was not exercising its exclusive option to reacquire the TRC253 program following a review of the Phase 1/2 data in prostate cancer patients with acquired resistance to Xtandi® or Erleada®. In the completed Phase 1/2 trial, data demonstrated the prevalence of the ARL mutation is much less common than expected at the time of initiation of Phase 1/2 trial, making commercialization of TRC253 in prostate cancer in the United States not viable. TRC253, however, was as active as Xtandi in preclinical models of prostate cancer and has not been studied in patients without acquired resistance to Xtandi or Erleada. As a result of Janssen not exercising its exclusive option to reacquire the program, we have retained worldwide development and commercialization rights, and are obligated to pay Janssen a total of up to $45.0 million in development and regulatory milestones upon achievement of specified events, in addition to a low single digit royalty. We believe TRC253 may be able to be developed in China, where standard of care therapies such as Xtandi and Erleada are not widely accessible to patients with prostate cancer and are actively looking for a corporate partner to develop and potentially commercialize TRC253 in China.
TJ004309, also known as TJD5, is a novel humanized antibody against CD73 expressed on stromal cells and tumors that converts extracellular adenosine monophosphate (AMP) to the immunosuppressive metabolite adenosine. We are developing TJ004309 in collaboration with I-Mab under a strategic collaboration and clinical trial agreement that we entered into in November 2018 (the TJ004309 Agreement). In July 2019, we began enrollment in a Phase 1 clinical trial to assess safety and preliminary efficacy of TJ004309 as a single agent and when combined with the PD-L1 checkpoint inhibitor Tecentriq® in patients with advanced solid tumors. We also entered into a separate strategic collaboration and clinical trial agreement (the Bispecific Agreement) which allows for the development of up to five of I-Mab’s proprietary bispecific antibody product candidates to be nominated by I-Mab within a five-year period for development and commercialization in North America, with the option to opt-in and acquire product rights outside of Greater China and Korea prior to completing the first pivotal clinical trial for any bispecific product candidate.
In March 2020, I-Mab issued a press release announcing a strategic partnership with Kalbe Genexine Biologics (KG Bio), whereby KG Bio received what the press release described as a right of first negotiation outside North America for TJ004309 for up to $340 million in potential payments to I-Mab. In March 2020, we also learned that I-Mab entered into two license and collaboration agreements with ABL Bio in July 2018 (ABL Bio License 1 and ABL Bio License 2). Under ABL Bio License 1, I-Mab granted to ABL Bio exclusive, worldwide (excluding Greater China), royalty-bearing rights to develop and commercialize a bispecific antibody (the BsAb) using certain monoclonal antibody sequences. Under ABL License 2, I-Mab and ABL agreed to collaborate to develop three PD-L1-based bispecific antibodies by using ABL Bio’s proprietary BsAb technology and commercialize them in their respective territories, which, collectively, include China, Hong Kong, Macau, Taiwan and South Korea, and other territories throughout the rest of the world if both parties agree to do so in such other territories during the performance of the agreement. On April 8, 2020, we issued a notice of dispute regarding possible breaches of the TJ004309 Agreement and the Bispecific Agreement. As of the date of this Annual Report, these disputes have not been resolved. We believe that based on these transactions, we may be entitled to receive payments under the TJ004309 Agreement, although I-Mab has disputed that any payment is due. We cannot currently estimate the likely outcome of the dispute under the TJ004309 Agreement or the Bispecific Agreement. Until these discussions are complete, we may be unable to provide a timeline as to when or if we will file an IND for a bispecific antibody under the Bispecific Agreement. Furthermore, our ability to license certain bispecific product candidates from I-Mab may be more limited than we previously believed due to I-Mab’s separate license with ABL Bio that preceded our license with I-Mab. In February 2021, I-Mab sent us a notice purporting to terminate the TJ4309 Agreement, which would result in I-Mab owing us a prespecified early termination fee of $9.0 million. However, I-Mab does not have an option to terminate the TJ004309 Agreement without cause until the ongoing Phase 1 trial of TJ004309 is complete, and we therefore believe the TJ4309 Agreement has not been terminated and continue to perform our contractual obligations.
The following table summarizes key information regarding ongoing and planned development of our clinical stage product candidates:
We utilize a CRO-independent product development platform that emphasizes capital efficiency. Our experienced clinical operations, data management, quality assurance, product development and regulatory affairs groups manage significant aspects of our clinical trials with internal resources. We use these internal resources to minimize the costs associated with utilizing CROs to conduct clinical trials. In our experience, this model has resulted in capital efficiencies and improved communication with clinical trial sites, which expedites patient enrollment and improves the quality of patient data as compared to a CRO-managed model. We have leveraged this platform in all of our sponsored clinical trials. We have also leveraged our product development platform to diversify our product pipeline without payment of upfront license fees through license agreements with 3D Medicines and Alphamab, I-Mab, and Janssen. We continue to evaluate ex-U.S. companies that would benefit from a rapid and capital-efficient U.S. drug development solution that includes U.S. and European Union (EU) clinical development expertise. We believe we will continue to be recognized as a preferred U.S. clinical development partner through a cost- and risk-sharing partnership structure, which may include U.S. commercialization.
Our goal is to be a leader in the development of targeted therapies for patients with cancer and other diseases of high unmet medical need.
Since our inception in 2004, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to research and development efforts relating to our product candidates, including conducting clinical trials and developing manufacturing capabilities, in-licensing related intellectual property, providing general and administrative support for these operations, and protecting our intellectual property. To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and instead, have funded our operations from the sales of equity securities, payments received in connection with our collaboration agreements, and commercial bank debt under our credit facility with Silicon Valley Bank (SVB). At December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments totaling $36.1 million.
We do not own or operate, nor do we expect to own or operate, facilities for product manufacturing, storage, distribution or testing. We contract with third parties or our collaboration partners for the manufacture of our product candidates and we intend to continue to do so in the future.
We have incurred losses from operations in each year since our inception. Our net losses were $16.8 million and $22.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $179.1 million.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for at least the next several years. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year. We expect our expenses to increase slightly in 2021 as we:
•
continue to conduct clinical trials of product candidates, including enrollment of the ENVASARC pivotal trial;
•
continue our research and development efforts;
•
maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
•
seek regulatory approvals for product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials.
We do not expect to generate any revenues from product sales until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for one or more product candidates, which we expect will take a number of years. If we obtain regulatory approval for any product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. Accordingly, we will need to raise substantial additional capital. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the pace and results of our preclinical and clinical development efforts, developments under our collaboration agreements, including whether and when we receive milestone and other potential payments, and the timing and nature of the regulatory approval process for product candidates. We anticipate that we will seek to fund our operations through public or private equity or debt financings or other sources. Debt financing, if available, may involve covenants further restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. Further, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, the global credit and financial markets have experienced extreme volatility and disruptions, including diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates and uncertainty about economic stability. If the equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult, more costly and more dilutive. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and ability to develop product candidates.
Collaboration and License Agreements
Collaboration Agreement with 3D Medicines and Alphamab
In December 2019, we, 3D Medicines, and Alphamab entered into the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement for the development of envafolimab, an investigational PD-L1 sdAb, or nanobody, administered by rapid subcutaneous injection, for the treatment of sarcoma in North America.
Pursuant to the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement, we were granted an exclusive license to develop and commercialize envafolimab for the treatment of sarcoma in North America. We are responsible for conducting and will bear the costs of any Phase 1, Phase 2, and Phase 3 or post-approval clinical trial in North America for envafolimab in the indications of refractory and first line treatment of sarcoma. 3D Medicines and Alphamab are responsible for conducting and will bear the costs of investigational new drug (IND)-enabling studies (other than those specific to the sarcoma indication) and the preparation of chemical, manufacturing and controls (CMC) activities sections of an IND application for envafolimab. 3D Medicines and Alphamab have agreed to manufacture and supply, or to arrange for a third party manufacturer to manufacture and supply, envafolimab to us at pre-negotiated prices that vary based on clinical or commercial use. 3D Medicines and Alphamab retained the right to develop envafolimab in all territories outside of North America as well as within North America for all indications other than sarcoma.
We will be responsible for commercializing envafolimab for sarcoma in North America, including booking of sales revenue, unless (a) envafolimab is first approved in North America for an indication other than sarcoma and launched in North America, or (b) envafolimab is first approved in North America for sarcoma and subsequently approved in North America for an additional non-
orphan indication and sold commercially by 3D Medicines and/or Alphamab, or licensee, in which case 3D Medicines and Alphamab will be responsible for commercializing envafolimab for sarcoma in North America, including booking of sales revenue. If 3D Medicines and Alphamab become responsible for commercialization under the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement, we have the option to co-market envafolimab for sarcoma in North America. In the event that envafolimab is first approved in North America for sarcoma and within three years of the commercial launch of envafolimab in North America for sarcoma 3D Medicines and Alphamab replace us as the party responsible for commercialization, and we elect and 3D Medicines and Alphamab agree for us to not co-market envafolimab for sarcoma in North America, then 3D Medicines and Alphamab will be required to compensate us for our costs associated with preparing for and conducting commercial activities.
If we have the responsibility for commercialization under the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement, we will owe 3D Medicines and Alphamab tiered double digit royalties on net sales of envafolimab for sarcoma in North America ranging from the teens to mid-double digits. If 3D Medicines and Alphamab have responsibility for commercialization under the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement, we will be entitled to (a) tiered double digit royalties on net sales of envafolimab for sarcoma in North America ranging from the teens to mid-double digits if we have elected to not co-market envafolimab in sarcoma or (b) a 50% royalty on net sales of envafolimab for sarcoma in North America if we have chosen to co-market envafolimab in sarcoma. Payment obligations under the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement continue on a country-by-country basis until the last to expire licensed patent covering envafolimab expires.
3D Medicines and Alphamab retain the right to reacquire the rights to envafolimab for sarcoma in North America in connection with an arm’s length sale to a third party of the rights to develop and commercialize envafolimab in North America for all indications, provided that the sale may not occur prior to completion of a pivotal trial of envafolimab in sarcoma without our written consent and the parties must negotiate in good faith and agree to fair compensation be paid to us for the value of and opportunity represented by the reacquired rights.
Each party agreed that during the term of the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement, it would not develop or license from any third party a monospecific inhibitor to PD-L1 or PD-1 in sarcoma.
The term of the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement continues until the later of the date the parties cease further development and commercialization of envafolimab for sarcoma in North America or the expiration of all payment obligations. The Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement may be terminated earlier by a party in the event of an uncured material breach by the other party or bankruptcy of the other party, or for safety reasons related to envafolimab. In the event we elect, or a joint steering committee (JSC) determines, to cease further development or commercialization of envafolimab, or if we fail to use commercially reasonable efforts to develop (including progress in clinical trials) and commercialize envafolimab and do not cure such failure within a specified time period, then our rights and obligations under the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement will revert to 3D Medicines and Alphamab.
Collaboration Agreements with I-Mab Biopharma
In November 2018, we entered into two separate strategic collaboration and clinical trial agreements with I-Mab for the development of multiple immuno-oncology programs, including I-Mab’s proprietary CD73 antibody TJ004309 as well as up to five proprietary bispecific antibodies currently under development by I-Mab.
In the TJ004309 Agreement, we are collaborating with I-Mab on developing TJ004309, and will bear the costs of filing an IND application and for Phase 1 clinical trials, share costs equally for Phase 2 clinical trials, and we will bear 40% and I-Mab 60% of the costs for pivotal clinical trials. I-Mab will also be responsible for the cost of certain non-clinical activities and the supply of TJ004309 and any reference drugs used in the development activities. We also agreed with I-Mab for a specified period of time to not develop or license to or from a third party any monoclonal antibody targeting CD73 or any other biologic for certain indications that a JSC, as set up under the TJ004309 Agreement, selects for TJ004309 development.
In the event that I-Mab licenses rights to TJ004309 to a third party, we would be entitled to receive escalating portions of royalty and non-royalty consideration received by I-Mab with respect to territories outside of Greater China. In the event that I-Mab commercializes TJ004309, we would be entitled to receive a royalty on net sales by I-Mab in North America ranging from the mid-single digits to low double digits, and in the EU and Japan in the mid-single digits. The portions of certain third party royalty and non-royalty consideration and the royalty from net sales by I-Mab to which we would be entitled escalate based on the phase of development and relevant clinical trial obligations we complete under the TJ004309 Agreement, ranging from a high-single digit to a mid-teen percentage of non-royalty consideration as well as a double digit percentage of royalty consideration. In March 2020, I-Mab issued a press release announcing a strategic partnership with KG Bio, whereby KG Bio received what the press release described as a right of first negotiation outside North America for TJ004309 for up to $340 million in potential payments to I-Mab. On April 8, 2020, we issued a notice of dispute to I-Mab as we may be entitled to receive a payment under the TJ004309 Agreement, although I-Mab has disputed that any payment is due. We cannot currently estimate the likely outcome of the dispute under the TJ004309 Agreement.
The TJ004309 Agreement may be terminated by either party in the event of an uncured material breach by the other party or bankruptcy of the other party, or for safety reasons related to TJ004309. I-Mab may also terminate the TJ004309 Agreement if we cause certain delays in completing a Phase 1 clinical trial. In addition, I-Mab may terminate the TJ004309 Agreement for any reason within 90 days following the completion of the first Phase 1 clinical trial, in which case we would be entitled to a minimum
termination fee of $9.0 million, or following the completion of the first Phase 2 clinical trial, in which case we would be entitled to a pre-specified termination fee of $15.0 million and either a percentage of non-royalty consideration I-Mab may receive as part of a license to a third party or an additional payment if TJ004309 is approved for marketing outside Greater China before a third party license is executed, in addition to a double digit percentage of royalty consideration. In February 2021, I-Mab sent us a notice purporting to terminate the TJ4309 Agreement, which would result in I-Mab owing us a prespecified early termination fee of $9.0 million. However, I-Mab does not have an option to terminate the TJ004309 Agreement without cause until the ongoing Phase 1 trial of TJ004309 is complete, and we therefore believe the TJ4309 Agreement has not been terminated and continue to perform our contractual obligations.
Pursuant to the Bispecific Agreement, we and I-Mab may mutually select through a JSC up to five of I-Mab’s bispecific antibody product candidates within a five-year period for development and commercialization in North America.
For each product candidate selected by the JSC for development under the Bispecific Agreement, I-Mab will be responsible and bear the costs for IND-enabling studies and establishing manufacturing for the product candidate, we will be responsible for and bear the costs of filing an IND and conducting Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical trials, and we will be responsible for and will share equally with I-Mab in the costs of conducting Phase 3 or pivotal clinical trials, in each case within North America. Subject to I-Mab’s right to co-promote an approved product candidate, we will be responsible for commercializing any approved product candidates in North America, and we will share profits and losses equally with I-Mab in North America. We would also be entitled to receive tiered low single digit royalties on net sales of product candidates in the EU and Japan.
At any time prior to completing the first pivotal clinical trial for a product candidate or if I-Mab ceases to support development costs or pay its portion of Phase 3 clinical trial costs for a product candidate or the JSC decides to cease development over our objections after initiating Phase 3 clinical trials, we will have an option to obtain an exclusive license to such product candidate in all territories except Greater China and Korea and any other territories in which I-Mab previously licensed rights to a third party subject to our right of first refusal for any licenses I-Mab may grant to third-parties.
If we exercise our licensing option, we would assume sole responsibility for developing and commercializing the product candidate in the licensed territory, and in lieu of profit or loss sharing with I-Mab with respect to such product candidate, we would owe I-Mab pre-specified upfront and milestone payments and royalties on net sales, with the payments and royalties escalating depending on the phase of development the product candidate reached at the time we obtained the exclusive license as follows: (i) if before IND-enabling studies and the preparation of the CMC activities of the collaborative product, we would owe I-Mab a one-time upfront payment of $10.0 million, development and regulatory based milestone payments totaling up to $90.0 million that begin upon completion of a pivotal trial, sales milestones totaling up to $250.0 million, and royalties in the mid-single digits on annual net sales; (ii) if after IND submission but before completion of a Phase 1a clinical trial of the collaborative product, we would owe I-Mab a one-time upfront payment of $25.0 million, development and regulatory based milestone payments totaling up to $125.0 million that begin upon completion of a pivotal trial, sales milestones totaling up to $250.0 million, and royalties in the high single digits on annual net sales; (iii) if after completion of a Phase 1a clinical trial but before completion of a Phase 2 proof of concept clinical trial for the collaborative product, we would owe I-Mab a one-time upfront payment of $50.0 million, development and regulatory based milestone payments totaling up to $250.0 million that begin upon completion of a pivotal trial, sales milestones totaling up to $250.0 million, and royalties in the low double digits on annual net sales; and (iv) if after completion of a Phase 2 proof of concept clinical trial and before completion of a pivotal trial for the collaborative product, we would owe I-Mab a one-time upfront payment of $80.0 million, development and regulatory based milestone payments totaling up to $420.0 million that begin upon completion of a pivotal trial, sales milestones totaling up to $250.0 million, and royalties in the high-teens on annual net sales.
Each party agreed that for a specified period of time, it would not develop or license to or from any third party any bispecific monoclonal antibody targeting the same two biological targets as those of any selected product candidates under the Bispecific Agreement.
If development of any selected product candidates is terminated by a decision of the JSC, all rights to the product candidate will revert to I-Mab, subject to our rights to obtain an exclusive license in certain circumstances. If development is terminated after submission of an IND and prior to initiating Phase 3 clinical studies or after initiating Phase 3 clinical studies and with our concurrence, we would be entitled to tiered low single digit royalties on net sales of the product candidate in North America, the EU and Japan.
The Bispecific Agreement may be terminated by either party in the event of an uncured material breach by the other party or bankruptcy of the other party, or with respect to any selected product candidate, for safety reasons related to that product candidate.
In March 2020, we learned that I-Mab entered into two license and collaboration agreements with ABL Bio in July 2018. Under the ABL Bio License 1, I-Mab granted to ABL Bio exclusive, worldwide (excluding Greater China), royalty-bearing rights to develop and commercialize the BsAb using certain monoclonal antibody sequences. Under ABL License 2, I-Mab and ABL agreed to collaborate to develop three PD-L1-based bispecific antibodies by using ABL Bio’s proprietary BsAb technology and commercialize them in their respective territories, which, collectively, include China, Hong Kong, Macau, Taiwan and South Korea, and other territories throughout the rest of the world if both parties agree to do so in such other territories during the performance of the agreement. On April 8, 2020, we issued a notice of dispute regarding possible breach of the Bispecific Agreement. We cannot
currently estimate the likely outcome of the dispute under the Bispecific Agreement. Until these discussions are complete, we may be unable to provide a timeline as to when or if it will file an IND for a bispecific antibody under the Bispecific Agreement. Furthermore, our ability to license certain bispecific product candidates from I-Mab may be more limited than we previously believed due to I-Mab’s separate license with ABL Bio that preceded our license with I-Mab.
License Agreement with Janssen Pharmaceutica N.V.
In September 2016, we entered into a strategic licensing collaboration with Janssen for two novel oncology assets from Janssen’s early oncology development portfolio. The agreement, as amended, grants us the right to develop TRC253 (formerly JNJ-63576253), a novel small molecule high affinity competitive inhibitor of wild type androgen receptor (AR Mutant Program) and multiple AR mutant receptors which display drug resistance to approved treatments, which is intended for the treatment of men with prostate cancer.
In April 2020, Janssen notified us that it would not be exercising its option to reacquire rights to TRC253 following its review of data from the Phase 1/2 trial of TRC253 in prostate cancer. As a result, we have retained worldwide development and commercialization rights to TRC253, and are obligated to pay to Janssen (x) development and regulatory based milestone payments totaling up to $45.0 million upon achievement of specified events and (y) royalties in the low single digits based on annual net sales of TRC253 products, subject to certain specified reductions.
Other License Agreements
Under each of our license agreements we may have payment obligations that are contingent upon future events such as our achievement of specified development, regulatory and commercial milestones and are required to make development milestone payments and royalty payments in connection with the sale of products developed under these agreements. We do not have any significant ongoing annual payment obligations under these license agreements. As of December 31, 2020, we were unable to estimate the timing or likelihood of achieving the milestones or making future product sales. These commitments include the following:
•
Under our license agreement with Case Western, we may be required to pay up to an aggregate of approximately $9.8 million in milestone payments, of which $0.7 million relates to the initiation of certain development activities ($0.2 million of which has been paid) and approximately $9.1 million relates to the submission of certain regulatory filings and receipt of certain regulatory approvals. If products utilizing certain intellectual property licensed from Case Western, or the TRC102 Technology, are successfully commercialized, we will be required to pay Case Western a single-digit royalty on net sales, subject to adjustments in certain circumstances. Beginning on the earlier of a specified number of years from the effective date of the agreement and the anniversary of the effective date following the occurrence of a specified event, we will be required to make a minimum annual royalty payment of $75,000, which will be credited against our royalty obligations. In the event we sublicense any of our rights under the agreement relating to the TRC102 Technology, we will be obligated to pay Case Western a portion of certain fees we may receive under the sublicense. Our royalty obligations will continue on a country-by-country basis through the later of the expiration of the last valid claim under the TRC102 Technology or 14 years after the first commercial sale of a product utilizing the TRC102 Technology in a given country.
•
Under our license agreement with Janssen for TRC253, as amended, we may be required to pay up to an aggregate of $45.0 million in milestone payments, of which $15.0 million relates to the initiation of certain development activities and $30.0 million relates to the submission of certain regulatory filings and receipt of certain regulatory approvals. If TRC253 is successfully commercialized, we will be required to pay Janssen a low single-digit royalty on net sales, subject to reductions in certain circumstances.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
Our revenue during the three year period ended December 31, 2020 was derived from our 2017 collaboration with Ambrx, Inc. (Ambrx). In February 2019, Ambrx notified us that it had elected to terminate its agreement with us, which became effective 90 days after the notice. The terms of this arrangement contained multiple promised goods and services. The license agreement provided for the receipt of multiple types of payments, including a non-refundable upfront payment, milestone payments, and royalties on net product sales. In accordance with our revenue recognition policy, we identified one performance obligation for all of the promised goods and services under the agreement and recognized revenue for the fixed or determinable collaboration consideration at a point in time, which occurred in the first quarter of 2018.
We expect that any revenue we generate will fluctuate from quarter to quarter as a result of the timing of any additional collaboration agreements and recognition of associated upfront and milestone payments, and the extent to which any of our products are approved and successfully commercialized by us or our partners. If we or our partners fail to develop product candidates in a timely manner or obtain regulatory approval for them, our ability to generate future revenues, our results of operations and our financial position could be adversely affected.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs associated with the preclinical and clinical development of product candidates. These costs consist primarily of:
•
salaries and employee-related expenses, including stock-based compensation and benefits for personnel in research and development functions;
•
costs incurred under clinical trial agreements with investigative sites;
•
costs to acquire, develop and manufacture preclinical study and clinical trial materials;
•
costs associated with conducting our preclinical, development and regulatory activities, including fees paid to third party professional consultants, service providers and our scientific advisory board;
•
payments related to licensed products and technologies; and
•
facilities, depreciation and other expenses, including allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities.
Research and development costs, including third party costs reimbursed by Santen and I-Mab as part of such collaborations, are expensed as incurred. We account for nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expenses when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by product candidate for the periods indicated:
Unallocated expenses consist primarily of our internal personnel related and facility costs.
We expect our current level of research and development expenses to increase slightly in 2021 due to enrollment of the ENVASARC trial.
We cannot determine with certainty the timing of initiation, the duration or the completion costs of current or future preclinical studies and clinical trials of product candidates due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, many clinical trial sites have temporarily suspended dosing of previously-enrolled patients and/or enrollment of new patients, and patients in clinical trials may choose to not enroll, not participate in follow-up clinical visits or drop out of trials as a precaution against, or as a result of, contracting COVID-19. These events have impacted our clinical trials and those of our collaborators and we cannot predict with certainty the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will ultimately delay our clinical trials or those of our collaborators or increase our expenses in completing clinical trials. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future preclinical studies and clinical trials, regulatory developments and our ongoing assessments as to each product candidate’s commercial potential. We will need to raise substantial additional capital in the future. In addition, we cannot forecast which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
The costs of clinical trials to us and the timing of such costs may vary significantly based on factors such as:
•
the extent to which costs for comparator drugs are borne by third parties;
•
per patient trial costs;
•
the number of sites included in the trials;
•
the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•
the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•
the number of patients that participate in the trials;
•
the number of doses that patients receive;
•
the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•
potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
•
the duration of patient participation in the trials and follow-up;
•
the duration and scope of impact of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•
the phase of development of the product candidate;
•
the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidate; and
•
the extent to which costs are borne by third parties such as NCI.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for employees in executive, finance and administration, corporate development and administrative support functions, including stock-based compensation expenses and benefits. Other significant general and administrative expenses include legal services, including those associated with obtaining and maintaining patents, insurance, occupancy costs, accounting services, and the cost of various consultants.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will remain relatively constant in the near term.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) primarily consists of interest related to our loan agreement with SVB offset in part by interest income from our short-term investments and cash equivalents.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies related to revenue recognition, expense accruals, and stock-based compensation are most critical to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue during the three year period ended December 31, 2020 was derived from our 2017 collaboration with Ambrx. The terms of this arrangement included payments to us for the following: non-refundable, up-front license fees; development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; and royalties on net sales of licensed products. In accordance with Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, we perform the following five steps in determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of these agreements: (i) identification of the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including any constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy each performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services transferred to the customer. Once a contract is determined to be within the scope of Accounting Standards Codification 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, at contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within the contract to determine those that are performance obligations and assess whether each promised good is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied.
As part of the accounting for these types of arrangements, we develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. We use key assumptions to determine the stand-alone selling price, which may include development timelines, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, discount rates, and probabilities of technical and regulatory success.
Licenses of intellectual property: If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone Payments: At the inception of each arrangement that includes development, commercialization, and regulatory milestone payments, we evaluate whether the achievement of the milestones is considered probable and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. Performance milestone payments represent a form of variable consideration. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone payment is included in the transaction price. Achievement of milestones that are not within our control or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable until the approvals are achieved. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achieving such development milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Manufacturing Supply Services: Arrangements that include a promise for future supply of drug substance or drug product for either clinical development or commercial supply at the customer’s discretion are generally considered options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the licensee and if so, they are accounted for as separate performance obligations at the outset of the arrangement.
Royalties: For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from any of our out-licensing arrangements.
We receive payments from our collaborators based on billing schedules established in each contract. Up-front payments and fees may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until we perform our obligations under the collaboration arrangements. Amounts are recorded as accounts receivable when our right to consideration is unconditional. We do not assess whether a contract has a significant financing component if the expectation at contract inception is such that the period between payment by the customer and the transfer of the promised goods or services to the customer will be one year or less.
Clinical Trial Expense Accruals
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors, clinical sites, and consultants in connection with conducting clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts vary and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided under such contracts.
Our objective is to reflect the appropriate trial expenses in our financial statements by recording those expenses in the period in which services are performed and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the progress of the trial as measured by patient progression and the timing of various aspects of the trial. We determine accrual estimates taking into account discussion with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of consummation of trials. During the course of a clinical trial, we adjust the clinical expense recognition if actual results differ from our estimates. We make estimates of accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known at that time. Our clinical accruals are dependent upon accurate reporting by third-party vendors. Although we do not expect our estimates to differ materially from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low for any particular period. For the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020, there were no material adjustments to our prior period estimates of accrued expenses for clinical trials.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense represents the grant date fair value of employee stock option and award grants recognized as expense over the requisite service period of the awards (usually the vesting period) on a straight-line basis, net of actual forfeitures. We estimate the fair value of stock option grants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the risk-free interest rate, the expected dividend yield of our common stock, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock and the expected term of the option. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based
compensation expense could be materially different in the future. See Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our employee stock options granted for all periods presented.
The following table summarizes the stock-based compensation expense recognized in our consolidated financial statements:
As of December 31, 2020, the unrecognized stock-based compensation expense related to outstanding time-based stock options was $1.3 million and is expected to be recognized as expense over a weighted-average period of approximately 2.6 years.
Other Company Information
Net Operating Loss and Research and Development Tax Credit Carryforwards
At December 31, 2020, we had federal and California net operating loss, or NOL, carryforwards, of approximately $152.5 million and $117.7 million, respectively. The federal and California NOL carryforwards will begin expiring in 2030, unless previously utilized. The federal NOL generated after 2017 of $69.3 million will carryforward indefinitely and be available to offset up to 80% of future taxable income each year. At December 31, 2020, we had federal and California research and development and Orphan Drug credit carryforwards of approximately $10.3 million and $2.5 million, respectively. The federal research and development and Orphan Drug credit carryforwards will begin expiring in 2031, unless previously utilized. The California research and development credit carryforwards do not expire.
Pursuant to Sections 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code (Code), our annual use of our NOL and research and development credit carryforwards may be limited in the event that a cumulative change in ownership of more than 50% occurs within a three-year period. We completed a Section 382/383 analysis regarding the limitation of our NOL and research and development credit carryforwards as of December 31, 2018 and did not identify a cumulative change in ownership of more than 50% within the proceeding three-year period. Future ownership changes, including changes during the year ended December 31, 2020, may limit our ability to utilize our remaining NOL and research and development tax credit carryforwards. As of December 31, 2020, we had a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
This section discusses our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. For a discussion and analysis of the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 please refer to Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Research and development expenses. Research and development expenses were $8.2 million and $14.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease of $6.3 million was primarily due to the termination of carotuximab development in oncology and lower manufacturing expenses for TRC253.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses were $8.0 million and $7.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase of $0.3 million was primarily due to corporate related expenses.
Other expense, net. Other expense, net was $0.6 million and $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our sources of cash liquidity include cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, and amounts available under existing common stock purchase agreements, including our common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital and our Capital on DemandTM sales agreement with JonesTrading. We believe that these sources are sufficient to fund the current requirements of working capital and other financial commitments, including our long-term debt and operating lease obligations, for the next twelve months from the financial statement issuance date. However, we periodically consider various financing alternatives and may, from time to time, seek to take advantage of favorable interest rate environments or other market conditions.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with clinical trial sites and clinical supply manufacturing organizations and with vendors for preclinical safety and research studies, research supplies and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice, and therefore are cancelable contracts.
We have incurred losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $179.1 million, and we expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. We expect our current level of research and development expenses to increase slightly in 2021 due to enrollment of the ENVASARC pivotal trial. Given we do not anticipate any revenues from product sales in the foreseeable future, we will need additional capital to fund our operations, which we may seek to obtain through one or more equity offerings, debt financings, government or other third party funding, and licensing or collaboration arrangements.
Sale of Common Stock
In December 2020, we sold 1,612,844 shares of our common stock at an average purchase price of $8.56 for net proceeds of $13.6 million in two registered direct offerings with certain institutional investors.
In August 2020, we sold 2,633,838 shares of our common stock at an average purchase price of $1.66 per share and warrants to purchase 3,429,696 shares of our common stock at an average purchase price of $1.64 per share with an exercise price of $0.01 per share (the 2020 Pre-Funded Warrants) for net proceeds of approximately $10.0 million in a private placement with multiple accredited institutional health care focused funds. In accordance with their terms, the 2020 Pre-Funded Warrants may not be exercised if the holder’s ownership of our common stock would exceed 19.99% of our total shares outstanding following such exercise.
In March 2018, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with new and certain existing investors for the purchase of $38.7 million of our common stock and warrants. We sold approximately 1.2 million shares of common stock at a purchase price of $27.00 per share, pre-funded warrants to purchase approximately 0.2 million shares of common stock at a purchase price of $26.90 per share and an exercise price of $0.10 per share, and warrants to purchase approximately 1.4 million shares of common stock at a purchase price of $1.25 per share and an exercise price of $27.00 per share. We received total net proceeds of $36.5 million.
Common Stock Purchase Agreement with Aspire Capital
In October 2019, as amended in April 2020, we entered into the 2019 Purchase Agreement with Aspire Capital which provides that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations of the 2019 Purchase Agreement, Aspire Capital is committed to purchase up to an aggregate of $15.0 million of shares of our common stock at our request from time to time during the 30 month term of the 2019 Purchase Agreement and at prices based on the market price of our common stock at the time of each sale. In consideration for entering into the 2019 Purchase Agreement and concurrently with the execution of the 2019 Purchase Agreement, we issued to Aspire Capital 142,658 shares of our common stock. As of December 31, 2020, we had sold an aggregate 4.8 million shares of common stock under the 2019 Purchase Agreement with Aspire Capital for net proceeds of $9.6 million.
ATM Facility
In December 2020, we entered into a Capital on DemandTM Sales Agreement, or the Sales Agreement, with JonesTrading Institutional Services LLC, or JonesTrading, pursuant to which we could sell from time to time, at our option, up to an aggregate of $50.0 million of shares of our common stock through JonesTrading, as sales agent or principal, all of which remains available for sale as of December 31, 2020. Sales of our common stock made pursuant to the Sales Agreement, if any, will be made on the Nasdaq Capital Market under our effective registration statement on Form S-3, by means of ordinary brokers’ transactions at market prices. Additionally, under the terms of the Sales Agreement, we may also sell shares of our common stock through JonesTrading, on the Nasdaq Capital Market or otherwise, at negotiated prices or at prices related to the prevailing market price. JonesTrading will use its commercially reasonable efforts to sell our common stock from time to time, based upon our instructions (including any price, time or size limits or other customary parameters or conditions we may impose). We are required to pay JonesTrading 2.5% of gross proceeds from the common stock sold through the Sales Agreement.
In connection with entering into the Sales Agreement in December 2020, we terminated our prior Capital on Demand™ Sales Agreement, dated September 6, 2018, with JonesTrading and no further sales of Common Stock will occur under the prior sales agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we had sold an aggregate 3.0 million shares of common stock for net proceeds of $7.1 million under the prior sales agreement with JonesTrading.
Credit Facility with SVB
In May 2018, we entered into a third amendment to our Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement with SVB (the 2018 Amended SVB Loan) under which we borrowed $7.0 million, all of which was used to refinance previously outstanding amounts under the loan and security agreement. In connection with the 2018 Amended SVB Loan, we issued warrants to purchase up to 5,363 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $26.10 per share. The warrants are fully exercisable and expire on May 3, 2025.
The 2018 Amended SVB Loan provides for interest to be paid at a rate of 9.0% per annum, with interest-only payments due monthly through June 30, 2019. Thereafter, in addition to interest accrued during such period, the monthly payments include an amount equal to the outstanding principal at June 30, 2019 divided by 30 months. At maturity (or earlier prepayment), we are also required to make a final payment equal to 4.0% of the original principal amount of the amounts borrowed. The 2018 Amended SVB Loan provides for prepayment fees of 1.0% of the amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs after May 3, 2020. In April 2020, we entered into an agreement with SVB (Deferral Agreement) which granted us an interest-only payment period for six months, with a corresponding six month extension to the maturity date which is now June 2022. All other material terms and conditions of the 2018 Amended SVB Loan remained unchanged.
The 2018 Amended SVB Loan is collateralized by substantially all of our assets, other than our intellectual property, and contains customary conditions of borrowing, events of default and covenants, including covenants that restrict our ability to dispose of assets, merge with or acquire other entities, incur indebtedness and make distributions to holders of our capital stock. Should an event of default occur, including the occurrence of a material adverse change, we could be required to immediately repay all obligations under the 2018 Amended SVB Loan. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants and conditions of the 2018 Amended SVB Loan.
As of December 31, 2020, the total outstanding balance owed under the 2018 Amended SVB Loan amounted to $4.2 million. Future minimum principal and interest payments under the 2018 Amended SVB Loan, including the final payment, as of December 31, 2020 are $3.1 million in the next 12 months and $4.8 million in the next 24 months.
Operating Lease Obligations
Our operating lease obligations relate to our corporate headquarters in San Diego, California, which expires in April 2022. Future minimum lease payments under this lease are $0.5 million in the next twelve months and $0.7 million in the next 24 months.
Janssen License Agreement
We have retained worldwide development and commercialization rights to TRC253 following Janssen’s decision to not exercise its option to reacquire the TRC253 rights. As a result, we are obligated to pay to Janssen (x) development and regulatory based milestone payments totaling up to $45.0 million upon achievement of specified events and (y) royalties in the low single digits based on annual net sales of TRC253 products, subject to certain specified reductions. These obligations are contingent upon future events such as our achievement of specified development and regulatory milestones and the sale of the developed product. As of December 31, 2020, we were unable to estimate the timing or likelihood of achieving the milestones or making future product sales.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our net cash flow activity for each of the periods set forth below:
Operating activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $17.0 million and $23.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and was primarily due to our net loss for the respective year, adjusted for noncash items and offset by changes in our working capital.
Investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was primarily due to the purchase of short-term investment securities. Net cash provided by investing activities was $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and was due to maturities of short-term investments partially offset by purchases of these investments.
Financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $36.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily resulted from $13.6 million in net proceeds received from the sale of common stock in two registered direct offerings, $10.0 million in net proceeds received from the sale of common stock and pre-funded warrants in a private placement, $9.6 million in net proceeds of sales of our common stock under our 2019 Purchase Agreement with Aspire Capital, and $4.8 million in net proceeds of sales of our common stock through our prior September 2018 ATM facility with JonesTrading, offset by $1.4 million in net repayments on borrowings under our SVB loan agreement. Net cash provided by financing activities was $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and primarily resulted from $2.3 million in net proceeds received from the issuance of common stock through our ATM facility with JonesTrading, offset by $1.4 million in net repayments on borrowings under our SVB loan agreement.
Funding Requirements
At December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments totaling $36.1 million. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments will be sufficient to fund our obligations into the second half of 2022. We will need additional funding to complete the development and commercialization of our product candidates or those of our partners. In addition, we may evaluate in-licensing and acquisition opportunities to gain access to new product candidates that fit with our strategy. Any such transaction will likely increase our future funding requirements.
Our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially. Our future capital requirements are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors, including:
•
our ability to initiate, and the progress and results of, our ongoing and planned clinical trials;
•
the ability and willingness of our collaboration partners and licensees to continue clinical development of product candidates;
•
our ability to enter into and maintain our collaborations, including our collaborations with 3D Medicines and Alphamab, and I-Mab;
•
our ability to achieve, and our obligations to make, milestone payments under our collaboration and license agreements;
•
the outcome of our negotiations with I-Mab with respect to payments under the TJ004309 Agreement;
•
the costs and timing of procuring supplies of product candidates for clinical trials and regulatory submissions;
•
the scope, progress, results and costs of preclinical development, and clinical trials of our product candidates;
•
the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic delays our clinical development activities or those of our collaborators;
•
the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of product candidates;
•
the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates for which we or any of our partners, including 3D Medicines, Alphamab and I-Mab, may receive marketing approval;
•
the costs and timing of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending any intellectual property-related claims;
•
the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution, for any product candidates for which we receive marketing approval and do not partner for commercialization; and
•
the extent to which we acquire or in-license other products and technologies.
Until we can generate substantial product revenues, if ever, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, and licensing arrangements. There can be no assurance that additional funds will be available when needed from any source or, if available, will be available on terms that are acceptable to us. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, the global credit and financial markets have experienced extreme volatility and disruptions, including diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates and uncertainty about economic stability. If the equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult, more costly and more dilutive. Even if we raise additional capital, we may also be required to modify, delay or abandon some of our plans or programs which could have a material adverse effect on our business, operating results and financial condition and our ability to achieve our intended business objectives. Any of these actions could materially harm our business, results of operations and future prospects.