Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS ("MD&A")
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K ("Annual Report"). This Annual Report contains certain statements that are forward-looking within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Certain statements contained in the MD&A are forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates, assumptions and projections about our industry, business and future financial results. Our actual results could differ materially from the results contemplated by these forward-looking statements due to several factors, including those discussed in other sections of this Annual Report. See "Risk Factors" and "Forward-looking Statements."
OVERVIEW
Teradata Corporation is a leading multi-cloud data warehouse platform provider focused on helping companies leverage their data across an enterprise to uncover real-time intelligence, at scale. In doing so, we enable companies to find answers to their toughest business challenges. Our platform enables customers to integrate and simplify their multi-cloud data and analytic ecosystems, streamline access and management of their data, and use analytics to derive business value from diverse data types. Our platform is composed of our data warehouse platform - Teradata Vantage - enabled to run across on-premises, private cloud and public cloud environments. This platform is supported by business consulting and support services that enable customers to extract insights from across a company’s entire data and analytics ecosystem. Teradata’s strategy is discussed under Part I, Item I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
To drive operational excellence within Teradata, we are in the process of realigning and streamlining our operations as we pursue our business transformation and strategy to become a cloud-first growth company. As part of these activities, on November 2, 2020, the Company approved a plan to realign and reduce its workforce and rationalize its real estate footprint. The workforce measures involved involuntary headcount reduction actions. Separately, in September 2020, we offered a voluntary separation program ("VSP") to specific tenured employees as part of our efforts to improve our cost structure. For more information regarding the VSP, see Note 16 to Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The rationalization of the Company’s real estate footprint involves terminating leases relating to certain of the Company’s offices globally and transitioning impacted employees to a permanent virtual working environment, co-working space or facility, depending on business need. This is also consistent with the industry trend of working from a home-hybrid model.
We are continuing to execute on our key priorities, including significant product expansion of our Teradata Vantage multi-cloud data warehouse platform offering, expanding our footprint with existing customers and adding net new customers, increasing our focus on diversity and inclusiveness, and driving operational excellence and agility across the company.
To allow for greater transparency regarding the progress we are making toward achieving our strategic objectives, we utilize the following financial and performance metrics:
•Annual Recurring Revenue ("ARR") - annual contract value for all active and contractually binding term-based contracts at the end of a period. ARR includes maintenance, software upgrade rights, public cloud and on-premises subscription-based transactions and managed services.
•Public cloud ARR (included within total ARR) - annual contract value for all active and contractually binding term based contracts at the end of a period that are operated in a public cloud environment; and
•Remaining performance obligation ("RPO")/Backlog - the price of firm orders for which work has not been performed or goods have not been delivered and the Company is contractually required to perform.
COVID-19 Update
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the effects of the coronavirus disease 2019 ("COVID-19") pandemic and the related actions by governments around the world to attempt to contain the spread of the virus have impacted our business globally, and we expect our business will continue to be impacted for the foreseeable future. In particular, the outbreak and related preventive measures taken to contain COVID-19 beginning late in the first quarter of 2020 negatively impacted our ability to close transactions with customers and timely collect receivables in certain instances, which impacted our revenue and cash flow results for the first quarter. However, during the back half of 2020, we recovered from this impact, and as a result, we experienced a more favorable trend with meaningful ARR growth, strong cash flows and recurring revenue growth generated in these quarters, although we continued to see COVID-19 negatively impact our consulting business as described below.
In response to the pandemic, we have taken actions to manage expenses and costs appropriately in light of the uncertainty COVID-19 has created, which has had a positive impact on our operating performance. We continue to keep a watchful eye on COVID-19 impacts to our business and have undertaken additional expense management and cost measures to further drive our operating performance and provide agility in the event of an unforeseen reduction in demand should it occur. During 2020, we also experienced increased volatility in foreign currency exchange rates, in part related to the uncertainty from COVID-19, as well as actions taken by governments and
central banks in response to COVID-19. Certain foreign currency rates have depreciated significantly against the U.S. dollar during this period. We expect continued volatility in foreign currency exchange rates in 2021.
Our supply chain has been relatively stable with respect to manufacturing and distribution capabilities; however, our supply chain is susceptible to volatility due to ongoing uncertainty as a result of ongoing international and domestic pandemic response and recovery efforts. Operationally, we have been able to run our business without significant interruptions, with the vast majority of employees having shifted quickly as of mid-March 2020 to a work-from-home model, which remains in effect. However, our consulting business has been negatively impacted during the transition to work from home and shelter-in-place orders. Our customers’ reduction in discretionary spending in light of COVID-19 uncertainties has also impacted our consulting business, with consulting projects being delayed or suspended by our customers. We implemented several employee engagement and communication programs designed to support employees’ health and well-being while also enhancing their productivity during the pandemic.
Our priorities in formulating and implementing our response to the COVID-19 pandemic and related business disruption include the following:
•People - protecting the health and well-being of our employees,
•Customers - proactively connecting with our customers to support their needs and meet our service level commitments, while continuing to help them gain real business value from their data assets,
•Supply Chain - proactively working to monitor existing inventory, supplier availability and securing inventory for future quarters,
•Financial - responsibly managing expenses and costs to provide financial agility during the extended period of global economic uncertainty,
•Global Community - making our technology available to customers, partners and communities, particularly in healthcare and government, where collectively we can positively impact efforts in combating COVID-19, and
•Future of Work - planning to best position the Company to emerge as strong as possible when the COVID-19 pandemic ends.
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we are continuing to execute our pandemic response plan, and the Teradata Pandemic Response Team is refining and executing return-to-office plans with "safety first" considerations. Customer-facing teams are also proactively working to identify ways to assist customers, meet service level commitments, and engage with customers via virtual events.
Despite these efforts, there remains a fair degree of uncertainty regarding the potential impact of the pandemic on our business, from both a financial and operational perspective, and the scope and costs associated with additional measures that may be necessary in response to the pandemic going forward. We will continue our diligent efforts to monitor and respond as appropriate to the impacts of the pandemic on our business, including the status of our workforce, supply chain, customers, suppliers, and vendors, based on the priorities described above. Our actions will continue to be informed by the requirements and recommendations of the federal, state or local authorities. We will remain agile and have contingency plans in place to appropriately respond to conditions as they unfold. For more information, see "Risk Factors" under Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
2020 FINANCIAL OVERVIEW
As more fully discussed in later sections of this MD&A, the following are the financial highlights for 2020:
•Revenue of $1,836 million decreased by 3% in 2020 as compared to 2019, with an underlying 7% increase in recurring revenue primarily driven by our transition from perpetual to subscription-based transactions. The increase in recurring revenue was more than offset by a 31% decrease in perpetual software licenses and hardware revenue and a 28% decrease in consulting services revenue. The decline in consulting service revenue is in alignment with our strategy as well as due to the impact of COVID-19 as discussed above.
•Gross margin was 55.5% in 2020, an increase from 50.3% in 2019, primarily due to a higher recurring revenue mix as compared to the prior year.
•Operating expenses in 2020 increased by 6% as compared to 2019, primarily due to expenses related to the VSP offered to employees, an increase in investments in cloud transformation, and employee stock-based compensation expense.
•Operating income was $16 million in 2020, up from $10 million in 2019.
•Net income was $129 million in 2020 versus a net loss of $20 million in 2019, primarily due to discrete tax items. Net earnings per share was $1.16 in 2020 compared to net loss per share of $0.18 in 2019.
RESULTS FROM OPERATIONS FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020, 2019 AND 2018
In July 2019, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued Accounting Standards Update 2019-07, "Codification Updates to SEC Sections-Amendments to SEC Paragraphs Pursuant to SEC Final Rule Releases No. 33-10532, Disclosure Update and Simplification", which makes a number of changes meant to simplify certain disclosures in financial condition and results of operations, particularly by eliminating year-to-year comparisons between prior periods previously disclosed. In accordance with the relevant aspects of the rule covering the current year annual report, we now include disclosures on results of operations for fiscal year 2020 versus 2019 only. For discussion of fiscal year 2019 versus 2018 see "Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report filed with the SEC for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenue
2020 compared to 2019 -Total revenue decreased $63 million, or 3%, in 2020. Recurring revenue grew 7%, primarily driven by our movement to subscription-based transactions from perpetual software licenses and hardware transactions, consistent with our strategy. Under subscription models, we recognize revenue over time as opposed to the upfront recognition under the perpetual model. Better than expected ARR growth also contributed to the increase in recurring revenue. For full year 2021, we expect ARR growth and recurring revenue growth at a mid- to high-single digit percentage increase as compared to 2020. Public cloud ARR is expected to increase by at least 100% year-over-year. Taking into consideration the growth in recurring revenue offset by reduced perpetual software licenses and hardware revenue and reduced consulting services revenue, we expect that total revenue is expected to grow at a low-single-digit percentage in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Revenues from perpetual software licenses and hardware decreased 31% in 2020 as customers continue to transition to subscription-based offerings.
Consulting services revenue decreased 28%, as we are realigning and focusing our consulting resources on higher-margin engagements that drive increased software consumption within our targeted customer base. Consulting revenue was also impacted by the transition to work from home and shelter-in-place orders that went in effect late in the first quarter of 2020 in response to COVID-19 as well as delays and/or cancellations of consulting projects due to customers’ reduced spending in light of COVID-19.
As a portion of the Company’s operations and revenue occur outside the United States, and in currencies other than the U.S. dollar, the Company is exposed to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. Based on currency rates as of January 31, 2020, Teradata is expecting two percentage points of positive impact from currency translation on our 2021 full-year total revenues.
Included below are financial and performance growth metrics for 2020:
•ARR was $1.587 billion at the end of 2020, a 11% increase from $1.427 billion at the end of 2019
•Public cloud ARR was $106 million at the end of 2020, a 165% increase from $40 million at the end of 2019
•Total backlog grew 7% to $2.921 billion
Our ARR is composed of three main categories: (1) ARR related to subscription and public cloud software licenses, (2) ARR related to our legacy perpetual maintenance and software upgrade rights, and (3) ARR related to subscription-based managed services. At December 31, 2020, our ARR consisted of:
•$960 million of subscription and public cloud-related ARR, up 37%;
•$508 million of perpetual license maintenance and software upgrade rights-related ARR, down 17%; and
•$119 million of subscription-based managed services ARR, up 6%.
This decline in our maintenance and software upgrade-related ARR, compared to 2019 was expected as the Company completes its transition to a subscription model and customers increasingly purchase Teradata on a subscription and/or public cloud basis.
The rate of our transition to a recurring revenue model has been significantly faster than expected, and we believe it is reflective of the value our customers see in our subscription model and cloud offerings.
Teradata will be realigning its ARR and revenue disclosures beginning the first quarter of 2021, removing managed services and third-party software from subscription-based ARR and recurring revenue. Managed services revenue will be included in "Consulting services revenue" in 2021 and third-party software will be moved to "Perpetual software licenses, hardware and other revenue."
Gross Profit
The Company often uses specific terms and definitions to describe variances in gross profit. The terms and definitions most often used are as follows:
•Revenue Mix - The proportion of recurring, consulting, and perpetual software licenses and hardware that generates the total revenue of the Company. Changes in revenue mix can have an impact on gross profit even if total revenue remains unchanged.
•Recurring Revenue Mix - The proportion of various recurring revenue offerings that comprise the total of recurring revenue. For example, a higher mix of subscriptions including hardware rentals could have a negative impact on total recurring gross profit.
•Deal Mix - Refers to the type of transactions closed within the period that generate the total perpetual software license and hardware revenue. For example, a higher mix of hardware versus software or the mix of Teradata versus third-party products can impact profitability.
Gross profit for the following years ended December 31 was as follows:
2020 compared to 2019 - The decrease in recurring gross profit as a percentage of revenue was primarily driven by a higher mix of subscription-based revenue as compared to the prior-year period. Subscription-based transactions
are typically lower margin as compared to the recurring revenue from legacy software maintenance and software upgrade rights, due to the higher mix of rental hardware.
The increase in perpetual software licenses and hardware gross profit as a percentage of revenue was primarily driven by deal mix as compared to the prior year.
Consulting services gross profit as a percentage of revenue increased as compared to the prior year primarily due to improved resource mix utilization as well as increased price realization and our continued strategic focus to improve consulting margins. The Company continues to refocus our consulting organization on Vantage-oriented offerings and reduce our footprint in non-core consulting engagements.
As part of our restructuring actions, we have moved to a more variable consulting cost structure starting in 2021, which is designed to improve the profitability of our consulting business.
Operating Expenses
2020 compared to 2019 - The SG&A expense increase was primarily driven by an increase in stock-based compensation expense, the VSP, amortization of capitalized sales compensation, as well as additional investments in our go-to-market and customer success teams.
R&D expenses increased primarily due to the VSP and a re-prioritization of our R&D organization on strategic initiatives and reduced spending on de-prioritized initiatives, while increasing investments in Cloud transformations.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net in 2020 and 2019 is comprised primarily of interest expense on long-term debt and finance leases, partially offset by interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents as well as benefit costs for our pension and postemployment plans. Other expense, net increased compared to the prior year primarily due to lower interest income generated on investments due to lower invested balances and lower interest rates, increased benefit costs for our pension and postemployment plans, and losses resulting from foreign currency transactions.
Provision for Income Taxes
The effective income tax rate for the following years ended December 31 was as follows:
The 2020 effective tax rate included a net $157 million of discrete tax benefit. Discrete tax benefit of $157 million, was recorded related to the transfer of foreign intellectual property as more fully described below. In addition, the Company recognized a net $13 million of tax benefit resulting from the CARES Act of 2020, which allows U.S.
corporations a one-time opportunity to claim income tax refunds by allowing a 5-year net operating loss ("NOL") carry-back for taxable losses incurred in the tax year 2020. Teradata intends to carry back its 2020 NOL to claim a refund for taxes it paid in 2015, which created a one-time income tax benefit for the difference between the 35% 2015 carry back tax rate and the current 21% federal statutory rate. These tax benefits were partially offset by $9 million tax expense related to stock-based compensation and $4 million of incremental global intangible low-taxed income ("GILTI") tax. These discrete net tax benefits resulted in full-year total income tax benefit in 2020 of $153 million, on a pre-tax net loss of $24 million, causing a tax rate of 637.5%.
The 2019 effective tax rate was impacted by $3 million tax expense related to stock-based compensation and $3 million of incremental GILTI tax, which resulted in a full-year income tax expense in 2019 of $7 million, on a pre-tax net loss of $13 million, causing a negative tax rate of 53.8%.
The Company is expecting its full-year effective tax rate for 2021 to be approximately 29%, which takes into consideration, among other things, the forecasted earnings mix by jurisdiction and the estimated discrete items to be recognized in 2021. The forecasted tax rate is based on the overseas profits being taxed at an overall effective tax rate of approximately 23%, as compared to the federal statutory tax rate of 21% in the U.S.
Revenue and Gross Profit by Operating Segment
Teradata manages its business under three geographic regions, which are also the Company’s operating segments: (1) Americas region (North America and Latin America); (2) EMEA region (Europe, Middle East, and Africa) and (3) APJ region (Asia Pacific and Japan). For purposes of discussing results by segment, management excludes the impact of certain items, consistent with the manner by which management evaluates the performance of each segment. This format is useful to investors because it allows analysis and comparability of operating trends. It also includes the same information that is used by Teradata management to make decisions regarding the segments and to assess financial performance. The chief operating decision maker, who is our President and Chief Executive Officer, evaluates the performance of the segments based on revenue and multiple profit measures, including segment gross profit. For management reporting purposes, assets are not allocated to the segments. Our segment results are reconciled to total company results reported under GAAP in Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following table presents revenue and operating performance by segment for the years ended December 31:
2020 compared to 2019
Americas
Americas revenue decreased 3% and included a 1% negative impact from foreign currency fluctuations. An increase in recurring revenue of 1% was offset by a decrease of 5% in perpetual software licenses and hardware revenue and a decrease in consulting revenue of 27%. Segment gross profit as a percentage of revenues was higher primarily due to an overall higher mix of recurring revenue.
EMEA
EMEA revenue decreased 1%, which included a 1% favorable impact from foreign currency fluctuations. An increase of 19% in recurring revenue was offset by a decrease of 47% in perpetual software licenses and hardware revenue and a decrease in consulting revenue of 31%. Segment gross profit as a percentage of revenues was higher primarily due to a higher mix of recurring revenue.
APJ
APJ revenue decreased 7%, which included no impact from foreign currency fluctuations. An increase in recurring revenue of 11% was offset by a decrease of 44% in perpetual software licenses and hardware revenue and a decrease in consulting revenue of 24%. Segment gross profit as a percentage of revenues was higher primarily due to a higher mix of recurring revenue.
FINANCIAL CONDITION, LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Teradata ended 2020 with $529 million in cash and cash equivalents, a $35 million increase from the December 31, 2019 balance, after using approximately $100 million for repurchases of Company common stock during the year. Cash provided by operating activities increased by $119 million to $267 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Teradata used approximately $58 million of cash in 2020 for reorganizing and restructuring its operations and go-to-market functions to align to its strategy, as compared to $63 million in 2019. The increase in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to improved management of working capital. Although the COVID-19 pandemic did not have a significant adverse impact on our financial results for 2020, we have reviewed our capital projects to ensure that we are only spending on projects that are deemed to be essential in the current environment. We have taken steps to manage spending on travel, third-party services and other operating expenses, and we continue to focus on cash flow generation. Terms of payments have been extended for certain customers in impacted industries; however, these extensions are not significant in aggregate. We do not expect the pandemic to have a significant adverse effect on our liquidity, as we believe that operating cash flows and available liquidity are sufficient to support operational needs for at least the next 12 months.
Teradata’s management uses a non-GAAP measure called "free cash flow," which is not a measure defined under GAAP. We define free cash flow as net cash provided by operating activities less capital expenditures for property and equipment and additions to capitalized software. Free cash flow is one measure of assessing the financial performance of the Company, and this may differ from the definition used by other companies. The components that are used to calculate free cash flow are GAAP measures taken directly from the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. We believe that free cash flow information is useful for investors because it relates the operating cash flow of the Company to the capital that is spent to continue and improve business operations. In particular, free cash flow indicates the amount of cash available after capital expenditures for, among other things, investments in the Company’s existing businesses, strategic acquisitions and repurchase of Teradata common stock. Free cash flow does not represent the residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures since there may be other non-discretionary expenditures that are not deducted from the measure. This non-GAAP measure should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, cash flows from operating activities under GAAP.
The table below shows net cash provided by operating activities and capital expenditures for the following periods:
Financing activities and certain other investing activities are not included in our calculation of free cash flow. There were no other investing activities in 2020 and 2019.
Teradata’s financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of cash outflows of $100 million for share repurchases, repayment of existing term loan of $25 million and $70 million of payments on finance leases, partially offset by $9 million net inflows from other financing activities.
Teradata’s financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily consisted of cash outflows of $300 million for share repurchases, repayment of existing term loan of $19 million and $33 million of payments on finance leases, partially offset by $44 million net inflows from other financing activities.
The Company purchased 4.8 million shares of its common stock at an average price per share of $20.81 in 2020 and 8.5 million shares of its common stock at an average price per share of $35.38 in 2019.
Share repurchases were made under two share repurchase programs initially authorized by our Board of Directors in 2008. The first of these programs (the "dilution offset program") authorizes the Company to repurchase Teradata common stock to the extent of cash received from the exercise of stock options and the Teradata Employee Stock Purchase Plan ("ESPP") to offset dilution from shares issued pursuant to these plans. As of December 31, 2020, under the Company’s second share repurchase program (the "general share repurchase program"), the Company had approximately $416 million of authorization remaining to repurchase outstanding shares of Teradata common stock. Share repurchases made by the Company are reported on a trade date basis.
Proceeds from the ESPP and the exercise of stock options, net of tax paid for shares withheld upon equity award settlement, were $9 million in 2020 and $44 million in 2019. These proceeds are included in other financing activities, net in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
Our total cash and cash equivalents held outside the United States in various foreign subsidiaries was $342 million as of December 31, 2020 and $344 million as of December 31, 2019. The remaining balance held in the United States was $191 million as of December 31, 2020 and $150 million as of December 31, 2019. Prior to the enactment of the 2017 Tax Act, the Company either reinvested or intended to reinvest its earnings outside of the United States. As a result of the 2017 Tax Act, the Company has changed its indefinite reinvestment assertion related to foreign earnings that have been taxed in the United States and now considers a majority of these earnings no longer indefinitely reinvested. Effective January 1, 2018, the United States moved to a territorial system of international taxation, and as such will generally not subject future foreign earnings to United States taxation upon repatriation in future years.
Management believes current cash, cash generated from operations and the $400 million available under the Credit Facility will be sufficient to satisfy future working capital, research and development activities, capital expenditures, pension contributions, and other financing requirements for at least the next twelve months. The Company principally holds its cash and cash equivalents in bank deposits and highly-rated money market funds.
The Company’s ability to generate positive cash flows from operations is dependent on general economic conditions, competitive pressures, and other business and risk factors described elsewhere in this Annual Report. If the Company is unable to generate sufficient cash flows from operations, or otherwise to comply with the terms of the credit facility and term loan agreement, the Company may be required to seek additional financing alternatives.
Long-term Debt. Our long-term debt and minimum debt obligations as of December 31, 2020 are discussed in Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Leases. In the normal course of business, the Company enters into operating and finance leases that impact, or could impact, our liquidity. Leases and minimum lease obligations as of December 31, 2020 are described in detail in Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contractual and Other Commercial Commitments. In the normal course of business, we enter into various contractual obligations that impact, or could impact, our liquidity. The following table and discussion outline our material obligations at December 31, 2020, with projected cash payments in the periods shown:
Transition tax is the remaining payable balance as of December 31, 2020 of the one-time tax on accumulated foreign earnings resulting from the Tax Act. The payments associated with this deemed repatriation will be paid over seven years ending in 2025. Purchase obligations are committed purchase orders and other contractual commitments for goods and services and include non-cancelable contractual payments for fixed or minimum amounts to be purchased in relation to service agreements with various vendors for ongoing telecommunications, information technology, hosting and other services.
Additionally, the Company had $39 million in total uncertain tax positions recorded on its balance sheet as of December 31, 2020, of which $18 million is recorded in non-current liabilities and $21 million is reflected as an offset to deferred tax assets related to certain tax attribute carryforwards. These items are not included in the table of obligations shown above. The settlement period for the non-current income tax liabilities cannot be reasonably estimated as the timing and the amount of the payments, if any, will depend on possible future tax examinations with the various tax authorities. However, it is not expected that any payments will be due within the next 12 months.
We also have product warranties and guarantees to third parties, as well as postemployment and international pension obligations that may affect future cash flow. These items are not included in the table of obligations shown above. The Company is also potentially subject to concentration of supplier risk. Our hardware components are assembled exclusively by Flex Ltd. ("Flex"). Flex procures a wide variety of components used in the manufacturing process on our behalf. Although many of these components are available from multiple sources, Teradata utilizes preferred supplier relationships to better ensure more consistent quality, cost, and delivery. Typically, these preferred suppliers maintain alternative processes and/or facilities to ensure continuity of supply. Given the Company’s strategy to outsource its manufacturing activities to Flex and to source certain components from single suppliers, a disruption in production at Flex or at a supplier could impact the timing of customer shipments and/or Teradata’s operating results. In addition, a significant change in the forecasts to any of these preferred suppliers could result in purchase obligations or components that may be in excess of demand. Product warranties and third-party guarantees are described in detail in "Note 10-Commitments and Contingencies" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Postemployment and pension obligations are described in detail in "Note 8-Employee Benefit Plans" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that generate relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or for other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. In connection with the preparation of these financial statements, we are required to make assumptions, estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and the related disclosure of contingent liabilities. These assumptions, estimates and judgments are based on historical experience and assumptions that are believed to be reasonable at the time. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, the determination of estimates requires the exercise of judgment. Our critical accounting policies are those that require assumptions to be made about matters that are highly uncertain. Different estimates could have a material impact on our financial results. Judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of these policies and estimates may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or circumstances. Our management periodically reviews these estimates and assumptions to ensure that our financial statements are presented fairly and are materially correct.
In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP and does not require significant management judgment in its application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting among available alternatives would not produce a materially different result. The significant accounting policies and estimates that we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are discussed in the paragraphs below. Teradata’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit Committee of Teradata’s Board of Directors. For additional information regarding our accounting policies and other disclosures required by GAAP, see "Note 1-
Description of Business, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2018, we adopted ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers ("ASC 606"). This standard replaced existing revenue recognition rules with a comprehensive revenue measurement and recognition standard and expanded disclosure requirements. Refer to Notes 1 and 3, of our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for discussion of our revenue recognition policies.
Revenue recognition for complex contractual arrangements requires judgment, including a review of specific contracts, past experience, creditworthiness of customers, international laws and other factors. Specifically, complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions may require significant contract interpretation to determine the appropriate accounting. We must also apply judgment in determining all performance obligations in the contract and in determining the standalone selling price of each performance obligation, considering the price charged for each product when sold on a standalone basis and applicable renewal rates for services and subscriptions. Changes in judgments about these factors could impact the timing and amount of revenue recognized between periods.
The Company reviews the standalone selling price on a periodic basis and updates it, when appropriate, to ensure that the practices employed reflect the Company’s recent pricing experience. The Company maintains internal controls over the establishment and updates of these estimates, which includes review and approval by the Company’s management. For the year ended December 31, 2020 there was no material impact to revenue resulting from changes in the standalone selling price, nor does the Company expect a material impact from such changes in the near term.
Income Taxes
In accounting for income taxes, we recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities. The deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the enacted tax rates expected to apply in the periods in which the deferred tax assets or liabilities are expected to be settled or realized. The Company made an accounting policy election in 2018 related to the Tax Act to provide for the tax expense related to GILTI in the year the tax is incurred.
Prior to the enactment of the Tax Act in December 2017, the Company had not provided for taxes on the undistributed earnings of its foreign subsidiaries as the Company either reinvested or intended to reinvest those earnings outside of the United States. Because of the Tax Act, the Company has changed its indefinite reinvestment assertion related to foreign earnings that have been taxed in the United States and now considers a majority of these earnings no longer indefinitely reinvested. The Company has recorded $2 million of deferred foreign tax expense with respect to certain earnings that are not considered permanently reinvested. Deferred taxes have not been provided on earnings considered indefinitely reinvested.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes by prescribing thresholds and attributes for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. We record any interest and/or penalties related to uncertain tax positions in the income tax expense line on our Consolidated Statements of Income. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has a total of $39 million of unrecognized tax benefits, of which $18 million is included in the other liabilities section of the Company’s consolidated balance sheet as a non-current liability. The remaining balance of $21 million of uncertain tax positions relates to certain tax attributes generated by the Company which are netted against the underlying deferred tax assets recorded on the balance sheet.
We regularly review our deferred tax assets for recoverability and establish a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. We have recorded $51 million in 2020 and $45 million in 2019 for valuation allowances, a majority of which offset our California R&D tax credit carryfoward, as the Company expects to continue to generate excess California R&D tax credits into the foreseeable future.
On January 1, 2020, we transferred certain of our intellectual property among our wholly-owned subsidiaries, which resulted in the recognition of deferred tax assets of $157 million. The recognition of deferred tax assets from intra-entity transfers of intellectual property required us to make significant estimates and assumptions to determine the fair value of such intellectual property. Significant assumptions in valuing the intellectual property include, but are not limited to, internal revenue and expense forecasts, and the discount rate. The sustainability of our future tax benefits is dependent upon the acceptance of these valuation estimates and assumptions by the taxing authorities.
Stock-based Compensation
We measure compensation cost for stock awards at fair value and recognize compensation expense over the service period. In addition, we issue performance-based awards that vest only if specific performance conditions are satisfied. The number of shares that will be earned can vary based on actual performance. No shares will vest if the threshold objectives are not met. In the event the objectives are exceeded, additional shares will vest up to a maximum payout. The cost of these awards is expensed over the performance period based upon management’s estimate and analysis of the probability of meeting the performance criteria. Because the actual number of shares to be awarded is not known until the end of the performance period, the actual compensation expense related to these awards could differ from our current expectations. We account for forfeitures as they occur instead of estimating forfeitures at the time of grant and revising those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from our estimates.
Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets
The Company reviews goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. For 2019, the Company performed a quantitative impairment test. In this test, the Company compares the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. The Company typically determines the fair value of its reporting units using a weighting of fair values derived from the income and market approaches. Under the income approach, the Company calculates the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. The market approach estimates fair value based on market multiples of revenue and earnings derived from comparable companies with similar operating and investment characteristics as the reporting unit. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that unit, goodwill is not impaired. If the carrying value of the net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, then the company records an impairment loss equal to the difference. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company performed its annual impairment test of goodwill and determined that no impairment to the carrying value of goodwill was necessary.
Determining the fair value of goodwill and acquired intangibles is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, discount rates and future economic and market conditions. The company’s estimates are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. These valuations require the use of management’s assumptions, which may not reflect unanticipated events and circumstances that may occur.
Leases
On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted ASU No. 2016-02, "Leases (Topic 842)", which requires leases with durations greater than twelve months to be recognized on the balance sheet. We determine if a contract contains a lease at inception. Our material operating leases consist of automobiles in certain countries and real estate, including office, storage and parking space. Our operating leases generally have remaining terms of 2-6 years. Our finance leases primarily consist of equipment financed for the purpose of delivering services to our customers and generally have terms of 3 years.
Operating lease assets and liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date. Operating lease liabilities represent the present value of lease payments not yet paid. Operating lease assets represent our right to use an underlying asset and are based upon the operating lease liabilities adjusted for prepayments or accrued lease payments, initial direct costs, lease incentives, and impairment of operating lease assets. To determine the present value of lease payments not yet paid, when available, the we use the rate implicit in the lease. However, real estate
leases do not typically provide a readily determinable implicit rate. Therefore, we estimate the incremental borrowing rate to discount the lease payments based on information available at lease commencement. The incremental borrowing rate used in the calculation of the lease liability is based on the secured rate associated with financed lease obligations for each location of leased property. Many of our leases include variable rental escalation clauses which are recognized when incurred. Some of our leases also include renewal options and/or termination options that are factored into the determination of lease payments and lease terms when it is reasonably certain that the Company will exercise these options. Lease agreements do not contain any material residual value guarantees or material restrictive covenants. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the balance sheet. Changes in judgments and estimates, such as the likelihood of renewal options, impairments, or the incremental borrowing rate could impact the amounts of assets or liabilities recorded or could impact the amount of cost or expense recognized between periods.
Pension and Postemployment Benefits
We measure pension and postemployment benefit costs and credits using actuarial valuations. Actuarial assumptions attempt to anticipate future events and are used in calculating the expense and liability relating to these plans. These factors include assumptions we make about interest rates, expected investment return on plan assets, total and involuntary turnover rates, and rates of future compensation increases. In addition, our actuarial consultants also use subjective factors such as withdrawal rates and mortality rates to develop our valuations. We review and update these assumptions on an annual basis at the beginning of each fiscal year. We are required to consider current market conditions, including changes in interest rates, in making these assumptions. The actuarial assumptions that we use may differ materially from actual results due to changing market and economic conditions, higher or lower withdrawal rates, or longer or shorter life spans of participants. These differences may result in a significant impact to the measurement of our pension and postemployment benefit obligations and to the amount of pension and postemployment benefits expense we have recorded or may record. For example, as of December 31, 2020, a one-half percent increase/decrease in the discount rate would change the projected benefit obligation of our pension plans by approximately $13 million, and a one-half percent increase/decrease in our involuntary turnover assumption would change our postemployment benefit obligation by approximately $9 million.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
A discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements is described in "Note 1-Description of Business, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements elsewhere in this Annual Report, and we incorporate such discussion by reference.