ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with TD Group’s consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this report. The following discussion may contain predictions, estimates and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties, including those discussed under the heading entitled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this report. These risks could cause our actual results to differ materially from any future performance suggested below.
Overview
For fiscal year 2021, we generated net sales of $4,798 million, gross profit of $2,513 million or 52.4% of net sales, and net income attributable to TD Group of $680 million. The COVID-19 pandemic has continued to cause a significant adverse impact on our net sales, net income and EBITDA As Defined when compared to pre-pandemic levels. Historically and as our business continues to recover from the pandemic, we believe we have achieved steady, long-term growth in sales and improvements in operating performance since our formation in 1993 due to our competitive strengths and through execution of our value-driven operating strategy. More specifically, focusing our businesses on our value-driven operating strategy of obtaining profitable new business, carefully controlling the cost structure and pricing our highly engineered value-added products to fairly reflect the value we provide and the resources required to do so has historically resulted in improvements in gross profit and income from operations over the long-term.
Our selective acquisition strategy has also contributed to the growth of our business. The integration of certain acquisitions into our existing businesses combined with implementing our proven operating strategy has historically resulted in improvements in the financial performance of the acquired business.
We believe our key competitive strengths include:
Large and Growing Installed Product Base with Aftermarket Revenue Stream. We provide components to a large and growing installed base of aircraft to which we supply aftermarket products. We estimate that our products are installed on over 100,000 commercial transport, regional transport, military and general aviation fixed wing turbine aircraft and rotary wing aircraft.
Diversified Revenue Base. We believe that our diversified revenue base reduces our dependence on any particular product, platform or market channel and has been a significant factor in maintaining our financial performance. Our products are installed on almost all of the major commercial aircraft platforms now in production. We expect to continue to develop new products for military and commercial applications. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, many of our businesses have taken the opportunity to explore new business opportunities by working on developing highly engineered solutions for emerging needs arising from the pandemic. Product solutions currently being explored include anti-viral or antimicrobial technology, air purification, and touchless technologies, among others.
Barriers to Entry. We believe that the niche nature of our markets, the industry’s stringent regulatory and certification requirements, the large number of products that we sell and the investments necessary to develop and certify products create potential disincentives to competition for certain products.
Our business strategy is made up of two key elements: (1) a value-driven operating strategy focused around our three core value drivers and (2) a selective acquisition strategy.
Value-Driven Operating Strategy. Our three core value drivers are:
•Obtaining Profitable New Business. We attempt to obtain profitable new business by using our technical expertise and application skill and our detailed knowledge of our customer base and the individual niche markets in which we operate. We have regularly been successful in identifying and developing both aftermarket and OEM products to drive our growth.
•Improving Our Cost Structure. We are committed to maintaining and continuously improving our lean cost structure through detailed attention to the cost of each of the products that we offer and our organizational structure, with a focus on reducing the cost of each.
•Providing Highly Engineered Value-Added Products to Customers. We focus on the engineering, manufacturing and marketing of a broad range of highly engineered niche products that we believe provide value to our customers. We believe we have been consistently successful in communicating to our customers the value of our products. This has generally enabled us to price our products to fairly reflect the value we provide and the resources required to do so.
Selective Acquisition Strategy. We selectively pursue the acquisition of proprietary aerospace component businesses when we see an opportunity to create value through the application of our three core value-driven operating strategies. The aerospace industry, in particular, remains highly fragmented, with many of the companies in the industry being small private businesses or small non-core operations of larger businesses. We have significant experience among our management team in executing acquisitions and integrating acquired businesses into our company and culture. As of the date of this report, we have successfully acquired approximately 86 businesses and product lines since our formation in 1993. Many of these acquisitions have been integrated into an existing TransDigm production facility, which enables a higher production capacity utilization, which in turn improves gross profit levels due to the ability to spread the fixed manufacturing overhead costs over higher production volume. In the case of larger acquisitions that consists of multiple business units (such as the Esterline acquisition), we may pursue opportunities to divest certain acquired business units that are not in line with our long-term acquisition strategy.
Acquisitions and divestitures during the most recent three fiscal years are described in Note 2, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic is continuing to cause an adverse impact on our employees, operations, supply chain and distribution system and the long-term impact to our business remains unknown. This is due to the numerous uncertainties that have risen from the pandemic, including the severity of the disease, the duration of the outbreak, the likelihood of resurgences of the outbreak, including due to the emergence and spread of variants, actions that may be taken by governmental authorities in response to the disease, the continued efficacy and public acceptance of vaccines, and unintended consequences of the foregoing.
The commercial aerospace industry, in particular, has been significantly disrupted, both domestically and internationally, by the pandemic. The pandemic has resulted in governments around the world implementing stringent measures to help control the spread of the virus, including quarantines, “shelter in place” and “stay at home” orders, travel restrictions, business curtailments and other measures. As a result, demand for travel declined at a rapid pace beginning in the second half of fiscal 2020 and has remained depressed compared to pre-pandemic levels. However, commercial air travel has increasingly shown signs of recovery in recent months with increasing air traffic, primarily in certain domestic markets. The recovery in international commercial air travel has been slower with international travel only slightly recovered from COVID-19 pandemic lows. The exact pace and timing of the commercial air travel recovery remains uncertain and is expected to continue to be uneven depending on factors such as trends in the number of COVID-19 infections (e.g., impact of new variants of COVID-19 resurfacing), the continued efficacy and public acceptance of vaccines and easing of quarantines and travel restrictions, among other factors. We currently expect COVID-19 to continue to cause an adverse impact on our net sales, net income and EBITDA as Defined compared to pre-pandemic levels into fiscal 2022. Longer-term, because the duration of the pandemic is unclear, it is difficult to forecast a precise impact on the Company’s future results.
The Company took immediate and aggressive action to minimize the spread of COVID-19 in our workplaces and reduce costs. Since the early days of the pandemic, we have been following guidance from the World Health Organization and the U.S. Center for Disease Control to protect employees and prevent the spread of the virus within all of our facilities globally.
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, COVID-19 restructuring costs incurred were approximately $36 million, of which $26 million was recorded in cost of sales and $10 million was recorded in selling and administrative expenses. These were costs related to the Company's actions to reduce its workforce to align with customer demand. Additionally, the Company incurred approximately $4 million in incremental costs related to the pandemic that are not expected to recur once the pandemic has subsided and are clearly separable from normal operations (e.g., additional cleaning and disinfecting of facilities by contractors above and beyond normal requirements, personal protective equipment).
As of September 30, 2021, the restructuring accrual associated with the costs incurred in response to the COVID-19 pandemic was approximately $19 million. In fiscal 2022, the Company may incur additional restructuring and incremental costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic though at a reduced level in comparison to fiscal 2021 and 2020.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, certain operating data of the Company, including presentation of the amounts as a percentage of net sales (amounts in millions):
(1)Net income applicable to TD Group common stockholders represents net income attributable to TD Group less special dividends declared or paid on participating securities, including dividend equivalent payments of $73 million and $185 million for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020.
(2)Earnings per share from continuing operations is calculated by dividing net income applicable to TD Group common stockholders, excluding income from discontinued operations, net of tax, by the basic and diluted weighted average common shares outstanding. Earnings per share from discontinued operations is calculated by dividing income from discontinued operations, net of tax, by the basic and diluted weighted average common shares outstanding.
(3)Refer to “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” in this discussion and analysis for additional information and limitations regarding these non-GAAP financial measures, including a reconciliation to the comparable GAAP financial measure.
Fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared with fiscal year ended September 30, 2020
Total Company
•Net Sales. Net organic sales and acquisition and divestiture sales and the related dollar and percentage changes for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (amounts in millions):
Organic sales represent sales from existing businesses owned by the Company, excluding sales from acquisitions and divestitures. Acquisition sales represent sales from acquired businesses for the period up to one year subsequent to their respective acquisition date. Divestiture sales represent sales from businesses divested in fiscal 2021. Acquisition and divestiture sales are excluded from organic sales due to the variability in the nature, timing and extent of acquisitions and divestitures and resulting variable impact on underlying trends.
The decrease in organic sales of $380 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, is primarily related to decreases in commercial OEM sales ($315 million, a decrease of 25.6%) and commercial aftermarket sales ($233 million, a decrease of 18.1%); partially offset by increases in defense sales ($115 million, an increase of 5.4%) and non-aerospace sales ($53 million, an increase of 19.8%). The decreases in the commercial OEM market and commercial aftermarket are primarily attributable to the adverse impact that the COVID-19 pandemic has had on the customer demand for air travel worldwide particularly in the first half of fiscal 2021 and build rate reductions by aircraft OEMs. Both commercial OEM and aftermarket sales increased in the second half of fiscal 2021 compared to the previous year’s comparable period. The increase in defense sales and non-aerospace sales in fiscal 2021 is primarily driven by the OEM market.
The increase in acquisition and divestiture sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 is primarily attributable to the acquisition of Cobham Aero Connectivity (“CAC”) in the second quarter of fiscal 2021 and the divestitures of ScioTeq and TREALITY Simulation Visual Systems ("ScioTeq and TREALITY") and Technical Airborne Components (“TAC”), all of which were completed in the third quarter of fiscal 2021. Refer to Note 2, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein for further information on the businesses acquired and divested by the Company in fiscal years 2020 and 2021.
•Cost of Sales and Gross Profit. Cost of sales decreased by $171 million, or 7.0%, to $2,285 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to $2,456 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. Cost of sales and the related percentage of net sales for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (amounts in millions):
The decrease in the dollar amount of cost of sales during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 was primarily due to lower sales volume from decreased customer demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the other factors summarized above, including those factors that partially offset the decrease in cost of sales.
Gross profit as a percentage of net sales increased by 0.5 percentage points to 52.4% for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 from 51.9% for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. In addition to the factors summarized above, the increase in the gross profit percentage is primarily driven by the realization of the cost mitigation measures that began to be enacted in the second half of fiscal 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The material cost mitigation measures enacted are described in Note 1, "Description of the Business and Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic," in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein. Partially offsetting were higher material costs due to inflationary effects and shortages in the global supply chain for certain raw materials and component parts. Also partially offsetting were fixed overhead costs spread over a lower production volume during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
•Selling and Administrative Expenses. Selling and administrative expenses decreased by $42 million to $685 million, or 14.3% of sales, for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 from $727 million, or 14.2% of sales, for the comparable period in the prior year. Selling and administrative expenses and the related percentage of total sales for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (amounts in millions):
The decrease in total selling and administrative expenses during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 is primarily due to the realization of the cost mitigation measures that began to be enacted in the second half of fiscal 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by the other factors summarized above. The material cost mitigation measures enacted are described in Note 1, "Description of the Business and Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic," in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein. The increase in non-cash stock compensation expense is attributable to the new stock option grants awarded in fiscal 2021 and the impact of the Black-Scholes fair value on certain fiscal 2021 stock option grant modifications and on the fiscal 2020 grants in connection with the change in vesting terms approved by the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors in the first quarter of fiscal 2021. The decrease in bad debt expense for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 is primarily driven by a decrease in estimated losses from certain commercial aerospace customers that were more adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Amortization of Intangible Assets. Amortization of intangible assets was $137 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to $169 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The decrease in amortization expense of $32 million was primarily due to the amortization expense on sales order backlog recorded in fiscal 2020 in connection with the acquisition of Esterline that did not occur in fiscal 2021 as sales order backlog was fully amortized by the end of fiscal 2020. This was partially offset by amortization expense on intangible assets related to the CAC acquisition in the second quarter of fiscal 2021.
•Interest Expense-net. Interest expense-net includes interest on borrowings outstanding, amortization of debt issuance costs, original issue discount and premium, revolving credit facility fees and interest on finance leases; slightly offset by interest income. Interest expense-net increased $30 million, or 2.9%, to $1,059 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 from $1,029 million for the comparable period in the prior year. The increase in interest expense-net was primarily due to an increase in the weighted average level of outstanding borrowings, which was approximately $20.0 billion for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to approximately $19.1 billion for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The weighted average interest rate for cash interest payments on total borrowings outstanding for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 was 5.03%.
•Refinancing Costs. Refinancing costs of $37 million were recorded for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to $28 million recorded for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The refinancing costs are primarily related to fees incurred on the early redemptions of the 6.50% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2024 (the "2024 Notes") and the 2025 Notes that occurred in the second and third quarters of fiscal 2021, respectively.
•Other Income. Other income of $51 million was recorded for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to $46 million recorded for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. Other income for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 was primarily driven by $24 million recorded for the settlement of the insurance claim for Leach International Europe’s Niort, France operating facility fire in August 2019. This primarily represents the insurance proceeds received in excess of the carrying value of the damaged fixed assets and inventory and proceeds from the business interruption settlement. The remaining $27 million is primarily driven by non-service related components of net periodic benefit costs on the Company's defined benefit pension plans ($14 million), receipt of payment of Canadian governmental subsidies ($7 million) and the release of a litigation reserve ($3 million). Other income for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 was primarily driven by proceeds or proceeds receivable from business interruption insurance settlements ($34 million) and non-service related components of net periodic benefit costs on the Company's defined benefit pension plans ($12 million).
•Gain on Sale of Businesses-net. Gain on sale of businesses-net of $69 million was recorded for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, and is primarily related to the net gain on sale recognized during the third quarter of fiscal 2021 as a result of the ScioTeq and TREALITY and TAC divestitures. There was no gain on sale of businesses-net recorded for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020.
•Income Taxes. Income tax expense as a percentage of income before income taxes was approximately 4.7% for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to 11.7% for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The Company’s lower effective tax rate for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 was primarily due to the Company's ability to utilize its net interest deduction limitation carryforward pursuant to IRC Section 163(j) resulting in the release of the valuation allowance applicable to such carryforward and the discrete impact of excess tax benefits associated with share-based compensation.
•Income from Discontinued Operations, net of tax. There were no discontinued operations for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. Income from discontinued operations, net of tax, for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 was $47 million and consisted of $7 million from the results of operations of Souriau-Sunbank and a gain on the sale of Souriau-Sunbank, net of tax, of $40 million.
•Net Income Attributable to TD Group. Net income attributable to TD Group decreased $19 million, or 2.7%, to $680 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to net income attributable to TD Group of $699 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020.
•Earnings per Share. Basic and diluted earnings per share was $10.41 for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. There was no impact on earnings per share from discontinued operations for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. Basic and diluted earnings per share from continuing operations and discontinued operations were $8.14 and $0.82, respectively, for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. Net income attributable to TD Group for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 of $680 million was decreased by dividend equivalent payments of $73 million, or $1.24 per share, resulting in net income applicable to TD Group common stockholders of $607 million, or $10.41 per share. Net income attributable to TD Group for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 of $699 million was decreased by dividend equivalent payments of $185 million, or $3.22 per share, resulting in net income applicable to TD Group common stockholders of $514 million, or $8.96 per share. The increase of $1.45 per share is primarily a result of the factors referred to above.
Business Segments
•Segment Net Sales. Net sales by segment for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (amounts in millions):
Net sales for the Power & Control segment decreased $145 million, a decrease of 5.4%, for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The sales decrease resulted primarily from decreases in organic sales in commercial OEM ($101 million, a decrease of 18.5%) and commercial aftermarket ($81 million, a decrease of 12.7%); partially offset by an increase in organic defense sales ($44 million, an increase of 3.2%). The decreases in commercial OEM and commercial aftermarket sales are attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse impact on the commercial aerospace sector, particularly in the first half of fiscal 2021, and build rate reductions by aircraft OEMs. The increase in defense sales is primarily attributable to the rebound in demand from the temporary pandemic-induced decline for certain platforms in fiscal 2020. The change in acquisition and divestiture sales was immaterial for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
Net sales for the Airframe segment decreased $170 million, a decrease of 7.5%, for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The sales decrease resulted primarily from decreases in organic sales in commercial OEM ($214 million, a decrease of 31.8%) and commercial aftermarket ($151 million, a decrease of 23.4%); partially offset by an increase in organic defense sales ($72 million, an increase of 10.4%). The decreases in commercial OEM and commercial aftermarket sales are attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse impact on the commercial aerospace sector, particularly in the first half of fiscal 2021. The increase in defense sales is primarily attributable to the rebound in demand from the temporary pandemic-induced decline for certain platforms in fiscal 2020. Acquisition and divestiture sales increased $85 million, primarily due to the acquisition of CAC in the second quarter of fiscal 2021.
Net sales for the Non-aviation segment increased by $10 million, an increase of 6.5%, for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The sales increase resulted primarily from an increase in organic sales in non-aerospace ($21 million, an increase of 18.7%). Acquisition and divestiture sales decreased by $9 million.
•EBITDA As Defined. Refer to the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section within Item 7 for further information on EBITDA as Defined. EBITDA As Defined by segment for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (amounts in millions):
Organic EBITDA As Defined represents EBITDA As Defined from existing businesses owned by the Company as of September 30, 2021, excluding EBITDA As Defined from acquisitions and divestitures. EBITDA As Defined from acquisitions and divestitures represents EBITDA As Defined from acquired businesses up to one year subsequent to the respective acquisition date and from businesses divested by the Company during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
EBITDA As Defined for the Power & Control segment decreased approximately $26 million, a decrease of 1.9%, primarily as a result of lower organic sales in the commercial OEM market and commercial aftermarket due to the COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse impact on the commercial aerospace sector, particularly in the first half of fiscal 2021, and build rate reductions by aircraft OEMs. The change in EBITDA As Defined for the Power & Control segment from acquisitions and divestitures was immaterial for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
EBITDA As Defined for the Airframe segment decreased approximately $77 million, a decrease of 8.1%, primarily as a result of lower organic sales in the commercial OEM market and commercial aftermarket due to the COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse impact on the commercial aerospace sector, particularly in the first half of fiscal 2021, and build rate reductions by aircraft OEMs. EBITDA As Defined for the Airframe segment from acquisitions and divestitures increased by $27 million, primarily due to the acquisition of CAC in the second quarter of fiscal 2021.
EBITDA As Defined for the Non-aviation segment increased approximately $8 million, an increase of 14.8%, primarily as a result of favorable organic sales mix specifically from other non-aerospace sales. The change in EBITDA As Defined for the Non-aviation segment from acquisitions and divestitures was immaterial for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
Fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 compared with fiscal year ended September 30, 2019
For our results of operations for fiscal 2020 compared with fiscal 2019, refer to the discussion in Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations” of Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on November 12, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table presents selected balance sheet, cash flow and other financial data relevant to the liquidity or capital resources of the Company for the periods specified below (in millions):
(1)Includes debt issuance costs and original issue discount and premiums. Reference Note 12, “Debt,” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein for additional information.
(2)For purposes of computing the ratio of earnings to fixed charges, earnings consist of earnings from continuing operations before income taxes plus fixed charges. Fixed charges consist of interest expense, amortization of debt issuance costs, original issue discount and premium and the “interest component” of rental expense.
We have historically maintained a capital structure comprising a mix of equity and debt financing. We vary our leverage both to optimize our equity return and to pursue acquisitions. We expect to meet our current debt obligations as they come due through internally generated funds from current levels of operations and/or through refinancing in the debt markets prior to the maturity dates of our debt.
If the Company has excess cash, it generally prioritizes allocating the excess cash in the following manner: (1) capital spending at existing businesses, (2) acquisitions of businesses, (3) payment of a special dividend and/or repurchases of our common stock and (4) prepayment of indebtedness or repurchase of debt. Whether the Company undertakes common stock repurchases or other aforementioned activities will depend on prevailing market conditions, the Company's liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material. In addition, the Company may issue additional debt if prevailing market conditions are favorable to doing so.
The Company’s ability to make scheduled interest payments on, or to refinance, the Company’s indebtedness, or to fund non-acquisition related capital expenditures and research and development efforts, will depend on the Company’s ability to generate cash in the future. This is subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other factors that are beyond its control, including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
The Company is continuing to strategically manage the Company’s cash and cash equivalents in response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and related uncertainty of the duration and impact of the pandemic on the Company’s business in fiscal 2022 and beyond. For instance, due to favorable market conditions in the high yield bond market, the Company refinanced $1,950 of its senior subordinated notes in fiscal 2021 resulting in a reduced interest rate (estimated $35 million reduction in annual interest payments) and an extended maturity date.
As of September 30, 2021, the Company has significant cash liquidity as illustrated in the table presented below (in millions):
(1)On October 6, 2021, the Company repaid $200 million drawn on the revolving credit facility using existing cash on hand, increasing the borrowings available under the revolving credit facility to $728.9 million.
We believe our significant cash liquidity will allow us to meet our anticipated funding requirements. We expect to meet our short-term cash liquidity requirements (including interest obligations and capital expenditures) through net cash from operating activities, cash on hand and, if needed, additional draws on the revolving credit facility. Long-term cash liquidity requirements consist primarily of obligations under our long-term debt agreements. There is no maturity on any tranche of term loans or notes until August 2024.
In connection with the continued application of our three core value-driven operating strategies (obtaining profitable new business, continually improving our cost structure and providing highly engineered value-added products to customers), we expect our efforts will continue to generate strong margins and provide sufficient cash provided by operating activities to meet our interest obligations and liquidity needs. We believe our cash provided by operating activities and available borrowing capacity will enable us to make strategic business acquisitions (such as the CAC acquisition completed in the second quarter of fiscal 2021 for an enterprise value of $965 million using existing cash on hand), pay dividends to our shareholders and make opportunistic investments in our own stock, subject to any restrictions in our existing credit agreement and market conditions in consideration of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
In the future, the Company may increase its borrowings in connection with acquisitions, if cash flow from operating activities becomes insufficient to fund current operations or for other short-term cash needs or for stock repurchases or dividends. Our future leverage will also be impacted by the then current conditions of the credit markets.
Operating Activities. The Company generated $913 million of net cash from operating activities during fiscal 2021 compared to $1,213 million during fiscal 2020. The change from prior year is primarily driven by changes in working capital as further described below.
The change in trade accounts receivable during fiscal 2021 was a use of cash of $78 million in cash compared to a source of cash of $352 million in fiscal 2020. The increase in the use of cash of $430 million is primarily attributable to the decrease in accounts receivable from lower sales due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company continues to actively manage its accounts receivable, the related agings and collection efforts in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The change in inventories during fiscal 2021 was a source of cash of $79 million compared to a use of cash of $62 million in fiscal 2020. The increase in the source of cash is primarily driven by decreased purchasing of raw materials particularly in the first half of fiscal 2021 from lower demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actively managing inventory levels.
The change in accounts payable during fiscal 2021 was a source of cash of $3 million compared to a use of cash of $62 million in fiscal 2020 primarily due to timing of payments to suppliers.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $785 million during fiscal 2021, consisting primarily of $945 million from the acquisition of CAC in the second quarter of fiscal 2021 and capital expenditures of $105 million. This was partially offset by proceeds of $259 million from the completion of the divestitures of certain businesses, and $24 million of insurance proceeds received from the Leach International Europe facility fire claim. The Company estimates its capital expenditures in fiscal year 2022 to be between $135 million and $155 million with the increase from prior year attributable to projects that were delayed into fiscal 2022 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company’s capital expenditures incurred from year-to-year are primarily for projects that are consistent with our three core value-driven operating strategies (obtaining profitable new business, continually improving our cost structure and providing highly engineered value-added products to customers).
Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities during fiscal 2021 was $70 million. The use of cash was primarily attributable to the redemptions of the 2024 Notes and 2025 Notes for $1,220 million and $762 million, respectively, repayment on term loans of $75 million and dividend equivalent payments of $73 million. This was partially offset by $1,189 million in net proceeds from the completion of the 4.625% 2029 Notes offering, $743 million in net proceeds from the completion of the 4.875% 2029 Notes offering and $128 million in proceeds from stock option exercises.
Description of Senior Secured Term Loans and Indentures
Senior Secured Credit Facilities
TransDigm has $7,374 million in fully drawn term loans (the “Term Loans Facility”) and a $760 million revolving credit facility. The Term Loans Facility consists of three tranches of term loans as follows (aggregate principal amount disclosed is as of September 30, 2021):
The Term Loans Facility requires quarterly aggregate principal payments of $18.8 million. The revolving credit facility consists of two tranches which include up to $151.5 million of multicurrency revolving credit. At September 30, 2021, the Company had $31 million in letters of credit outstanding, $200 million drawn and outstanding, and $529 million in borrowings available under the revolving credit facility. On October 6, 2021, the Company repaid the $200 million drawn using existing cash on hand.
The interest rates per annum applicable to the loans under the Credit Agreement are, at TransDigm’s option, equal to either an alternate base rate or an adjusted LIBOR for one, two, three or six-month (or to the extent agreed to by each relevant lender, nine or twelve-month) interest periods chosen by TransDigm, in each case plus an applicable margin percentage. The adjusted LIBOR related to tranche E, tranche F and tranche G term loans are not subject to a floor. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, the applicable interest rate was approximately 2.33% on the existing term loans. Interest rate swaps and caps used to hedge and offset, respectively, the variable interest rates on the credit facility are described in Note 21, “Derivatives and Hedging Activities,” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein.
Fiscal 2021 Amendment to the Credit Agreement
On May 24, 2021, the Company entered into Amendment No. 8 and Loan Modification Agreement (herein, "Amendment No. 8"). Under the terms of Amendment No. 8, the Company, among other things, (i) extends the maturity date of the revolving credit commitments and revolving loans under its existing Credit Agreement to May 24, 2026, and (ii) the LIBOR interest rate per annum applicable to the revolving loans under its existing Credit Agreement is 2.50%, a decrease from the 3.00% rate that applied previous to the amendment. The other terms and conditions that apply to the revolving loans are substantially the same as the terms and conditions that applied to the revolving loans immediately prior to Amendment No. 8.
Indentures
The following table represents the notes outstanding as of September 30, 2021:
Refer to Note 12, "Debt," in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein for information over the Company’s issuances and redemptions of senior subordinated notes executed during fiscal year 2021.
The 6.375% 2026 Notes, the 7.50% 2027 Notes, the 5.50% 2027 Notes, the 4.625% 2029 Notes and the 4.875% 2029 Notes (collectively, the “TransDigm Inc. Notes”) were issued at a price of 100% of the principal amount. The 6.875% 2026 Notes (the "TransDigm UK Notes" and together with the TransDigm Inc. Notes, the "Notes," are further described below) offered in May 2018 were issued at a price of 99.24% of the principal amount, resulting in gross proceeds of $496.2 million. The 2025 Secured Notes (the "Secured Notes") were issued at a price 100% of the principal amount. The initial $3,800 million offering of the 2026 Secured Notes (the "Secured Notes") were issued at a price of 100% of their principal amount and the subsequent $200 million and $400 million offerings of the 2026 Secured Notes in the second quarter of fiscal 2019 and the third quarter of fiscal 2020, respectively, were issued at a price of 101% of their principal amount, resulting in gross proceeds of $4,410.5 million.
The Notes do not require principal payments prior to their maturity. Interest under the Notes is payable semi-annually. The Notes represent our unsecured obligations ranking subordinate to our senior debt, as defined in the applicable indentures. The Notes contain many of the restrictive covenants included in the Credit Agreement. TransDigm is in compliance with all of the covenants contained in the Notes.
Guarantor Information
The Notes are subordinated to all of our existing and future senior debt, rank equally with all of our existing and future senior subordinated debt and rank senior to all of our future debt that is expressly subordinated to the Notes. The TransDigm Inc. Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior subordinated unsecured basis by TD Group and TransDigm Inc.'s Domestic Restricted Subsidiaries. The TransDigm UK Notes are guaranteed on a senior subordinated basis by TransDigm Inc., TD Group and TransDigm Inc.'s Domestic Restricted Subsidiaries. The guarantees of the Notes are subordinated to all of the guarantors’ existing and future senior debt, rank equally with all of their existing and future senior subordinated debt and rank senior to all of their future debt that is expressly subordinated to the guarantees of the Notes. The Notes are structurally subordinated to all of the liabilities of TD Group’s non-guarantor subsidiaries.
The Secured Notes are senior secured obligations of TransDigm and rank equally in right of payment with all of TransDigm’s existing and future senior secured debt, including indebtedness under TransDigm’s existing senior secured credit facilities, and are senior in right of payment to all of TransDigm’s existing and future senior subordinated debt, including the Notes, TransDigm’s other outstanding senior subordinated notes and TransDigm’s guarantees in respect of TransDigm UK’s outstanding senior subordinated notes. The Secured Notes are guaranteed on a senior secured basis by TD Group, TransDigm UK and TransDigm’s wholly-owned U.S. subsidiaries named in the Secured Notes Indentures. The guarantees of the Secured Notes rank equally in right of payment with all of the guarantors’ existing and future senior secured debt and are senior in right of payment to all of their existing and future senior subordinated debt. The Secured Notes are structurally subordinated to all of the liabilities of TransDigm’s non-guarantor subsidiaries. The Secured Notes contain many of the restrictive covenants included in the Credit Agreement. TransDigm is in compliance with all of the covenants contained in the Secured Notes.
Separate financial statements of TransDigm Inc. are not presented because the Secured Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior secured basis by TD Group, TransDigm UK and all of TransDigm Inc.'s Domestic Restricted Subsidiaries. TD Group has no significant operations or assets separate from its investment in TransDigm Inc.
Separate financial statements of TransDigm Inc. are not presented because the TransDigm Inc. Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior subordinated basis by TD Group, TransDigm UK and all of TransDigm Inc.'s Domestic Restricted Subsidiaries. TD Group has no significant operations or assets separate from its investment in TransDigm Inc.
Separate financial statements of TransDigm UK are not presented because TransDigm UK's 6.875% 2026 Notes, issued in May 2018, are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior subordinated basis by TD Group, TransDigm Inc. and all of TransDigm Inc.'s Domestic Restricted Subsidiaries. TD Group has no significant operations or assets separate from its investment in TransDigm Inc.
The financial information presented is that of TD Group and the Guarantors, which includes TransDigm Inc. and TransDigm UK, on a combined basis and the financial information of non-issuer and non-guarantor subsidiaries has been excluded. Intercompany balances and transactions between TD Group and Guarantors have been eliminated, and amounts due from, amounts due to, and transactions with non-issuer and non-guarantor subsidiaries have been presented separately.
Certain Restrictive Covenants in Our Debt Documents
The Credit Agreement and the Indentures governing the Notes contain restrictive covenants that, among other things, limit the incurrence of additional indebtedness, the payment of special dividends, transactions with affiliates, asset sales, acquisitions, mergers and consolidations, liens and encumbrances, and prepayments of certain other indebtedness.
The restrictive covenants included in the Credit Agreement are subject to amendments executed periodically. The most recent amendment that impacted the restrictive covenants contained in the Credit Agreement is Amendment No. 7.
Under the terms of the Credit Agreement, TransDigm is entitled, on one or more occasions, to request additional term loans or additional revolving commitments to the extent that the existing or new lenders agree to provide such incremental term loans or additional revolving commitments provided that, among other conditions, our consolidated net leverage ratio would be no greater than 7.25x and the consolidated secured net debt ratio would be no greater than 5.00x, in each case, after giving effect to such incremental term loans or additional revolving commitments.
If any such default occurs, the lenders under the Credit Agreement and the holders of the Notes may elect to declare all outstanding borrowings, together with accrued interest and other amounts payable thereunder, to be immediately due and payable. The lenders under the Credit Agreement also have the right in these circumstances to terminate any commitments they have to provide further borrowings. In addition, following an event of default under the Credit Agreement, the lenders thereunder will have the right to proceed against the collateral granted to them to secure the debt, which includes our available cash, and they will also have the right to prevent us from making debt service payments on the Notes.
With the exception of the revolving credit facility, the Company has no maintenance covenants in its existing term loan and indenture agreements. Under the Credit Agreement, if the usage of the revolving credit facility exceeds 35%, or $266 million, of the total revolving commitments, the Company is required to maintain a maximum consolidated net leverage ratio of net debt to trailing four-quarter EBITDA As Defined of 7.25x as of the last day of the fiscal quarter.
As of September 30, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all of its debt covenants and expects to remain in compliance with its debt covenants in subsequent periods.
Trade Receivables Securitization
During fiscal 2014, the Company established a trade receivable securitization facility (the “Securitization Facility”). The Securitization Facility effectively increases the Company’s borrowing capacity depending on the amount of the domestic operations’ trade accounts receivable. The Securitization Facility includes the right for the Company to exercise annual one year extensions as long as there have been no termination events as defined by the agreement. The Company uses the proceeds from the Securitization Facility as an alternative to other forms of debt, effectively reducing borrowing costs.
On July 27, 2021, the Company amended the Securitization Facility to, among other things, (i) extend the maturity date to July 26, 2022, and (ii) bear interest at a rate of 1.20% plus three month LIBOR, compared to the interest rate of 1.35% plus 0.50% or three-month LIBOR, whichever is greater, that applied prior to the amendment. The Securitization Facility is collateralized by substantially all of the Company’s domestic operations’ trade accounts receivable. As of September 30, 2021, the Company has borrowed $350 million under the Securitization Facility, which is fully drawn.
Dividend and Dividend Equivalent Payments
No dividends were declared or paid in fiscal 2021. We do not anticipate declaring regular quarterly or annual cash dividends on our common stock in the near future. Any declaration of special cash dividends on our common stock in the future will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors and will depend upon our results of operations, earnings, capital requirements, financial condition, future prospects, contractual restrictions under the senior secured credit facility and Indentures, the availability of surplus under Delaware law and other factors deemed relevant by our Board of Directors. TD Group is a holding company and conducts all of its operations through direct and indirect subsidiaries. Unless TD Group receives dividends, distributions, advances, transfers of funds or other payments from our subsidiaries, TD Group will be unable to pay any dividends on our common stock in the future. The ability of any subsidiaries to take any of the foregoing actions is limited by the terms of our senior secured credit facility and Indentures and may be limited by future debt or other agreements that we may enter into.
Dividend equivalent payments made in fiscal 2021 were $73 million. Pursuant to the Third Amended and Restated TransDigm Group Incorporated 2003 Stock Option Plan Dividend Equivalent Plan, the Second Amended and Restated TransDigm Group Incorporated 2006 Stock Incentive Plan Dividend Equivalent Plan and the 2014 Stock Option Plan Dividend Equivalent Plan, all of the options granted under the existing stock option plans are entitled to certain dividend equivalent payments in the event of the declaration of a dividend by the Company.
Stock Repurchase Program
On November 8, 2017, our Board of Directors, authorized a stock repurchase program permitting repurchases of our outstanding shares not to exceed $650 million in the aggregate, subject to any restrictions specified in the Credit Agreement and/or Indentures governing the existing Notes.
No repurchases were made under the program during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, the Company repurchased 36,900 shares of its common stock at a gross cost of $18.9 million at the weighted average cost of $512.67 under the repurchase program. As of September 30, 2021, the remaining amount of repurchases allowable under the program was $631.1 million subject to any restrictions specified in the Credit Agreement and/or Indentures governing the existing Notes.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes the Company’s cash requirements from all significant contractual obligations as of September 30, 2021 (in millions):
(1)Represents principal maturities which excludes interest, debt issuance costs, original issue discount and premiums.
(2)The tranche E term loans mature in May 2025, the tranche F term loans mature in December 2025 and the tranche G term loans mature in August 2024. The term loans require quarterly principal payments totaling $18.8 million.
(3)Assumes that the variable interest rate on our tranche E, tranche F and tranche G term loans under our Senior Secured Term Loans range from approximately 2.38% to 3.94% based on anticipated movements in the LIBOR. In addition, interest payments include the impact of the existing interest rate swap and cap agreements described in Note 21, “Derivatives and Hedging Activities,” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein.
(4)Represents future benefit payments expected to be paid from the pension and post-retirement benefit plans or from the Company’s assets. Expected benefit payments in fiscal year 2022 primarily relates to the termination of the Esterline Retirement Plan (“ERP”), effective June 30, 2021. The Company anticipates the termination process to be completed within the next 12 months, with the ERP expected to be fully liquidated by the end of fiscal year 2022.
(5)On October 6, 2021, the Company repaid the $200 million drawn on the revolving credit facility using existing cash on hand.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company utilizes letters of credit to back certain payment and performance obligations. Letters of credit are subject to limits based on amounts outstanding under the Company’s revolving credit facility. As of September 30, 2021, the Company had $31 million in letters of credit outstanding.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP, which often requires the judgment of management in the selection and application of certain accounting principles and methods. Management believes that the quality and reasonableness of our most critical policies enable the fair presentation of our financial position and results of operations. However, investors are cautioned that the sensitivity of financial statements to these methods, assumptions and estimates could create materially different results under different conditions or using different assumptions.
Below are those policies applied in preparing our financial statements that management believes are the most dependent on the application of estimates and assumptions. For additional significant accounting policies, see Note 3, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein.
Revenue Recognition - Revenue is recognized from the sale of products when control transfers to the customer, which is demonstrated by our right to payment, a transfer of title, a transfer of the risk and rewards of ownership, or the customer acceptance, but most frequently upon shipment where the customer obtains physical possession of the goods. The majority of the Company's revenue is recorded at a point in time. Sales recognized over time are generally accounted for using an input measure to determine progress completed at the end of the period. Sales for service contracts generally are recognized as the services are provided. For agreements with multiple performance obligations, judgment is required to determine whether performance obligations specified in these agreements are distinct and should be accounted for as separate revenue transactions for recognition purposes based on the standalone selling price of each performance obligation. The primary method used to estimate a standalone selling price is the price observed in standalone sales to customers for the same product or service. We consider the contractual consideration payable by the customer and assesses variable consideration that may affect the total transaction price. Variable consideration is included in the estimated transaction price when there is a basis to reasonably estimate the amount, including whether the estimate should be constrained in order to avoid a significant reversal of revenue in a future period. These estimates are based on historical experience, anticipated performance under the terms of the contract and our best judgment at the time.
Inventories - Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost of inventories is generally determined by the average cost and the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) methods and includes material, labor and overhead related to the manufacturing process. Because the Company sells products that are installed on airframes that can be in-service for 25 or more years, it must keep a supply of such products on hand while the airframes are in use. Where management estimated that the net realizable value was below cost or determined that future demand was lower than current inventory levels, based on historical experience, current and projected market demand, current and projected volume trends and other relevant current and projected factors associated with the current economic conditions, a reduction in inventory cost to estimated net realizable value was made by recording a provision included in cost of sales. Additionally, management believes that the Company’s estimates of excess and obsolete inventory are reasonable and material changes in future estimates or assumptions used to calculate our estimate is unlikely. However, actual results may differ materially from the estimates and additional provisions may be required in the future. A 10% change in our excess and obsolete inventory reserve at September 30, 2021 would not have a material impact on our results. In accordance with industry practice, all inventories are classified as current assets as all inventories are available and necessary to support current sales, even though a portion of the inventories may not be sold within one year.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets - In accordance with ASC 805, “Business Combinations,” the Company uses the acquisition method of accounting to allocate costs of acquired businesses to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the dates of acquisition. The excess costs of acquired businesses over the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recognized as goodwill. The valuations of the acquired assets and liabilities will impact the determination of future operating results. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management’s judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash inflows and outflows, revenue growth rates and EBITDA margins, discount rates, customer attrition rates, royalty rates, asset lives and market multiples, among other items. We determine the fair values of intangible assets acquired generally in consultation with third-party valuation advisors. Fair value adjustments to the Company’s assets and liabilities are recognized and the results of operations of the acquired business are included in our consolidated financial statements from the effective date of the merger or acquisition.
Intangible assets other than goodwill are recognized if the benefit of the intangible asset is obtained through contractual or other legal rights, or if the intangible asset can be sold, transferred, licensed or exchanged, regardless of the Company’s intent to do so. Goodwill and identifiable intangible assets are recorded at their estimated fair value on the date of acquisition and are reviewed at least annually for impairment based on cash flow projections and fair value estimates.
U.S. GAAP requires that the annual, and any interim, goodwill impairment assessment be performed at the reporting unit level. The reporting unit level is one level below an operating segment. Substantially all goodwill was determined and recognized for each reporting unit pursuant to the accounting for the merger or acquisition as of the date of each transaction. With respect to acquisitions integrated into an existing reporting unit, any acquired goodwill is combined with the goodwill of the reporting unit.
At the time of goodwill impairment testing, the Company first assesses qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, and whether it is necessary to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. The quantitative test is required only if the Company concludes that it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount, or if the Company elects not to perform a qualitative assessment of a reporting unit. For the quantitative test, management determines the estimated fair value through the use of a discounted cash flow valuation model incorporating discount rates commensurate with the risks involved for each reporting unit. If the calculated estimated fair value is less than the current carrying value, impairment of goodwill of the reporting unit may exist. The use of a discounted cash flow valuation model to determine estimated fair value is common practice in impairment testing. The key assumptions used in the discounted cash flow valuation model for impairment testing includes discount rates, revenue growth rates and EBITDA margins, cash flow projections and terminal value rates. Discount rates are set by using the Weighted Average Cost of Capital (“WACC”) methodology. The WACC methodology considers market and industry data as well as company specific risk factors for each reporting unit in determining the appropriate discount rates to be used. The discount rate utilized for each reporting unit is indicative of the return an investor would expect to receive for investing in such a business.
Management, considering industry and company-specific historical and projected data, develops growth rates, sales projections and cash flow projections for each reporting unit. Terminal value rate determination follows a common methodology of capturing the present value of perpetual cash flow estimates beyond the last projected period assuming a constant WACC and low long-term growth rates.
Management tests indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment at the asset level, as determined by appropriate asset valuation at the time of acquisition. The impairment test for indefinite-lived intangible assets consists of a comparison between the estimated fair values and carrying values. If the carrying amounts of intangible assets that have indefinite useful lives exceed their estimated fair values, an impairment loss will be recognized in an amount equal to the difference. Management utilizes the royalty savings valuation method to determine the estimated fair value for each indefinite-lived intangible asset. In this method, management estimates the royalty savings arising from the ownership of the intangible asset. The key assumptions used in estimating the royalty savings for impairment testing include discount rates, royalty rates, growth rates, sales projections and terminal value rates. Discount rates used are similar to the rates developed by the WACC methodology considering any differences in company-specific risk factors between reporting units and the indefinite-lived intangible assets. Royalty rates are established by management with the advice of valuation experts. Management, considering industry and company-specific historical and projected data, develops growth rates and sales projections for each significant intangible asset. Terminal value rate determination follows common methodology of capturing the present value of perpetual sales estimates beyond the last projected period assuming a constant WACC and low long-term growth rates.
The discounted cash flow and royalty savings valuation methodologies require management to make certain assumptions based upon information available at the time the valuations are performed. Actual results could differ from these assumptions. Management believes the assumptions used are reflective of what a market participant would have used in calculating fair value considering the current economic conditions.
Given the continued adverse global economic and market conditions attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly as it pertains to the commercial aerospace sector, the Company continues to monitor for any indicators of impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. For certain reporting units that have higher commercial aerospace content and potentially present a higher risk for impairment, the Company performed a quantitative impairment test using an income approach in the prior year annual impairment assessment. In the second quarter of fiscal 2021, the Company reviewed the key assumptions used within the models to identify if any changes were necessary. Key assumptions reviewed included revenue growth rates and EBITDA margins, available industry data and management’s determination of the prospective financial information with consideration of the estimated length of time for the commercial aerospace sector to rebound to pre-pandemic levels. The Company also utilized a third party valuation firm to assist in the determination of the WACC. As a result of the interim impairment testing performed as of April 3, 2021, no goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets were determined to be impaired. We updated our assessment during the third quarter of fiscal 2021 and validated that the assumptions used in the analyses performed as of April 3, 2021 and the resulting conclusions remain appropriate as of July 3, 2021.
The Company had 46 reporting units with goodwill and 43 reporting units with indefinite-lived intangible assets as of the first day of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, the date of the annual impairment test. Based on its initial qualitative assessment over each of the reporting units, the Company identified 16 reporting units to test for impairment using a quantitative test for both goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. The estimated fair value of each of these reporting units was in excess of its respective carrying value, and therefore, no impairment was recorded on goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets. The Company performed a sensitivity analysis on the discount rate, which is a significant assumption in the calculation of fair values. With a one percentage point increase in the discount rate, all of the reporting units would continue to have fair values in excess of their respective carrying values.
Stock-Based Compensation - The cost of the Company’s stock-based compensation is recorded in accordance with ASC 718, “Stock Compensation.” The Company uses a Black-Scholes pricing model to estimate the grant-date fair value of the stock options awarded. The Black-Scholes pricing model requires assumptions regarding the expected volatility of the Company’s common shares, the risk-free interest rate, the expected life of the stock options award and the Company’s dividend yield. The Company utilizes historical data in determining the assumptions. An increase or decrease in the assumptions or economic events outside of management’s control could have an impact on the Black-Scholes pricing model. The Company estimates stock option forfeitures based on historical data. The total number of stock options expected to vest is adjusted by actual and estimated forfeitures. Changes to the actual and estimated forfeitures will result in a cumulative adjustment in the period of change. The Company also evaluates any subsequent changes to the respective option holders terms under the modification rules of ASC 718. If determined to be a modification, the Black-Scholes pricing model is updated as of the date of the modification resulting in a cumulative catch-up to expense.
Income Taxes - The Company estimates income taxes in each jurisdiction in which it operates. This involves estimating taxable earnings, specific taxable and deductible items, the likelihood of generating sufficient future taxable income to utilize deferred tax assets and possible exposures related to future tax audits. To the extent these estimates change, adjustments to deferred and accrued income taxes are made in the period in which the changes occur. Historically, such adjustments have not been significant.
New Accounting Standards
For information about new accounting standards, see Note 4, “Recent Accounting Pronouncements,” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We present below certain financial information based on our EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined. References to “EBITDA” mean earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, and references to “EBITDA As Defined” mean EBITDA plus, as applicable for each relevant period, certain adjustments as set forth in the reconciliations of income from continuing operations to EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined and the reconciliations of net cash provided by operating activities to EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined presented below.
Neither EBITDA nor EBITDA As Defined is a measurement of financial performance under U.S. GAAP. We present EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined because we believe they are useful indicators for evaluating operating performance and liquidity.
Our management believes that EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined are useful as indicators of liquidity because securities analysts, investors, rating agencies and others use EBITDA to evaluate a company’s ability to incur and service debt. In addition, EBITDA As Defined is useful to investors because the revolving credit facility under our senior secured credit facility requires compliance under certain circumstances, on a pro forma basis, with a financial covenant that measures the ratio of the amount of our secured indebtedness to the amount of our Consolidated EBITDA defined in the same manner as we define EBITDA As Defined herein.
In addition to the above, our management uses EBITDA As Defined to review and assess the performance of the management team in connection with employee incentive programs and to prepare its annual budget and financial projections. Moreover, our management uses EBITDA As Defined to evaluate acquisitions.
Although we use EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined as measures to assess the performance of our business and for the other purposes set forth above, the use of these non-GAAP financial measures as analytical tools has limitations, and you should not consider any of them in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results of operations as reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•neither EBITDA nor EBITDA As Defined reflects the significant interest expense, or the cash requirements, necessary to service interest payments on our indebtedness;
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and neither EBITDA nor EBITDA As Defined reflects any cash requirements for such replacements;
•the omission of the substantial amortization expense associated with our intangible assets further limits the usefulness of EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined;
•neither EBITDA nor EBITDA As Defined includes the payment of taxes, which is a necessary element of our operations; and
•EBITDA As Defined excludes the cash expense we have incurred to integrate acquired businesses into our operations, which is a necessary element of certain of our acquisitions.
Because of these limitations, EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined should not be considered as measures of discretionary cash available to us to invest in the growth of our business. Management compensates for these limitations by not viewing EBITDA or EBITDA As Defined in isolation and specifically by using other U.S. GAAP measures, such as net income, net sales and operating profit, to measure our operating performance. Neither EBITDA nor EBITDA As Defined is a measurement of financial performance under U.S. GAAP, and neither should be considered as an alternative to net income or cash flow from operations determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our calculation of EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined may not be comparable to the calculation of similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of income from continuing operations to EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined (in millions):
(1)Represents accounting adjustments to inventory associated with acquisitions of businesses and product lines that were charged to cost of sales when the inventory was sold.
(2)Represents costs incurred to integrate acquired businesses and product lines into TD Group’s operations, facility relocation costs and other acquisition-related costs.
(3)Represents transaction-related costs for both acquisitions and divestitures comprising deal fees, legal, financial and tax due diligence expenses and valuation costs that are required to be expensed as incurred.
(4)Represents the compensation expense recognized by TD Group under our stock incentive plans.
(5)Represents costs expensed related to debt financing activities, including new issuances, extinguishments, refinancings and amendments to existing agreements.
(6)Represents restructuring costs related to the Company's cost reduction measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 of $36 million and $46 million, respectively, and also includes restructuring costs related to the 737 MAX production rate change for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 of $3 million. These are costs related to the Company's actions to reduce its workforce and consolidate certain facilities to align with customer demand. This also includes incremental costs related to the pandemic for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 of $4 million and $5 million, respectively, which are not expected to recur once the pandemic has subsided and are clearly separable from normal operations (e.g., additional cleaning and disinfecting of facilities by contractors above and beyond normal requirements, personal protective equipment).
(7)Represents the net gain on completed divestitures. Refer to Note 2, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein for further details.
(8)Primarily represents the gain on insurance proceeds from the Leach International Europe facility fire (refer to Note 15, “Commitments and Contingencies” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein for further details), foreign currency transaction gain or loss, payroll withholding taxes related to special dividend and dividend equivalent payments and stock option exercises, non-service related pension costs, deferred compensation and gain or loss on sale of fixed assets.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of net cash provided by operating activities to EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined (in millions):
(1)Represents interest expense excluding the amortization of debt issuance costs and premium and discount on debt.
(2)Represents the compensation expense recognized by TD Group under our stock incentive plans.
(3)Represents costs expensed related to debt financing activities, including new issuances, extinguishments, refinancings and amendments to existing agreements.
(4)Represents the net gain on completed divestitures. Refer to Note 2, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein for further details.
(5)Represents accounting adjustments to inventory associated with acquisitions of businesses and product lines that were charged to cost of sales when the inventory was sold.
(6)Represents costs incurred to integrate acquired businesses and product lines into TD Group’s operations, facility relocation costs and other acquisition-related costs.
(7)Represents transaction-related costs for both acquisitions and divestitures comprising deal fees, legal, financial and tax due diligence expenses, and valuation costs that are required to be expensed as incurred.
(8)Represents restructuring costs related to the Company's cost reduction measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 of $36 million and $46 million, respectively, and also includes restructuring costs related to the 737 MAX production rate change for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 of $3 million. These are costs related to the Company's actions to reduce its workforce and consolidate certain facilities to align with customer demand. This also includes incremental costs related to the pandemic for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 of $4 million and $5 million, respectively, which are not expected to recur once the pandemic has subsided and are clearly separable from normal operations (e.g., additional cleaning and disinfecting of facilities by contractors above and beyond normal requirements, personal protective equipment).
(9)Primarily represents the gain on insurance proceeds from the Leach International Europe facility fire (refer to Note 15, “Commitments and Contingencies” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein for further details), foreign currency transaction gain or loss, payroll withholding taxes related to special dividend and dividend equivalent payments and stock option exercises, non-service related pension costs, deferred compensation and gain or loss on sale of fixed assets.