Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Financial Information
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) section provides analysis of our operations and financial position for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020 and includes information available up to March 16, 2020, unless otherwise indicated herein. It is supplementary information and should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report.
Certain statements contained in this MD&A may constitute forward-looking statements as defined under securities laws. Forward-looking statements may relate to our future outlook and anticipated events or results and may include statements regarding our future financial position, business strategy, budgets, litigation, projected costs, capital expenditures, financial results, taxes, plans and objectives. In some cases, forward-looking statements can be identified by terms such as “anticipate”, “estimate”, “intend”, “project”, “potential”, “continue”, “believe”, “expect”, “could”, “would”, “should”, “might”, “plan”, “will”, “may”, “predict”, or other similar expressions concerning matters that are not historical facts. To the extent any forward-looking statements contain future-oriented financial information or financial outlooks, such information is being provided to enable a reader to assess our financial condition, material changes in our financial condition, our results of operations, and our liquidity and capital resources. Readers are cautioned that this information may not be appropriate for any other purpose, including investment decisions.
Forward-looking statements contained in this MD&A are based on certain factors and assumptions regarding expected growth, results of operations, performance, and business prospects and opportunities. While we consider these assumptions to be reasonable, based on information currently available, they may prove to be incorrect. Forward-looking statements are also subject to certain factors, including risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from what we currently expect. These factors are more fully described in the “Risk Factors” section at Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”) requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, related revenues and expenses, and disclosure of gain and loss contingencies at the date of the financial statements. The estimates and assumptions made require us to exercise our judgment and are based on our experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. We continually evaluate the information that forms the basis of our estimates and assumptions as our business and the business environment generally changes. The following are the accounting estimates which we believe to be most important to our business.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable are recorded at their original invoice amounts. We regularly review collectability and establish an allowance for uncollectible amounts as necessary.
Inventory
Inventory is our largest current asset other than cash and consists primarily of raw materials and finished goods held for sale. Inventories are valued at the lower of cost, measured on a first-in, first out basis, or estimated net realizable value. In order to determine the value of inventory at the balance sheet date, we evaluate a number of factors to determine the adequacy of provisions for inventory. These factors include the age of inventory, the amount of inventory held by type, future demand for products, and the expected future selling price we expect to realize by selling the inventory. Our estimates are judgmental in nature and are made at a point in time, using available information, expected business plans, and expected market conditions. As a result, the actual amount received on sale could differ from our estimated value of inventory.
Long-Lived Assets
We review our long-lived assets, to include intangible assets subject to amortization, for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such long-lived asset or group of long-lived assets (collectively referred to as “the asset”) may not be recoverable. Such circumstances include, but are not limited to:
·
a significant decrease in the market price of the asset;
·
a significant change in the extent or manner in which the asset is being used;
·
a significant change in the business climate that could affect the value of the asset;
·
a current period loss combined with projection of continuing loss associated with use of the asset; and
·
a current expectation that, more likely than not, the asset will be sold or otherwise disposed of before the end of its previously estimated useful life.
We continually evaluate whether such events and circumstances have occurred. When such events or circumstances exist, the recoverability of the asset’s carrying value shall be determined by estimating the undiscounted future cash flows (cash inflows less associated cash outflows) that are directly associated with and that are expected to arise as a direct result of the use and eventual disposition of the asset. To date, no such impairment has occurred. To the extent such events or circumstances occur that could affect the recoverability of our long-lived assets, we may incur charges for impairment in the future.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue at the time of delivery of the product and when all of the following have occurred: a sales agreement is in place; the performance obligations of the agreement has been identified; the transaction price has been determined; the transaction price has been allocated to the performance obligations; and when each performance obligation is satisfied. Agreed trading terms with customers such as value incentives, rebates, early payment discounts and other discounts are recorded as reductions to revenues at the time of sale.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales includes the direct purchase cost of the product based on the FIFO method.
Stock-Based Compensation
We maintain a stock incentive plan under which stock options and other stock-based awards may be granted to selected officer, directors and service providers. For grants of stock options, we are required to estimate a number of inputs at each grant date, such as the estimated life of the option, future stock price volatility, and the forfeiture rate used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine a fair value for the options granted to employees or non-employee directors. Once determined at the grant date, the fair value of the stock option award is recorded over the vesting period of the options granted.
Income Taxes
We are liable for income taxes in jurisdictions where we operate. Our effective tax rate may differ from the statutory tax rate and will vary from year to year primarily as a result of any permanent differences, investment and other tax credits, as well as the provision for income taxes at different rates in various jurisdictions. In making an estimate of our income tax liability, we first assess which items of income and expense are taxable in a particular jurisdiction. This process involves a determination of the amount of taxes currently payable as well as the assessment of the effect of temporary timing differences resulting from different treatment of items for accounting and tax purposes. These differences in the timing of the recognition of income or the deductibility of expenses may result in deferred income tax balances that are recorded as assets or liabilities as the case may be on our balance sheet. We also estimate the amount of valuation allowance to maintain relating to loss carry forwards and other balances that can be used to reduce future taxes payable. We assess the likelihood of the ultimate realization of these tax assets by looking at the relative size of the tax assets in relation to the profitability of the businesses and the jurisdiction to which they can be applied, the number of years based on management’s estimate it will take to use the tax assets and any other special circumstances. Given our history of operating losses we have taken a valuation allowance to offset the potential future value of loss carry-forwards.
Results of Operations for the Fiscal Years Ended November 30, 2020 and November 30, 2019
The following summary of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements for the fiscal years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019.
Our operating results for years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019 are summarized as follows:
Revenues and Gross Profits
Revenues decreased 59% in 2020 to $872,923 versus $2,153,572 in the prior year. The decrease was the result of the Company’s implementation of a strategic shift away from established commodity-based private label product sales to developing high-margin premium branded product sales in the period. Gross profit decreased by 43% to $244,122 versus $429,761 with margin improvement in the period to 28.0% of revenues versus 20.0% of revenues in the prior period. This improvement is attributable to early commercial development of Brain Armor® branded product sales. Subject to receipt of additional funding which will be used in part for further sales and marketing initiatives, Management expects revenue and profit contribution improvement as commercial efforts continue to gain traction and market conditions normalize. COVID-19 has thus far adversely affected our revenues and our ability to raise additional capital, so there is no assurance we will be able to grow our business or raise sufficient additional capital on acceptable terms or at all.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses for the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019 are outlined in the table below:
Operating expenses for the year ended November 30, 2020 were $4,571,077 as compared to $6,950,756 for the comparative period in 2019, a decrease of 34.2%. The decrease in our operating expenses was primarily due to our efforts to reduce costs, partially offset by an increase in professional fees. Management expects operating expenses to increase as revenue is expected to gain traction and market conditions normalize.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other income/(expenses) for the year ended November 30, 2020 were $(1,068,237) versus $(5,696,798) in the comparative period in 2019, an improvement of 81.2%. The increase in income was due primarily to an increase in a derivative gain of $5,637,629 on the revaluation of the embedded conversion option of the 2018 and 2019 convertible notes partially offset by a loss on debt extinguishment of $1,092,295. Management expects interest expenses to decrease. and does not expect any amortization of debt discount or derivative loss or gains.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
EBITDA
We define EBITDA as net income (loss), adjusted to exclude: Interest income and expense, depreciation and amortization expense including impairment loss. EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that we present in this annual report on Form 10-K to supplement the financial information we present on a GAAP basis. We monitor and present EBITDA because it is a key measure used by our management to understand and evaluate our performance. Reported net loss for the year ended November 30, 2020 was $(5,395,192) compared to $(12,217,793) in the comparative period in 2019. After deducting non-cash amounts of interest and loss on debt extinguishment, depreciation and amortization, EBITDA for the year ended November 30, 2020 was $(204) compared to $(7,837,905) in 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA, adjusted to exclude stock options expense and derivative loss. Reported EBITDA for the year ended November 30, 2020 was $(204) compared to $(7,837,700) in the comparative period in 2019. After deducting non-cash stock options expense and derivative loss, Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended November 30, 2020 was $(4,312,542) compared to ($6,131,863) in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash and cash equivalents balance at November 30, 2020 was $88,007. Management believes the current funds available to the company will not be sufficient to fund our operations for the next twelve months from the date the financial statements are issued unless the Company can raise additional funds.
Historical Convertible Note Financings
On January 29, 2015, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with a non-US institutional investor whereby we agreed to sell an aggregate principal amount of $2,300,000 of senior secured convertible debentures, convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock. We received $1,800,000 of the funds from the transaction on February 5, 2015 and the balance of $500,000 on May 14, 2015. On September 26, 2016, we entered into a Convertible Promissory Note Amendment Agreement with this investor whereby we agreed to extend the maturity date and amend the interest payable on the senior secured convertible debentures, whereby we extended the term of the notes through September 30, 2019 and interest rate was increased from 6% per annum to 8% per annum. The convertible debentures are convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock at an initial conversion price of $0.71 per share for an aggregate of up to 3,239,437 shares.
On September 26, 2016, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with a non-US institutional investor pursuant to which, in consideration for proceeds of $4,100,000, we issued a secured convertible promissory note in the amount of $4,100,000. Pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, the investor has agreed, from time to time after January 1, 2017, to make additional investments at our request of up to $5,900,000 ($10,000,000 in the aggregate) in one or more tranches of not less than one tranche during any 60 day period. The funding of any tranche under the agreement (other than the first $4,100,000 which has been funded) is subject to the mutual agreement of the parties as to the use of funds. The parties have agreed to negotiate in good faith to pre-approve use of funds within 120 days following September 26, 2016. On May 9, 2017, the Company received the second tranche of funding with proceeds of $4,400,000 and on May 16, 2018 the third tranche of funding with proceeds of $1,500,000 for a total investment by the investor of $10,000,000. The Company intends to use the proceeds of the secured convertible note for general working capital purposes including, without limitation, settlement of accounts payable and repayment of mature loans. In consideration of each advance made by the investor pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, we will issue to the investor a convertible promissory note of equal value, maturing three years after issuance, and bearing interest at the rate of 8% per annum. Each note will be secured in first priority against the present and after acquired assets of the Company, and will be convertible in whole or in part at the option of the holder into common shares of the Company at a conversion price per share of $.60, equal to a 25% discount to the 10 day average closing price of the Company’s common stock for the period immediately preceding the issuance of the applicable note.
On November 30, 2018 the Company and Fengate entered into a Securities Purchase Amendment Agreement (‘SPA”) pursuant to which the Company has agreed to issue to Fengate additional convertible promissory notes (collectively, the “2018 and 2019 Convertible Notes”) of up to $10,000,000, subject to certain terms and conditions. Each portion of the principal amount advanced pursuant to the SPA will bear interest at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum and will be payable monthly in arrears to Fengate. Outstanding principal and interest will continue to be secured by the general security agreement dated September 26, 2016, which forms a part of the Agreement. The holder of the note may also elect from time to time to convert all or a portion of the outstanding principal and interest into common shares of the Company at a 25% discount to the average closing price of the common shares during the 10 trading days immediately prior to the applicable conversion date. The 2018 and 2019 Convertible Notes were extended and will mature on December 1, 2021.
On November 30, 2018 the Company received the first tranche of funding with proceeds of $3,400,780. The 2nd tranche of $2,804,187 was received on April 13, 2019. The 3rd tranche of $3,795,033 less $936,168 withheld for withheld for interest payments up to and including June 30, 2020 was received on November 6, 2019. On March 5, 2020, the 2018 and 2019 Convertible Notes were amended to increase the amount of the 3rd tranche by $936,168 representing the amount previously withheld as interest payment. The withheld interest was subsequently received on March 12, 2020.The Company used the proceeds of the secured convertible note for general working capital purposes including, without limitation, product development, inventory, and marketing and selling expenses.
Agreement to Restructure Convertible Notes
On November 30, 2020 (“Effective Date”), the Company entered into that certain Fourth Amendment to Convertible Promissory Notes ( “Fourth Amendment”), with Fengate, the holder of the Notes (the “Note Holder”).
By way of background, immediately prior to the Effective Date, the Company was indebted to the Note Holder in the aggregate principal amount of $22.3 million as follows: $12.3 million (the “2016 Convertible Notes”) and $10 million (the “Amended SPA Notes”). In addition, the Company owed aggregate accrued interest of $5,359,392 on the 2016 Convertible Notes and the Amended SPA Notes.
Conversion of $17.7 million of Indebtedness into Company Equity
In connection with the Fourth Amendment, the Note Holder has agreed to convert aggregate principal and accrued interest of $17,659,392 into equity of the Company, as more fully described below.
As of the Effective Date, the Company and Note Holder have agreed that the Company will issue the Note Holder 29,432,320 shares of Company Preferred Stock in full and complete satisfaction of (i) all amounts owing under the 2016 Convertible Notes through November 30, 2020 (including accrued interest thereon) and (ii) all accrued interest on the Amended SPA Notes through November 30, 2020. This transaction represents the conversion of aggregate principal and accrued interest of $17,659,392 into Preferred Stock at the rate of $.60 per share. The $17,659,392 is comprised of $12.3 million of principal owing under the 2016 Convertible Notes and all accrued interest owing under both the 2016 Convertible Notes and the Amended SPA Notes (an aggregate of $5,359,392).
Under the terms of the Fourth Amendment, the Preferred Stock shall be (i) voting shares, with the same voting rights as common shares, except the Preferred Stock shall have no vote in respect of election of directors, (ii) entitled to such dividends as the Board of Directors of the Company may in its discretion declare (and no dividends may be declared on the Company’s other classes of shares unless a dividend is declared on the Preferred Stock), (iii) have a preference in liquidation ahead of all other classes of Company shares, (iv) be entitled upon a sale of the Company (to be further defined in definitive agreements) to receive the consideration that would be payable in respect of that number of shares of common stock of the Company equal to the number of shares of Preferred Stock (on a one-for one basis with the Company common stock), and (v) otherwise on such other terms and conditions as are mutually agreeable and not inconsistent with the foregoing.
The consummation of the foregoing transaction is subject to (i) authorization and issuance of the Preferred Stock, which is subject to approval of the requisite number of common shares of the Company, in accordance with Nevada law and the Company’s organizational documents, and (ii) Note Holder’s obligation to remain in compliance with regulations governing its ownership of voting shares.
The Company and Note Holder have undertaken to consummate the foregoing transactions no later than June 30 , 2021.The Company expects to consummate this transaction prior to May 30, 2021.
Amendment of Terms of $10 million Amended SPA Notes
The Fourth Amendment also amends the Amended SPA Notes (aggregate principal amount of $10 million) as of the Effective Date, as follows:
1.
Interest Rate. The interest rate per annum in respect of outstanding principal under the Amended SPA Notes shall be eight (8%) percent computed on a simple interest basis.
2.
Interest Payments.
a.
Interest on unpaid principal of the Amended SPA Notes ($10 million) with respect to the period of December 1, 2020 through November 30, 2021 may be paid by the Company in kind by issuing a non-interest bearing note (a “PIK Note”) in the amount of $800,000 on November 30, 2021 with a maturity date of November 30, 2025. If no PIK Note is issued on such date, accrued and unpaid principal shall be payable in cash.
b.
Interest on unpaid principal of the Amended SPA Notes with respect to the period of December 1, 2021 through November 30, 2022 may be paid by the Company in kind by issuing a PIK Note in the amount of $800,000 on November 30, 2022 with a maturity date of November 30, 2025. If no PIK Note is issued on such date, accrued and unpaid principal shall be payable in cash.
c.
The PIK Notes issued by the Company pursuant to the previous two paragraphs shall be in the form attached to the Securities Purchase Agreement dated as of September 26, 2016, as amended, pursuant to the which the Amended SPA Notes were issued, subject to revisions necessary to make such PIK Notes non-convertible and non-interest bearing.
d.
Interest on unpaid principal with respect to the period of December 1, 2022 through November 30, 2025 shall be payable quarterly in arrears commencing February 28, 2023.
3.
Termination of Conversion Feature. The convertibility of the Amended SPA Notes is terminated.
4.
Extension of Maturity Date. The Maturity Date of the Amended SPA Notes is extended to November 30, 2025.
Except as modified by the Fourth Amendment, the Notes, as previously amended, remain in full force and effect.
On May 28, 2020, we obtained a $135,165 unsecured loan payable through the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), which was enacted as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES ACT”). The funds were received from Bank of America through a loan agreement pursuant to the CARES Act. The CARES Act was established in order to enable small businesses to pay employees during the economic slowdown caused by COVID-19 by providing forgivable loans to qualifying businesses for up to 2.5 times their average monthly payroll costs. The amount borrowed under the CARES Act and used for payroll costs, rent, mortgage interest, and utility costs during the 24 week period after the date of loan disbursement is eligible to be forgiven provided that (a) we use the PPP Funds during the eight week period after receipt thereof, and (b) the PPP Funds are only used to cover payroll costs (including benefits), rent, mortgage interest, and utility costs. While the full loan amount may be forgiven, the amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if, among other reasons, we do not maintain staffing or payroll levels or less than 60% of the loan proceeds are used for payroll costs. Principal and interest payments on any unforgiven portion of the PPP Funds (the “PPP Loan”) will be deferred to the date the SBA remits the borrower’s loan forgiveness amount to the lender or, if the borrower does not apply for loan forgiveness, 10 months after the end of the borrower’s loan forgiveness period for six months and will accrue interest at a fixed annual rate of 1.0% and carry a two year maturity date. There is no prepayment penalty on the CARES Act Loan.
Working Capital Deficiency and Need for Additional Capital
We currently have a working capital deficiency. As of November 30, 2020, we had a working capital deficit of approximately $6.4 million, compared to a deficit of approximately $18.3 million as of November 30, 2019. The approximate $11.9 million decrease in working capital deficit was due primarily to (all amounts approximate) $12.0 million decrease in convertible debt reclassified to long term debt and a $5.8 million decrease in derivative liability partially offset by $3.9 million increase in accrued liabilities, 926,000 decrease in cash and $863,000 decrease in inventory.
As disclosed under Item 3. Legal Proceedings, a judgment was entered against us in the Everlast matter in the amount of approximately $740,000. In addition, the plaintiff in the Oracle matter has requested a default judgment against us. Accordingly, the Company is currently obligated to pay Everlast approximately $740,000 and could be liable to pay Oracle at least $217,000 if the court enters a default judgment, in which case, the Company would be liable for in excess of $1 million in judgments, in the aggregate. If the Company is compelled to pay these liabilities, there would be a material adverse effect on the financial condition of the Company.
As of March 15, 2021, we had only minimal cash on hand, and consequently, we are unable to fully implement our current business plan. Accordingly, we have an immediate need for additional capital to fund our operating activities. COVID-19 has thus far adversely affected our revenues and our ability to raise additional capital, so there is no assurance we will be able to grow our business or raise sufficient additional capital on acceptable terms or at all.
In order to remedy this liquidity deficiency, we are actively seeking to raise additional funds through the sale of equity and/or debt securities, and ultimately, we will need to generate substantial positive operating cash flows. Our internal sources of funds will consist of cash flows from operations, but not until we begin to realize additional revenues from the sale of our products and services. As previously stated, our operations are generating negative cash flows, and thus adversely affecting our liquidity. If we are unable to raise additional funds in the near term, we will not be able to implement our business plan, in which case there would be a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
In the event we do not generate sufficient funds from revenues or financing through the issuance of common stock or from debt financing, we will be unable to fully implement our business plan and pay our obligations as they become due, any of which circumstances would have a material adverse effect on our business prospects, financial condition, and results of operations. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be required should we be unable to recover the value of our assets or satisfy our liabilities.
Based on our limited availability of funds we expect to spend minimal amounts on product development, sales and marketing and capital expenditures. We expect to fund any future product development expenditures through a combination of cash flows from operations and proceeds from equity and/or debt financing. If we are unable to generate positive cash flows from operations, and/or raise additional funds (either through debt or equity), we will be unable to fund our product development expenditures, in which case, there could be an adverse effect on our business and results of operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.