ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our future results of operations could differ materially from our historical results or those anticipated in our forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” in Item 1A and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. With respect to this section, the cautionary language applicable to such forward-looking statements described under “Forward-Looking Statements” found before Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K is incorporated by reference into this Item 7.
About Tidewater
Our vessels and associated vessel services provide support for all phases of offshore oil and natural gas exploration, field development and production as well as windfarm development and maintenance. These services include towing of, and anchor handling for, mobile offshore drilling units; transporting supplies and personnel necessary to sustain drilling, workover and production activities; offshore construction and seismic and subsea support; geotechnical survey support for windfarm construction; and a variety of specialized services such as pipe and cable laying. In addition, we have one of the broadest geographic operating footprints in the offshore vessel industry. Our global operating footprint allows us to react quickly to changing local market conditions and to be responsive to the changing requirements of the many customers with which we believe we have strong relationships. We are also one of the most experienced international operators in the offshore energy industry with a history spanning over 60 years.
On November 15, 2018 (Merger Date), we completed our merger with GulfMark Offshore, Inc. GulfMark pursuant to the Agreement and Plan of the Merger dated July 15, 2018. GulfMark’s balances and results are included in our consolidated financial statements and disclosures beginning on the Merger Date. Therefore, our balances and results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 include GulfMark’s operations while our balances and results for the year ended December 30, 2018 only include GulfMark’s operations for the last 45 days.
At December 31, 2020, we owned 172 vessels with an average age of 10.4 years (excluding 3 joint venture vessels, but including 35 stacked active vessels and 23 vessels designated for sale) available to serve the global energy industry. The average age of our 149 active vessels at December 31, 2020 is 10.2 years.
Principal Factors That Drive Our Results
Our revenues, net earnings and cash flows from operations are largely dependent upon the activity level of our offshore marine vessel fleet. As is the case with the numerous other vessel operators in our industry, our business activity is largely dependent on the level of exploration, field development and production activity of our customers. Our customers’ business activity, in turn, is dependent on current and expected crude oil and natural gas prices, which fluctuate depending on expected future levels of supply and demand for crude oil and natural gas, and on estimates of the cost to find, develop and produce crude oil and natural gas reserves.
Our revenues in all segments are driven primarily by our fleet size, vessel utilization and day rates. Because a sizeable portion of our operating and depreciation costs do not change proportionally with changes in revenue, our operating profit is largely dependent on revenue levels.
Operating costs consist primarily of crew costs, repair and maintenance costs, insurance costs, fuel, lube oil and supplies costs and other vessel operating costs. Fleet size, fleet composition, geographic areas of operation, supply and demand for marine personnel, and local labor requirements are the major factors which affect overall crew costs in all segments. In addition, our newer, more technologically sophisticated vessels generally require a greater number of specially trained, more highly compensated fleet personnel than our older, smaller and less sophisticated vessels. Crew costs may increase if competition for skilled personnel intensifies, although a weaker offshore energy market could mitigate any potential inflation of crew costs.
Costs related to the recertification of vessels are deferred and amortized over 30 months on a straight-line basis. Maintenance costs incurred at the time of the recertification drydocking that are not related to the recertification of the vessel are expensed as incurred. Costs related to vessel improvements that either extend the vessel’s useful life or increase the vessel’s functionality are capitalized and depreciated.
Insurance costs are dependent on a variety of factors, including our safety record and pricing in the insurance markets, and can fluctuate over time. Our vessels are generally insured for up to their estimated fair market value in order to cover damage or loss resulting from marine casualties, adverse weather conditions, mechanical failure, collisions, and property losses to the vessel. We also purchase coverage for potential liabilities stemming from third-party losses with limits that we believe are reasonable for our operations, but do not generally purchase business interruption insurance or similar coverage. Insurance limits are reviewed annually, and third-party coverage is purchased based on the expected scope of ongoing operations and the cost of third-party coverage.
Fuel and lube costs can also fluctuate in any given period depending on the number and distance of vessel mobilizations, the number of active vessels off charter, drydockings, and changes in fuel prices. We also incur vessel operating costs that are aggregated as “other” vessel operating costs. These costs consist of brokers’ commissions, including commissions paid to unconsolidated joint venture companies, training costs, satellite communication fees, agent fees, port fees and other miscellaneous costs. Brokers’ commissions are incurred primarily in our non-U.S. operating areas where brokers oftentimes assist us in obtaining work. Brokers generally are paid a percentage of day rates billed upon collection of the amounts invoiced and, accordingly, commissions paid to brokers generally fluctuate in accordance with vessel revenue.
Deepwater activity is a significant segment of the global offshore crude oil and natural gas markets, and a significant component of our business. Development typically involves significant capital investment and multi-year development plans. Such projects are generally underwritten by the participating exploration, field development and production companies using relatively conservative crude oil and natural gas pricing assumptions. Although these projects are generally less susceptible to short-term fluctuations in the price of crude oil and natural gas, deepwater exploration and development projects can be more costly relative to other onshore and offshore exploration and development. As a result, generally depressed crude oil prices have caused, and may continue to cause, many of our customers and potential customers to reevaluate their future capital expenditures in regard to deepwater projects.
Sonatide
We previously disclosed the significant financial and operational challenges that we confront with respect to operations in Angola, as well as steps that we have taken to address or mitigate those risks. Most of our attention has been focused in three areas: (i) reducing the net receivable balance due from Sonatide, our Angolan joint venture with Sonangol, for vessel services; (ii) reducing the foreign currency risk created by virtue of provisions of Angolan law that require that payment for a portion of the services provided by Sonatide be paid in Angolan kwanza; and (iii) optimizing opportunities, consistent with Angolan law, for services provided by us to be paid for directly in U.S. dollars. In late 2019, we were informed that, as part of a broad privatization program, Sonangol intends to seek to divest itself from Sonatide.
In the second quarter of 2020, Sonatide declared a $35.0 million dividend. On June 22, 2020, Sonangol received $17.8 million and we received $17.2 million. Our share of the dividend is reflected as dividend income from unconsolidated company in the consolidated statement of operations because (i) our investment in Sonatide had previously been written down to zero, (ii) the distributions are not refundable and (iii) we are not liable for the obligations of or committed to provide financial support to Sonatide. In addition, as a result of the aforementioned dividend payment, the cash balances of the joint venture were significantly reduced and we determined that, as a result, a significant portion of our net due from Sonatide balance was compromised. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $40.9 million affiliate credit loss impairment expense.
DTDW
We own 40% of DTDW in Nigeria. Our partner, who owns 60%, is a Nigerian national. DTDW owns one offshore service vessel and has long term debt of $4.7 million which is secured by the vessel and guarantees from the DTDW partners. We also operate company owned vessels in Nigeria for which the joint venture receives a commission. As of December 31, 2020, we had no company owned vessels operating in Nigeria and the DTDW owned vessel was not employed. At the beginning of 2020 we had expected that we would be operating numerous vessels in Nigeria, but in the second quarter of 2020 the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting oil price reduction caused our primary customer in Nigeria to eliminate all planned operations for 2020. As a result, the near-term cash flow projections indicate that DTDW does not have sufficient funds to meet its obligations to us or to the holder of its long-term debt. Therefore, we recorded affiliate credit loss impairment expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaling $12.1 million. In addition, based on our analysis we have determined that DTDW will be unable to pay its debt obligation and the debt will not be satisfied by liquidating the vessel and, as a result, we recorded additional impairment expense of $2.0 million for our expected share of the obligation guarantee during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Industry Conditions and Outlook
Our business is directly impacted by the level of activity in worldwide offshore oil and natural gas exploration, development and production, which in turn is influenced by trends in oil and natural gas prices. In addition, oil and natural gas prices are affected by a host of geopolitical and economic forces, including the fundamental principles of supply and demand. In particular, the oil price is significantly influenced by actions of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, or OPEC. Prices are subject to significant uncertainty and, as a result, are extremely volatile. Beginning in late 2014, oil prices declined significantly from levels of over $100.00 per barrel and continued to decline throughout 2015 and into 2016 causing an industry-wide downturn. Prices began to stabilize in the $50.00 to $60.00 per barrel range in 2019 and early 2020. However, in the first quarter of 2020 the industry was severely impacted by the previously discussed global pandemic (COVID-19) and the resulting loss of demand and decrease in oil prices.
As COVID-19 spread throughout the world, its impact on many of our locations, including our vessels, has affected our operations. We have implemented various protocols for both onshore and offshore personnel in efforts to limit this impact, but there is no assurance that those efforts will be fully successful. Any spread of COVID-19 to our onshore workforce or key management personnel could prevent us from supporting our offshore operations, reduce productivity as our onshore personnel continue to work remotely, and disrupt our business. Any outbreak on our vessels may result in the vessel, or some or all of a vessel crew, being quarantined and therefore impede the vessel’s ability to generate revenue. We have experienced challenges in connection with our offshore crew changes due to health and travel restrictions related to COVID-19, and those challenges and/or restrictions are expected to continue despite our efforts at mitigating them. To the extent the COVID-19 pandemic adversely affects our operations and business, it may also have the effect of heightening many of the other risks set forth in our SEC filings.
The effect on our business includes lockdowns of shipyards where we have vessels performing drydocks which will delay vessels returning to service and the cancellation and/or temporary delay of certain revenue vessel contracts allowed either under the contract provisions or by mutual agreement with our customers. These cancellations and/or temporary delays reduced our 2020 revenues by approximately 18.0%. We also incurred approximately $18.0 million in higher operating costs, primarily related to additional crew costs, mobilization and vessel stacking costs as a result of these unplanned contract cancellations. There may be additional cancellations or delays.
As a company, we have undertaken the following temporary measures to assist us in weathering the COVID-19 pandemic and allow us to recover as soon as possible:
•
Planned capital and drydock expenditures tied to contracts referenced above will be temporarily delayed or cancelled. As a result of the ongoing contract cancellations and delays we postponed drydocks expected to cost approximately $23.3 million in 2020. Budgeted drydocks expenditures for 2021 are expected to be approximately $19.0 million. It is possible that additional planned drydocks will be cancelled or delayed due to contract cancellations or delays. We cannot predict the number or cost of any additional cancellations or delays.
•
We have the ability to rapidly respond to contract cancellations and delays. We have or will remove the crews and shut down all operations, depending on contract terms, on vessels associated with cancelled or delayed contracts. We continue to evaluate our general and administrative costs to reflect the current demand for our offshore support vessels.
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations will depend on the severity, location, and duration of the effects and spread of the pandemic itself, the actions undertaken by national, regional, and local governments and health officials to contain the virus or treat its effects, and how quickly and to what extent economic conditions improve and normal business and operating conditions resume. As we cannot predict the duration or scope of this pandemic, the anticipated negative financial impact to our operating results cannot be reasonably estimated but could be both material and long-lasting.
In the first and second quarters of 2020, we considered these events surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting oil price decrease and demand reduction to be indicators that the value of our active offshore vessel fleet may be impaired. As a result, as of March 31, 2020 and June 30, 2020 , we performed Step 1 evaluations of our active offshore fleet under FASB Accounting Standards Codification 360, which governs the methodology for identifying and recording impairment of long-lived assets to determine if any of our asset groups have net book value in excess of undiscounted future net cash flows. Our evaluations did not indicate impairment of any of our asset groups. During the third quarter conditions related to the pandemic and oil price environment did not worsen from the second quarter and in the fourth quarter industry conditions marginally improved compared with the third quarter. As a result, we did not identify additional events or conditions that would require us to perform a Step 1 evaluation during either quarter. We will continue to monitor the expected future cash flows and the fair market value of our asset groups for impairment.
Results of Operations
We manage and measure our business performance primarily based on four distinct geographic operating segments: Americas, Middle East/Asia Pacific, Europe/Mediterranean and West Africa.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” in Part II, Items 7. and 7A. of the company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Our 2020 results are affected by the following factors:
● The global COVID-19 pandemic and concurrent drop in crude oil demand and price had a substantial effect on our revenues and operations through all segments. Although we were able to reduce our costs substantially as revenues came down, the overall effect was negative on our results of operations. The cancellation and/or temporary delay of certain revenue vessel contracts reduced our 2020 revenues by approximately 18.0%. We also incurred approximately $18.0 million in higher operating costs, primarily related to additional crew costs, mobilization and vessel stacking costs as a result of these unplanned contract cancellations.
●
As of December 31, 2020, we owned 149 active offshore support vessels operated in our four segments throughout the world, of which 35 were temporarily stacked.
●
During 2020, we identified and reclassified 32 of our vessels from property and equipment to assets held for sale in addition to the 46 vessels designated for sale in 2019. In conjunction with the reclassification, we revalued the vessels at the lower of net book value and estimated net realizable value. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded impairment expense of $75.2 million related to our assets held for sale. In 2020 we have sold 56 vessels, 53 of which were classified as assets held for sale and three of which were sold from our active fleet. We recognized $7.5 million in net gains on the sales of these vessels in 2020. At December 31, 2020 we have 23 vessels remaining in assets held for sale.
●
We also recorded $53.0 million in affiliate credit loss impairment expense as a significant portion of the due from affiliate balances from our two joint ventures in Angola and Nigeria was compromised. In addition, we determined that our Nigerian joint venture would be unable to pay its debt obligation and as a result, we recorded additional impairment expense of $2.0 million for our expected share of the obligation guarantee.
The above factors are discussed in more detail and in context in the consolidated and segment results of operations comparisons for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 below.
The following tables present vessel revenue by segment, vessel operating costs by segment, the related segment vessel revenue and operating costs as a percentage of segment vessel revenues, total vessel revenue and operating costs and the related total vessel revenue and operating costs as a percentage of total vessel revenues for our owned and operated vessel fleet:
The following tables present vessel operations general and administrative expenses by segment, the related segment vessel operations general and administrative expenses as a percentage of segment vessel revenues, total vessel operations general and administrative expenses and the related total vessel operations general and administrative expenses as a percentage of total vessel revenues.
The following tables present depreciation and amortization expense by segments, the related segment depreciation and amortization expense as a percentage of segment vessel revenues, total depreciation and amortization expense and the related total depreciation and amortization expense as a percentage of total vessel revenues.
The following tables compare operating income and other components of earnings before income taxes, and its related percentage of total revenues.
(A)
Included in corporate expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are $1.5 million and $12.6 million, respectively, of severance and termination benefits, including acceleration of restricted stock awards, for certain executive officers and other corporate employees.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 were $397.0 million and $486.5 million, respectively. The decrease in revenue is primarily due to decreases in our West Africa with 14 less active vessels and Europe/Mediterranean segments, with 13 less active vessels. Both segments were significantly affected by the decrease in demand caused by the pandemic. Overall, we had 32 less average active vessels in the year ended December 31, 2020 than in the year ended December 31, 2019. Active utilization decreased from 80.4% in 2019 to 77.0% in 2020.
Vessel operating costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 were $268.8 million and $329.2 million, respectively. The decrease is primarily due to a decrease in vessel activity, as we have 32 less active vessels in our fleet in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Depreciation and amortization expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was $116.7 million and $101.9 million, respectively. Depreciation and amortization expense were higher in the current period because of a $18.8 million increase in amortization of deferred drydocking and survey costs partially offset by lower vessel depreciation resulting from the discontinuation of depreciation on vessels classified as held for sale.
General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 were $73.4 million and $103.7 million, respectively. General and administrative expenses decreased overall in 2020 because of cost cutting measures being implemented during the pandemic and a reduction in one-time severance charges incurred in 2020 compared to 2019.
The net gain on asset dispositions, for the year ended December 31, 2020 are $7.6 million of net gains, primarily from the sale of 56 vessels and other assets. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized net gains of $2.3 million related to the sale of 40 vessels, primarily from our active fleet, and other assets.
During 2020, as discussed previously, we recorded $74.1 million of impairment primarily related to our vessels held for sale and $53.0 million of credit related losses associated with our two joint ventures in Nigeria and Angola. This compares to $37.8 million of impairment recorded in 2019, primarily related to our initial recognition of assets held for sale and inventory obsolescence.
Interest expense and other debt costs decreased by $4.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This is the result of paying down $97.1 million of our long-term debt primarily in the third and fourth quarters of 2020, offset by the acceleration of recognition of a portion of our deferred debt discount associated with the repaid debt. In addition, our interest income and other decreased by $5.4 million primarily as a result of lower cash balances in 2020 compared to 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized foreign exchange losses of $5.2 million and for the year ended December 31, 2019 we recognized losses of $1.3 million. These foreign exchange losses were primarily the result of the revaluation of various foreign currencies where we conduct our business including the Norwegian Kroner, Brazilian-Reais, Angola Kwanza, British Pound and Euro which are denominated balances to our U.S. dollar reporting currency.
In addition, our income tax benefit was $1.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with an income tax expense of $27.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the reversal of some uncertain tax positions during 2020 as well as an NOL carryback for a tax refund under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.
Americas Segment Operations. Vessel revenues in the Americas segment decreased 7.5%, or $10.3 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily due to a decrease of five active vessels primarily due to the pandemic. Overall, Americas segment active utilization increased from 84.2% during 2019 to 85.7% during 2020 and average day rates during these same periods increased 7.7%, which was generally due to a greater portion of the segment’s vessels being hired at current prevailing day rates which were higher than those in 2019.
Operating profit for the Americas segment for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $5.7 million greater than operating profit for the year ended December 31, 2019. Even though revenues decreased from period to period, the higher operating profit was primarily related to a $18.6 million decrease in vessel operating costs resulting from the decrease in vessel activity because of the pandemic and $2.1 million lower general and administrative cost due from ongoing cost saving efforts. These declines were partially offset by a $4.6 million increase in depreciation because of increased amortization of deferred drydock costs.
Middle East/Asia Pacific Segment Operations. Vessel revenues in the Middle East/Asia Pacific segment increased $6.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The Middle East/Asia Pacific average day rates were 10.1% higher for 2020 than for 2019. Middle East/Asia Pacific segment active utilization decreased from 79.1% to 76.4% and average active vessel fleet count was flat. Our Middle East/Asia Pacific segment was only marginally affected by COVID-19.
Operating loss for the Middle East/Asia Pacific segment was approximately flat compared with the prior year because increased revenue was offset by higher vessel operating costs and an increase in depreciation resulting from increased amortization of deferred drydock costs.
Europe/Mediterranean Segment Operations. Vessel revenues in the Europe/Mediterranean segment decreased 32.4%, or $40.1 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a 13 active vessel decrease. Europe/Mediterranean segment active utilization increased from 85.8% to 89.8% and average day rates increased by 5.4%. These increases in average day rates are due to the mix of vessels under longer term higher day rate contracts continuing while shorter term and spot contracts were delayed or canceled. This Segment experienced a significant downturn due to the pandemic.
Operating loss for the Europe/Mediterranean segment increased from $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $8.6 million in 2020 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease resulted from lower revenue, which more than offset lower operating costs associated with lower vessel activity and lower general and administrative costs attributable to our ongoing cost reduction efforts.
West Africa Segment Operations. Vessel revenues in the West Africa segment decreased 37.5%, or $47.3 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The West Africa active vessel fleet decreased by 14 vessels during the comparative periods. West Africa segment active utilization decreased from 75.1% to 62.8% and average day rates increased by 3.2%. The decreases in revenue were mainly due to the capacity reduction and utilization decline caused by the negative impact of the pandemic. This segment had the most negative impact from the pandemic because of significant contract cancellations
The operating loss for the West Africa segment was $27.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $8.3 million operating profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily resulting from decreased revenue and $6.6 million of increased depreciation and amortization resulting from higher amortization of drydock costs. These declines were partially offset by lower operating costs associated with the lower vessel activity and lower general and administrative costs attributable to our ongoing cost reduction efforts.
Vessel Utilization and Average Rates by Segment
Owned or chartered vessels include stacked vessels. We consider a vessel to be stacked if the vessel crew is furloughed or substantially reduced and limited maintenance is being performed on the vessel. We reduce operating costs by stacking vessels when management does not foresee opportunities to profitably or strategically operate the vessels in the near future. Vessels are stacked when market conditions warrant and they are no longer considered stacked when they are returned to active service, sold or otherwise disposed. When economically practical marketing opportunities arise, the stacked vessels can be returned to active service by performing any necessary maintenance on the vessel and either rehiring or returning fleet personnel to operate the vessel. Although not currently fulfilling charters, stacked vessels are considered to be in service and are included in the calculation of our utilization statistics.
We had 35 and 19 stacked vessels in our active fleet as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2019, we had 46 total vessels that were classified as assets held for sale. During 2020, we designated an additional 32 assets for disposition and sold 53 vessels that had been designated as held for sale plus an additional three vessels from our active fleet. At December 31, 2020, 23 vessels remain reclassified as assets held for sale in current assets.
Vessel Dispositions
We seek opportunities to sell and/or recycle our older vessels when market conditions warrant and opportunities arise. The majority of our vessels are sold to buyers who do not compete with us in the offshore energy industry. The number of vessels disposed by segment are as follows:
Vessel Deliveries
We did not build any vessels in the two years ended December 31, 2020. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we acquired 11 crew boats for $5.3 million which were added to our active fleet in Africa.
General and Administrative Expenses
Consolidated general and administrative expenses and the related percentage of each component to total revenues are as follows:
Segment and corporate general and administrative expenses and the related percentage of total general and administrative expenses were as follows:
(A)
Restructuring charges for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 include $1.5 million and $12.6 million, respectively, of severance and termination benefits, including acceleration of restricted stock awards, for certain executive officers and other corporate employees.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 have decreased as compared to the comparable prior year primarily as a result of our continuing efforts to reduce overhead costs due to the downturn in the offshore services market.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Other Matters
Availability of Cash
As of December 31, 2020, we had 155.2 million in cash and cash equivalents (including restricted cash), including amounts held by foreign subsidiaries, the majority of which is available to us without adverse tax consequences. Included in foreign subsidiary cash are balances held in U.S. dollars and foreign currencies that await repatriation due to various currency conversion and repatriation constraints, partner and tax related matters, prior to the cash being made available for remittance to our domestic accounts. We currently intend that earnings by foreign subsidiaries will be indefinitely reinvested in foreign jurisdictions in order to fund strategic initiatives (such as investment, expansion and acquisitions), fund working capital requirements and repay debt (both third-party and intercompany) of our foreign subsidiaries in the normal course of business. Moreover, we do not currently intend to repatriate earnings of our foreign subsidiaries to the U. S. because cash generated from our domestic businesses and the repayment of intercompany liabilities from foreign subsidiaries are currently deemed to be sufficient to fund the cash needs of our operations in the U. S.
Our objective in financing our business is to maintain and preserve adequate financial resources and sufficient levels of liquidity. We do not have a revolving credit facility. Cash and cash equivalents and future net cash provided by operating activities provide us, in our opinion, with sufficient liquidity to meet our liquidity requirements.
Indebtedness
As of December 31, 2020, we had $198.0 million of long -term debt on our consolidated balance sheet of which $27.8 million is due within one year. Of this amount, our Secured Notes total $147.0 million, which is due in August 2022. The Secured Notes have a quarterly minimum trailing year interest coverage requirement that began June 30, 2019. Compliance with this covenant has been waived from April 2021 through December 31, 2021. Minimum liquidity requirements and other covenants are set forth in the Indenture. In addition, we have $50.9 million of long-term debt in a subsidiary that is collateralized by certain of the subsidiary’s vessels. This debt has similar covenants as the Secured Notes. We believe that our $155.2 million in cash on hand, plus cash generated from our operations and asset sales in 2021 will be sufficient to meet our debt obligations in 2021. Refer to Note (4) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details on our indebtedness.
We may from time to time seek to retire or purchase our outstanding debt through cash purchases and/or exchanges for equity securities, in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases or exchanges, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material.
Share Repurchases
No shares were repurchased during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. Please refer to Note (12) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Dividends
There were no dividends declared during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. Please refer to Note (11) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by or used in operating activities for any period will fluctuate according to the level of business activity for the applicable period.
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities is as follows:
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, of $4.0 million reflects a net loss of $196.7 million, non-cash impairments of $129.1 million, non-cash depreciation and amortization of $116.7 million, a net gain on asset dispositions of $7.6 million, and stock-based compensation expense of $5.1 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $26.5 million in cash while amounts due to/from affiliates provided $11.9 million in cash. We paid $33.3 million for regulatory drydocks in 2020.
Net cash used by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019, of $31.4 million reflects a net loss of $141.2 million, non-cash asset impairments of $37.8 million, non-cash depreciation and amortization of $101.9 million, a net gain on asset dispositions of $2.3 million and stock-based compensation expense of $19.6 million. We paid out $70.4 million for regulatory drydocks, including reactivations, in 2019. Changes in investments in, at equity, and advances to unconsolidated companies decreased by $1.0 million, primarily reflecting foreign exchange losses recognized by our 49% owned Sonatide joint venture.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities is as follows:
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $23.4 million, reflecting proceeds from the sale of assets of $38.3 million related to the disposal of 56 vessels, 25 of which were recycled. Additions to property and equipment were comprised of $14.9 million, primarily for the purchase of eleven crew vessels, upgrades to our existing fleet and continued enhancements to our current enterprise software system.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019, was $10.8 million, reflecting the receipt of proceeds from the sale of assets of $28.8 million related to the disposal of 40 vessels, 22 of which were recycled. Additions to property and equipment were comprised of $18.0 million, primarily for upgrades to our existing fleet and the implementation of a new enterprise software system.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities is as follows:
Financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, used $99.8 million of cash, as a result of the repayment of $76.2 million of our secured notes in open market purchases and a voluntary tender offer. Financing activities also included $21.9 million of scheduled semiannual payments and additional prepayments on the TROMS offshore debt.
Financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019, used $149.6 million of cash, as a result of the repayment of the $125.0 million of our secured notes and a $11.4 million redemption premium and consent fee, pursuant to a tender offer associated with the repayment of secured notes. Financing activities also included $8.7 million of scheduled semiannual payments on the TROMS offshore debt.
Legal Proceedings
Various legal proceedings and claims are outstanding which arose in the ordinary course of business. In the opinion of management, the amount of ultimate liability, if any, with respect to these actions, will not have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows. Information related to various commitments and contingencies, including legal proceedings, is disclosed in Note (12) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contractual Obligations and Contingent Commitments
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our consolidated contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the effect such obligations, inclusive of interest costs, are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods.
(A)
These amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits under FASB Interpretation No. 48. The estimated income tax liabilities for uncertain tax positions will be settled as a result of expiring statutes, audit activity, competent authority proceedings related to transfer pricing, or final decisions in matters that are the subject of litigation in various taxing jurisdictions in which we operate. The timing of any particular settlement will depend on the length of the tax audit and related appeals process, if any, or an expiration of a statute. If a liability is settled due to a statute expiring or a favorable audit result, the settlement of the tax liability would not result in a cash payment.
Letters of Credit and Surety Bonds
In the ordinary course of business, we had other commitments that we are contractually obligated to fulfill with cash should the obligations be called. These obligations include standby letters of credit, surety bonds and performance bonds that guarantee our performance as it relates to our vessel contracts, insurance, customs and other obligations in various jurisdictions. While these obligations are not normally called, the obligation could be called by the beneficiaries at any time before the expiration date should we breach certain contractual and/or performance or payment obligations. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $40.5 million of outstanding standby letters of credit, surety bonds and performance bonds, geographically concentrated in Mexico, Brazil and Nigeria.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosures and disclosures of any contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. We evaluate the reasonableness of these estimates and assumptions continually based on a combination of historical experience and other assumptions and information that comes to our attention that may vary the outlook for the future. Estimates and assumptions about future events and their effects are subject to uncertainty, and accordingly, these estimates may change as new events occur, as more experience is acquired, as additional information is obtained and as the business environment in which we operate changes. As a result, actual results may differ from estimates under different assumptions.
The Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, as described in Note (1) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, should be read in conjunction with this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. We have defined a critical accounting estimate as one that is important to the portrayal of our financial condition or results of operations and requires us to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments or estimates about matters that are uncertain. We believe the following critical accounting policies that affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements are described below. There are other items within our consolidated financial statements that require estimation and judgment, but they are not deemed critical as defined above.
Receivables and Allowance for Credit Losses
In the normal course of business, we extend credit to our customers on a short-term basis. Our principal customers are major oil and natural gas exploration, field development and production companies. We routinely review and evaluate our accounts receivable balances for collectability. The determination of the collectability of amounts due from our customers requires us to use estimates and make judgments regarding future events and trends, including monitoring our customers’ payment history and current credit worthiness to determine that collectability is reasonably assured, as well as consideration of the overall business climate in which our customers operate. Expected credit losses are recorded on the initial recognition of our primary financial assets, which are trade accounts receivable and contract assets. We also have net receivable balances related to joint ventures in which we own less than 50%. We review and evaluate these receivables for collectability in a similar manner as we evaluate trade receivables. We believe that our allowance for credit losses is adequate to cover potential bad debt losses under current conditions; however, uncertainties regarding changes in the financial condition of our customers, either adverse or positive, could impact the amount and timing of any additional provisions for credit losses that may be required.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review the vessels in our active fleet for impairment whenever events occur or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset group may not be recoverable. In such evaluation, the estimated future undiscounted cash flows generated by an asset group are compared with the carrying amount of the asset group to determine if a write-down may be required. With respect to vessels that are expected to remain in active service, we group together for impairment testing purposes vessels with similar operating and marketing characteristics. Due in part to the modernization of our fleet more newer vessels are being stacked and are expected to return to active service. Stacked vessels expected to return to active service are generally newer vessels, have similar capabilities and likelihood of future active service as other currently operating vessels, are generally current with classification societies in regard to their regulatory certification status, and are being actively marketed. Stacked vessels expected to return to active service are evaluated for impairment as part of their assigned active asset group and not individually.
We estimate cash flows based upon historical data adjusted for our best estimate of expected future market performance, which, in turn, is based on industry trends. The primary estimates and assumptions used in reviewing active vessel groups for impairment and estimating undiscounted cash flows include utilization rates, average day rates and average daily operating expenses. These estimates are made based on recent actual trends in utilization, day rates and operating costs and reflect management’s best estimate of expected market conditions during the period of future cash flows. These assumptions and estimates have changed considerably as market conditions have changed, and they are reasonably likely to continue to change as market conditions change in the future. Although we believe our assumptions and estimates are reasonable, deviations from the assumptions and estimates could produce materially different results. Management estimates may vary considerably from actual outcomes due to future adverse market conditions or poor operating results that could result in the inability to recover the current carrying value of an asset group, thereby possibly requiring an impairment charge in the future. As our fleet continues to age, management closely monitors the estimates and assumptions used in the impairment analysis in order to properly identify evolving trends and changes in market conditions that could impact the results of the impairment evaluation.
If an asset group fails the undiscounted cash flow test, we estimate the fair value of each asset group and compare such estimated fair value to the carrying value of each asset group in order to determine if impairment exists.
Management estimates the fair value of each vessel in an asset group considered Level 3, as defined by ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, by considering items such as the vessel’s age, length of time stacked, likelihood of a return to active service, actual recent sales of similar vessels, among others. Third party appraisals, broker values or internal valuations based on recent sale activity are utilized for vessels expected to be sold as an operating vessel. We leverage information for vessels in a similar class, similar age, or similar specification to be used as a basis of fair value for vessels expected to be sold. Internal valuations are also prepared for vessels expected to be sold for recycling utilizing an estimated recycle value per lightweight ton based on the region of the vessel is located and the weight of the vessel and recent recycle activity. We record an impairment charge when the carrying value of an asset group exceeds its estimated fair value. In previous years, we sought opportunities to dispose of our older vessels when market conditions warranted and opportunities would arise. As a result, vessel dispositions would vary from year to year, and gains (losses) on sales of assets would also fluctuate significantly from period to period. The majority of our vessels were sold to buyers with whom we do not compete in the offshore energy industry. We continue to employ that strategy, but to a lesser extent. When circumstances warrant we review our fleet and make decisions remove assets that are not considered to be part of our long-term plans. In these circumstance we will reclassify the identified vessels as held for sale and, if necessary, we will revalue these vessels to net realizable value. We consider the valuation approach for our assets held for sale to be a Level 3 fair value measurement due to the level of estimation involved in valuing assets to be recycled or sold. We determine the fair value of the vessels held for sale using two methodologies depending on the vessel and on our planned method of disposition. We designated certain vessels to be recycled and valued those vessels using recycling yard pricing schedules based on dollars per ton. We generally value vessels that will be sold rather than recycled at the midpoint of a value range based on sales agreements or using comparative sales in the marketplace.
Income Taxes
The asset-liability method is used for determining our income tax provisions, under which current and deferred tax liabilities and assets are recorded in accordance with enacted tax laws and rates. Under this method, the amounts of deferred tax liabilities and assets at the end of each period are determined using the tax rate expected to be in effect when taxes are actually paid or recovered. In addition, we determine our effective tax rate by estimating our permanent differences resulting from differing treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes.
As a global company, we are subject to the jurisdiction of taxing authorities in the United States and by the respective tax agencies in the countries in which we operate internationally, as well as to tax agreements and treaties among these governments. Our operations in these different jurisdictions are taxed on various bases: actual income before taxes, deemed profits (which are generally determined using a percentage of revenue rather than profits) and withholding taxes based on revenue. Determination of taxable income in any tax jurisdiction requires the interpretation of the related tax laws and regulations and the use of estimates and assumptions regarding significant future events such as the amount, timing and character of deductions, permissible revenue recognition methods under the tax law and the sources and character of income and tax credits. Changes in tax laws, regulations, agreements and treaties, foreign currency exchange restrictions or our level of operations or profitability in each taxing jurisdiction could have an impact on the amount of income taxes that we provide during any given year. We are periodically audited by various taxing authorities in the United States and by the respective tax agencies in the countries in which we operate internationally. The tax audits generally include questions regarding the calculation of taxable income. Audit adjustments affecting permanent differences could have an impact on our effective tax rate.
The carrying value of our net deferred tax assets is based on our present belief that we will be unable to generate sufficient future taxable income in certain tax jurisdictions to utilize such deferred tax assets, based on estimates and assumptions. If these estimates and related assumptions change in the future, we may be required to adjust valuation allowances against our deferred tax assets resulting in additional income tax expense or benefit in our consolidated statement of operations. Management evaluates the realizability of the deferred tax assets and assesses the need for changes to valuation allowances on a quarterly basis. While we have considered future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in assessing the present need for a valuation allowance, in the event we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of our net recorded amount, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would increase income in the period such determination was made. Should we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax asset in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would be charged to income in the period such determination was made.
Deferred taxes are not provided on undistributed earnings of certain non-U.S. subsidiaries and business ventures because we consider those earnings to be permanently invested abroad.
We record uncertain tax positions on the basis of a two-step process in which (1) we determine whether it is more likely than not that the tax positions would be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position and (2) for those tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, we recognize the largest amount of tax benefit that was more than 50 percent likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax authority. The recognition and measurement of tax liabilities for uncertain tax positions in any tax jurisdiction requires the interpretation of the related tax laws and regulations as well as the use of estimates and assumptions regarding significant future events. Changes in tax laws, regulations, agreements and treaties, foreign currency exchange restrictions or our level of operations or profitability in each taxing jurisdiction could have an impact on the amount of income taxes during any given year.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding the effect of new accounting pronouncements, refer to Note (1) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.