ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL
CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management discussion and analysis (“MD&A”) provides information that we believe is useful in understanding our operating results, cash flows and financial condition. We provide quantitative information about the material sales drivers including the effect of acquisitions and changes in foreign currency at the corporate and segment level. We also provide quantitative information about discrete tax items and other significant factors we believe are useful for understanding our results. The MD&A should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial information and related notes included in this Form 10-K. This discussion contains various “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” and also contains various “Forward-Looking Statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. We refer readers to the statements entitled “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” located at the end of this MD&A and “Forward-Looking Information and Cautionary Statements” and “Risk Factors” within Items 1 and 1A of this Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
Bio-Techne develops, manufactures and sells life science reagents, instruments and services for the research and clinical diagnostic markets worldwide. With our deep product portfolio and application expertise, we sell integral components of scientific investigations into biological processes and molecular diagnostics, revealing the nature, diagnosis, etiology and progression of specific diseases. Our products aid in drug discovery efforts and provide the means for accurate clinical tests and diagnoses.
During our fiscal year 2021, we operated with two operating segments - our Protein Sciences segment and our Diagnostics and Genomics segment. Our Protein Sciences segment is a leading developer and manufacturer of high-quality purified proteins and reagent solutions, most notably cytokines and growth factors, antibodies, immunoassays, biologically active small molecule compounds, tissue culture reagents and T-Cell activation technologies. This segment also includes protein analysis solutions that offer researchers efficient and streamlined options for automated western blot and multiplexed ELISA workflow. Our Genomics and Diagnostics segment develops and manufactures diagnostic products, including FDA-regulated controls, calibrators, blood gas and clinical chemistry controls and other reagents for OEM and clinical customers, as well as a portfolio of clinical molecular diagnostic oncology assays, including the ExoDx® Prostate test (EPI) for prostate cancer diagnosis. This segment also manufactures and sells advanced tissue-based in-situ hybridization assays (ISH) for spatial genomics research and clinical use.
OVERALL RESULTS
Operational Update
For fiscal 2021, consolidated net sales increased 26% as compared to fiscal 2020. Organic growth was 22%, with currency translation and acquisitions having a 3% and 1% impact on revenue respectively. Organic revenue growth was broad based and driven by accelerated momentum of the Company's long-term growth strategy as well as customer site closures in the latter half of fiscal 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
For fiscal 2021, consolidated earnings, including non-controlling interest, decreased 39% compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease in earnings was primarily due to a non-operating loss of approximately $67.9 million on our ChemoCentryx investment, compared to a gain on investment of $137 million in the last fiscal year. After adjusting for acquisition related costs, intangibles amortization, stock-based compensation, restructuring costs, the loss on investment, certain income tax items in both years, and non-controlling interest, adjusted net earnings increased 52% in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. Adjusted earnings growth was driven by volume leverage, operational productivity, and product mix.
For fiscal 2020, consolidated net sales increased 4% as compared to fiscal 2019. Organic growth was 4%, with currency translation and acquisitions having an immaterial impact on revenue. The Company experienced broad-based organic revenue growth in most major geographic regions and end-markets prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. This broad-based organic growth was partially offset by the negative impacts associated with the COVID-19 pandemic experienced by the Company in the latter half of fiscal year 2020.
For fiscal 2020, consolidated earnings, including non-controlling interest, increased 139% compared to fiscal 2019. The increase in earnings was primarily due to a non-operating gain of approximately $137 million on our ChemoCentryx investment and a gain of approximately $7 million on the settlement of the escrow balance associated with the Exosome acquisition. After adjusting for acquisition related costs, stock-based compensation, and certain income tax items in both years, adjusted net earnings increased 2% in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019. Adjusted earnings growth was driven by volume leverage, which was partially offset by business impacts associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
COVID-19 Business Update
The global spread of COVID-19 in the past 18 months has led to unprecedented restrictions on, and disruptions in, business and personal activities, including as a result of preventive and precautionary measures that we, other businesses, our communities and governments have taken and are taking to mitigate the spread of the virus and to manage its impact. While a number of vaccines developed in response to the pandemic appear to be effective in mitigating spread of the disease, we continue to actively monitor the pandemic on a global scale. We have taken and intend to continue taking steps to identify and mitigate the adverse impacts on, and risks to, our business (including but not limited to our employees, customers, business partners, manufacturing capabilities and capacity, and supply and distribution channels) posed by the spread of COVID-19 and the governmental and community responses thereto.
The Company has responded to the pandemic by leveraging our deep product portfolio and scientific expertise to develop robust COVID-19 product and service offerings providing critical support for both clinical care and therapeutic development. While our sales related to COVID-19 specific products have been modest, fiscal 2021 growth benefited from the reopening of customer sites initially closed in the latter half of fiscal 2021 and our ongoing efforts to utilize our portfolio of products and services to enable solutions for this evolving pandemic.
We are unable to forecast the impact of COVID-19 on future revenue given the uncertainty that some customer sites may close again due to increases in COVID-19 cases occurring in their region and over the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, especially if current vaccines prove to be ineffective against new strains of the Coronavirus that may develop over time. We anticipate a positive long-term outlook for sales growth resulting from expected future funding increases within life-science research in response to the current pandemic. Similar to current periods, we anticipate the impact on EPS to be similar to that of sales growth.
The Company remains in a strong financial position with sufficient available cash as well as access to additional funding, if necessary, through our long-term debt agreement. We did not experience any material changes to our June 30, 2021 nor our June 30, 2020 Balance Sheet, resulting from COVID-19 for items such as additional reserves or asset impairments resulting from the pandemic.
The Company has remained fully operational as we abided by local COVID-19 safety regulations across the world this past year. As the pandemic has eased, in most locations we will be returning all employees to on site work, although in certain instances we will continue to operate with appropriate safety measures, including staggered shifts, social distancing and hygiene best practices recommended by public health officials. In addition, the Company has taken and will continue to take additional steps to monitor and strengthen our supply chain to maintain an uninterrupted supply of our critical products and services.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Sales
Consolidated organic net sales exclude the impact of companies acquired during the first 12 months post-acquisition and the effect of the change from the prior year in exchange rates used to convert sales in foreign currencies (primarily the euro, British pound sterling, and Chinese yuan) into U.S. dollars.
Consolidated net sales growth was as follows:
Consolidated net sales by segment were as follows (in thousands):
In fiscal 2021, Protein Sciences segment net sales increased 27% compared to fiscal 2020. Organic growth for the segment was 24% for the fiscal year, with foreign currency translation having a favorable impact of 3%, and acquisitions contributing an immaterial amount.
Overall segment growth was driven by continued market acceptance of our portfolio of productivity enhancing solutions across end-markets and geographies combined with the reopening of customer sites that were closed in the latter half of fiscal 2020 due to COVID-19.
In fiscal 2021, Diagnostics and Genomics segment net sales increased 23% compared to fiscal 2020. Organic growth was 18% with acquisitions and foreign currency having a favorable impact of 4% and 1% impact on revenue, respectively.
Overall segment revenue growth was broad based across product lines and geographies. RNAscope products had an exceptional year in both the Academia and Bio-Pharma end markets, while the Exosome product line also provided year over year growth despite navigating limitations and/or customer avoidance of non-essential medical procedures throughout fiscal 2021 associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
In fiscal 2020, Protein Sciences segment net sales increased 2% compared to fiscal 2019. Organic growth for the segment was 3% for the fiscal year, with foreign currency translation having an unfavorable impact of 1%, and acquisitions contributing an immaterial amount.
Overall segment growth was driven by strong Bio-Pharma sales in North America and strong overall performance in China, which was partially offset by the disruption in research markets due to numerous customer site closures relating to the COVID-19 pandemic that occurred in the second half of fiscal 2020.
In fiscal 2020, Diagnostics and Genomics segment net sales increased 8% compared to fiscal 2019. Organic growth was 8% with acquisitions and foreign currency having an immaterial impact on revenue.
Overall segment revenue growth was driven by strong performance in our ExoDx Prostate Test, RNAscope, hematology, and assay development products lines prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. The closure of academic site labs and limitation of non-essential medical procedures resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted sales of our RNAscope product line and our ExoDx Prostate Test, respectively, in the latter portion of the fiscal year. These negative sales impacts were partially offset through growth in supplying specialty diagnostic antibodies and other raw materials to COVID-19 testing manufacturers.
Gross Margins
Consolidated gross margins were 68.0%, 65.4%, and 66.3% in fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019. Consolidated gross margins were positively impacted as a result of broad based revenue growth and cost management. Excluding the impact of acquired inventory sold, amortization of intangibles, and stock compensation expense, adjusted gross margins were 72.2%, 70.3%, and 71.5% in fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019 respectively. Fiscal 2021 adjusted gross margin was positively impacted by volume leverage and product mix when compared to fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019.
A reconciliation of the reported consolidated gross margin percentages, adjusted for acquired inventory sold and intangible amortization included in cost of sales, is as follows:
Fluctuations in adjusted gross margins, as a percentage of net sales, have primarily resulted from changes in foreign currency exchange rates and changes in product mix. We expect that, in the future, gross margins will continue to be impacted by the mix of our portfolio growing at different rates as well as future acquisitions.
Management uses adjusted operating results to monitor and evaluate performance of the Company’s two segments. Segment gross margins, as a percentage of net sales, were as follows:
The changes in the Protein Sciences segment’s gross margin percentage for fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 and 2019 was primarily attributable to mix of product sales within the segment.
The increase in Diagnostics and Genomics in gross margin for fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily due to volume leverage. The increase in Diagnostics and Genomics in gross margin for fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily due to volume leverage, operational productivity, and revenue growth against a similar cost base in recent acquisitions.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $64.4 million (25%) in fiscal 2021 when compared to fiscal 2020. Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased primarily due to investments made by the Company to support volume growth within each of the segments as well as additional expenses related to the acquisition of Asuragen, Inc.
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $3.8 million (1%) in fiscal 2020 when compared to fiscal 2019. Selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased primarily due to a reduction in corporate expenses and a gain resulting from a settlement of amounts held in escrow from the ExosomeDx acquisition between the Company and the former shareholders. These reductions to our selling, general, and administrative expenses were partially offset by an increase in expense within the segments.
Consolidated selling, general and administrative expenses were composed of the following (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $5.4 million (8%) and $2.8 million (4%) in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, as compared to prior year periods. The increase in research and development expenses in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily attributable to continued investment in future growth platforms of the Company and recent acquisitions. The increase in research and development expenses in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily attributable to continued investment in future growth platforms of the Company, recent acquisitions, and the development of new COVID-19 products.
Net Interest Income / (Expense)
Net interest income/(expense) for fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019 was $(13.5) million, $(18.6) million, and $(21.1) million, respectively. Net interest expense in fiscal 2021 decreased when compared to fiscal 2020 due to a reduction in our average long-term debt, which coincided with a reduction in the notional amount on our variable interest derivative. Net interest expense in fiscal 2020 decreased when compared to fiscal 2019 due to a reduction in our average long-term debt.
Other Non-Operating Expense, Net
Other non-operating expense, net, consists of foreign currency transaction gains and losses, rental income, building expenses related to rental property and the Company's gains and losses on investments as follows (in thousands):
During fiscal 2021, the Company recognized losses of $67.9 million related to changes in fair value associated with changes in the stock price of our ChemoCentryx, Inc. (CCXI) investment.
During fiscal 2020, the Company recognized gains of $137.5 million related to changes in fair value associated with changes in the stock price of our ChemoCentryx, Inc. (CCXI) investment.
During fiscal 2019, the Company recognized losses of $16.1 million related to changes in fair value associated with changes in the stock price of our ChemoCentryx, Inc. (CCXI) investment, which were partially offset by a $3.7 million gain realized upon acquisition from our historical investment in B-MoGen.
Income Taxes
Income taxes for fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019 were at effective rates of 5.8%, 17.1%, and 14.2%, respectively, of consolidated earnings before income taxes. The change in the effective tax rate was driven by discrete tax items. The Company's discrete tax benefits in fiscal 2021 primarily related to share-based compensation excess tax benefits of $28.1 million. The Company's discrete tax benefits in fiscal 2020 primarily related to share-based compensation excess tax benefits of $17.7 million. The Company's discrete tax benefits in fiscal 2019 primarily related to share-based compensation excess tax benefits of $7.2 million, $3.2 million related to deductible acquisition payments made to employees and third parties, and $2.0 million for tax refunds relating to certain state apportionments.
Net Earnings
Non-GAAP adjusted consolidated net earnings and earnings per share are as follows (in thousands):
Depending on the nature of discrete tax items, our reported tax rate may not be consistent on a period to period basis. The Company independently calculates a non-GAAP adjusted tax rate considering the impact of discrete items and jurisdictional mix of the identified non-GAAP adjustments. The following table summarizes the reported GAAP tax rate and the effective Non-GAAP adjusted tax rate for the periods ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Refer to Note 11 for additional discussion relating to the change in discrete tax items between fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale investments at June 30, 2021 were $231.6 million compared to $270.9 million at June 30, 2020. Included in available-for-sale investments at June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020 was the fair value of the Company's investment in CCXI of $20.0 million and $87.8 million, respectively.
At June 30, 2021, approximately 12% of the Company's cash and equivalent account balances of $199.1 million were located in the U.S., with the remainder located in primarily in Canada, China, the U.K. and other European countries.
At June 30, 2021, approximately 61% of the Company's available-for-sale investment account balances of $32.5 million were located in the U.S., with the remaining 39% in China.
The Company has either paid U.S. taxes on its undistributed foreign earnings or intends to indefinitely reinvest the undistributed earnings in the foreign operations or expects the earnings will be remitted in a tax neutral transaction. Management of the Company expects to be able to meet its cash and working capital requirements for operations, facility expansion, capital additions, and cash dividends for the foreseeable future, and at least the next 12 months, through currently available funds, including funds available through our line-of-credit and cash generated from operations.
Future acquisition strategies may or may not require additional borrowings under the line-of-credit facility or other outside sources of funding.
Cash Flows From Operating Activities
The Company generated cash from operations of $352.2 million, $205.2 million, and $181.6 million in fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019 respectively. The increase in cash generated from operating activities in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 was mainly a result of an increase in year over year operating income of $79.9 million and a $29.3 million benefit to operating cash from year-over-year changes in operating assets and liabilities as well as a non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $16.6 million. The increase in cash generated from operating activities in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 was mainly a result of higher GAAP earnings and lower accounts receivable balances in fiscal 2020, which were partially offset by the gain on investments included within earnings.
Cash Flows From Investing Activities
We continue to make investments in our business, including capital expenditures. The Company acquired Eminence Biotechnology and Asuragen, Inc. during fiscal year 2021 for a total of approximately $225.4 million, net of cash acquired. The Company did not make any acquisitions in fiscal 2020. Net cash paid for acquisitions of Quad, Exosome, and B-MoGen was $289.5 million in fiscal 2019.
The Company's net proceeds (outflow) from the purchase, sale and maturity of available-for-sale investments in fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019 were $26.7 million, $76.9, and ($21.9 million) million, respectively. The decrease in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was driven by the sale of a portion of the CCXI investment in fiscal year 2020, which did not reoccur in fiscal year 2021. The increase in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was driven by the sale of a portion of the Company’s investment in CCXI in fiscal 2020.The Company's investment policy is to place excess cash in certificates of deposit with the objective of obtaining the highest possible return while minimizing risk and keeping the funds accessible.
Capital additions in fiscal year 2021, 2020, and 2019 were $44.3 million, $51.7 million, and $25.4 million. Fiscal 2021 capital expenditures related to investments in new buildings, in particular, the Company's GMP manufacturing facility. Capital additions planned for fiscal 2022 are approximately $68.4 million and are expected to be financed through currently available cash and cash generated from operations. Increase in expected additions in fiscal 2022 is related to increasing capacity to meet expected sales growth across the Company and reduced expenditures in the comparable period, fiscal year 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cash Flows From Financing Activities
In fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, the Company paid cash dividends of $49.6 million, $48.9 million, $48.4 million, respectively. The Board of Directors periodically considers the payment of cash dividends.
The Company received $65.1 million, $71.0 million, $38.0 million, for the exercise of options for 627,000, 743,000, 382,000 shares of common stock in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
During fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, the Company repurchased $43.2 million, $50.1 million, and $15.4 million, respectively, in share repurchases included as a cash outflow within Financing Activities.
During fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, the Company drew $256.0 million, $40.0 million, and $580.0 million, respectively, under its revolving line-of-credit facility. Repayments of $271.5 million, $188.5 million, and $413.5 million were made on its line-of-credit in fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
During fiscal 2021, there were no payments related to contingent consideration classified as financing activities. The Company made $0.3 million in contingent consideration payments, which were classified within operating activities. During fiscal 2020, the Company made $4.4 million ($4 million for Quad and $0.4 million for B-MoGen) in cash payments towards the Quad, Exosome, and B-MoGen contingent consideration liabilities. Of the $4.4 million in total payments, $3.4 million is classified as financing on the statement of cash flows. The remaining $1 million is recorded as operating on the statement of cash flows as it represents the consideration liability that exceeds the amount of the contingent consideration liability recognized at the acquisition date. During fiscal 2019, the Company made no cash payments towards the Quad, Exosome, and B-MoGen contingent consideration liabilities.
During fiscal 2021 and 2020, the Company paid $19.3 million and $3.8 million, respectively, for net share settlements. During fiscal 2019, other financial activities includes payments for net share settlements as well as the final payment of $1.4 million related to Eurocell. This is included as a cash outflow within the other financing activities line of the consolidated statements of cash flows.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Management's discussion and analysis of the Company's financial condition and results of operations are based upon the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (U.S. GAAP). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The Company has identified the policies outlined below as critical to its business operations and an understanding of results of operations. The listing is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all accounting policies; investors should also refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Combinations
We allocate the purchase price of acquired businesses to the estimated fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the date of the acquisition. The calculations used to determine the fair value of the long-lived assets acquired, primarily intangible assets, can be complex and require significant judgment. We weigh many factors when completing these estimates including, but not limited to, the nature of the acquired company’s business; its competitive position, strengths, and challenges; its historical financial position and performance; estimated customer retention rates; discount rates; and future plans for the combined entity. We may also engage independent valuation specialists, when necessary, to assist in the fair value calculations for significant acquired long-lived assets.
The fair value of acquired technology is generally the primary asset identified and therefore estimated using the multi-period excess earnings method. The multi-period excess earnings method model estimates revenues and cash flows derived from the primary asset and then deducts portions of the cash flow that can be attributed to supporting assets, such as Trade Names and in-process research and development, that contributed to the generation of the cash flows. The resulting cash flow, which is attributable solely to the primary asset acquired, is then discounted at a rate of return commensurate with the risk of the asset to calculate a present value. The Trade Name is generally calculated using the relief from royalty method, which calculates the cost savings associated with owning rather than licensing the technology. Assumed royalty rates are applied to the projected revenues for the remaining useful life of the technology to estimate the royalty savings. In-process research and development assets are valued using the multi-period excess earnings method when the cash flows from the in-process research and development assets are separately identifiable from the primary asset. In circumstances that Customer Relationship assets are identified that are not the primary asset, they are valued using the distributor model income approach, which isolates revenues and cash flow associated with the sales and distribution function of the entity and attributable to customer-related assets, which are then discounted at a rate of return commensurate with the risk of the asset to calculate a present value.
We estimate the fair value of liabilities for contingent consideration by discounting to present value the probability weighted contingent payments expected to be made. For potential payments related to financial performance based milestones, projected revenue and/or EBITDA amounts, volatility and discount rates assumptions are included in the estimated amounts. For potential payments related to product development milestones, the fair value is based on the probability of achievement of such milestones. The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Goodwill is not amortized, but is subject to impairment testing on at least an annual basis.
We are also required to estimate the useful lives of the acquired intangible assets, which determines the amount of acquisition-related amortization expense we will record in future periods. Each reporting period, we evaluate the remaining useful lives of our amortizable intangibles to determine whether events or circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining period of amortization.
While we use our best estimates and assumptions, our fair value estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Any adjustments required after the measurement period are recorded in the consolidated statements of earnings.
The judgments required in determining the estimated fair values and expected useful lives assigned to each class of assets and liabilities acquired can significantly affect net income. For example, different classes of assets will have useful lives that differ. Consequently, to the extent a longer-lived asset is ascribed greater value than a shorter-lived asset, net income in a given period may be higher. Additionally, assigning a lower value to amortizable intangibles would result in a higher amount assigned to goodwill. As goodwill is not amortized, this would benefit net income in a given period, although goodwill is subject to annual impairment analysis.
Impairment of Goodwill
Goodwill
Goodwill was $843.1 million as of June 30, 2021, which represented 37.3% of total assets. Goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis in the fourth quarter of each year, or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that could indicate a possible impairment.
To analyze goodwill for impairment, we must assign our goodwill to individual reporting units. Identification of reporting units includes an analysis of the components that comprise each of our operating segments, which considers, among other things, the manner in which we operate our business and the availability of discrete financial information. Components of an operating segment are aggregated to form one reporting unit if the components have similar economic characteristics. We periodically review our reporting units to ensure that they continue to reflect the manner in which we operate our business.
There has been no impairment of goodwill since the adoption of Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC 350 guidance for goodwill and other intangibles on July 1, 2002.
2021 Goodwill Impairment Analyses
In completing our 2021 annual goodwill impairment analyses, we elected to perform a quantitative assessment for each of our five reporting units. A quantitative assessment involves comparing the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill, to its estimated fair value. Carrying value is based on the assets and liabilities associated with the operations of the reporting unit, which often requires the allocation of shared or corporate items among reporting units. In accordance with ASU 2017-04, a goodwill impairment charge is recorded for the amount by which the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit. In determining the fair values of our reporting units, we utilized the income approach. The income approach is a valuation technique under which we estimated future cash flows using the reporting unit's financial forecast from the perspective of an unrelated market participant. Using historical trending and internal forecasting techniques, we projected revenue and applied our fixed and variable cost experience rates to the projected revenue to arrive at the future cash flows. A terminal value was then applied to the projected cash flow stream. Future estimated cash flows were discounted to their present value to calculate the estimated fair value. The discount rate used was the value-weighted average of our estimated cost of capital derived using both known and estimated customary market metrics. In determining the estimated fair value of a reporting unit, we were required to estimate a number of factors, including projected operating results, terminal growth rates, economic conditions, anticipated future cash flows, the discount rate and the allocation of shared or corporate items.
Because our 2021 quantitative analyses included all of our reporting units, the summation of our reporting units' fair values, as indicated by our discounted cash flow calculations, were compared to our consolidated fair value, as indicated by our market capitalization, to evaluate the reasonableness of our calculations. This impairment assessment is sensitive to changes in forecasted cash flows, as well as our selected discount rate. Changes in the reporting unit's results, forecast assumptions and estimates could materially affect the estimation of the fair value of the reporting units.
The quantitative assessment completed as of April 1, 2021 indicated that all of the reporting units had a substantial amount of headroom. Accordingly, the Company determined there was no indication of impairment of goodwill in our annual goodwill impairment analysis. Further, no triggering events were identified in the year ended June 30, 2021 that would require an additional goodwill impairment assessment beyond our required annual goodwill impairment assessment.
2020 Goodwill Impairment Analyses
In completing our 2020 annual goodwill impairment analyses, we elected to perform a quantitative assessment for all of our reporting units. A quantitative assessment involves comparing the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill, to its estimated fair value. Carrying value is based on the assets and liabilities associated with the operations of the reporting unit, which often requires the allocation of shared or corporate items among reporting units. In accordance with ASU 2017-04, a goodwill impairment charge is recorded for the amount by which the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit. In determining the fair values of our reporting units, we utilized the income approach. The income approach is a valuation technique under which we estimated future cash flows using the reporting unit's financial forecast from the perspective of an unrelated market participant. Using historical trending and internal forecasting techniques, we projected revenue and applied our fixed and variable cost experience rates to the projected revenue to arrive at the future cash flows. A terminal value was then applied to the projected cash flow stream. Future estimated cash flows were discounted to their present value to calculate the estimated fair value. The discount rate used was the value-weighted average of our estimated cost of capital derived using both known and estimated customary market metrics. In determining the estimated fair value of a reporting unit, we were required to estimate a number of factors, including projected operating results, terminal growth rates, economic conditions, anticipated future cash flows, the discount rate and the allocation of shared or corporate items.
Because our 2020 quantitative analyses included all of our reporting units, the summation of our reporting units' fair values, as indicated by our discounted cash flow calculations, were compared to our consolidated fair value, as indicated by our market capitalization, to evaluate the reasonableness of our calculations. This impairment assessment is sensitive to changes in forecasted cash flows, as well as our selected discount rate. Changes in the reporting unit's results, forecast assumptions and estimates could materially affect the estimation of the fair value of the reporting units.
The quantitative assessment completed as of April 1, 2020 indicated that all of the reporting units had a substantial amount of headroom. Accordingly, the Company determined there was no indication of impairment of goodwill in our annual goodwill impairment analysis. Further, no triggering events were identified in the year ended June 30, 2020 that would require an additional goodwill impairment assessment beyond our required annual goodwill impairment assessment.
2019 Goodwill Impairment Analyses
At the beginning of the quarter ended March 31, 2019, the Company realigned the management of certain business processes between reporting units within the same segment. A goodwill allocation was performed between the impacted reporting units based on the relative fair value of the processes realigned. In conjunction with the realignment, a quantitative goodwill impairment assessment was performed both prior to and subsequent to the realignment. The quantitative impairment assessments performed utilized a consistent process with our fiscal 2021 quantitative goodwill impairment assessment described above. The quantitative assessment indicated that all of the impacted reporting units had substantial headroom both prior to and subsequent to the realignment. This impairment assessment performed was sensitive to changes in forecasted cash flows, as well as our selected discount rate. Changes in the reporting unit's results, forecast assumptions and estimates could materially affect the estimation of the fair value of the reporting units.
In conducting our annual goodwill impairment test as of April 1, 2019, we elected to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether changes in events or circumstances since our most recent quantitative test for goodwill impairment indicated that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Based on its annual analysis, the Company determined there was no indication of impairment of goodwill.
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Information regarding the accounting policies adopted during fiscal 2021 and those not yet adopted can be found under caption “Note 1: Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements appear in Item 8 of this report.
SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
None
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Item 7, contains financial measures that have not been calculated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (GAAP). These non-GAAP measures include:
●
Organic growth
●
Adjusted gross margin
● Adjusted operating margin
●
Adjusted net earnings
●
Adjusted effective tax rate
We provide these measures as additional information regarding our operating results. We use these non-GAAP measures internally to evaluate our performance and in making financial and operational decisions, including with respect to incentive compensation. We believe that our presentation of these measures provides investors with greater transparency with respect to our results of operations and that these measures are useful for period-to-period comparison of results.
Our non-GAAP financial measure of organic growth represents revenue growth excluding revenue from acquisitions within the preceeding 12 months as well as the impact of foreign currency. Excluding these measures provides more useful period-to-period comparison of revenue results as it excludes the impact of foreign currency exchange rates, which can vary significantly from period to period, and revenue from acquisitions that would not be included in the comparable prior period.
Our non-GAAP financial measures for adjusted gross margin, adjusted operating margin, and adjusted net earnings, in total and on a per share basis, exclude stock-based compensation, the costs recognized upon the sale of acquired inventory, amortization of acquisition intangibles, acquisition related expenses inclusive of the changes in fair value of contingent consideration, and other non-recurring items including non-recurring costs and gains. Stock-based compensation is excluded from non-GAAP adjusted net earnings because of the nature of this charge, specifically the varying available valuation methodologies, subjective assumptions, variety of award types, and unpredictability of amount and timing of employer related tax obligations. The Company excludes amortization of purchased intangible assets, purchase accounting adjustments, including costs recognized upon the sale of acquired inventory and acquisition-related expenses inclusive of the changes in fair value contingent consideration, and other non-recurring items including gains or losses on legal settlements and one-time assessments from this measure because they occur as a result of specific events, and are not reflective of our internal investments, the costs of developing, producing, supporting and selling our products, and the other ongoing costs to support our operating structure. Additionally, these amounts can vary significantly from period to period based on current activity.
The Company’s non-GAAP adjusted operating margin and adjusted net earnings, in total and on a per share basis, also excludes stock-based compensation expense, which is inclusive of the employer portion of payroll taxes on those stock awards, restructuring, impairments of equity method investments, gain and losses from investments, and certain adjustments to income tax expense. Impairments of equity investments are excluded as they are not part of our day-to-day operating decisions. Additionally, gains and losses from other investments that are either isolated or cannot be expected to occur again with any predictability are excluded. Costs related to restructuring activities, including reducing overhead and consolidating facilities, are excluded because we believe they are not indicative of our normal operating costs. The Company independently calculates a non-GAAP adjusted tax rate to be applied to the identified non-GAAP adjustments considering the impact of discrete items on these adjustments and the jurisdictional mix of the adjustments. In addition, the tax impact of other discrete and non-recurring charges which impact our reported GAAP tax rate are adjusted from net earnings. We believe these tax items can significantly affect the period-over-period assessment of operating results and not necessarily reflect costs and/or income associated with historical trends and future results.
The Company periodically reassesses the components of our non-GAAP adjustments for changes in how we evaluate our performance, changes in how we make financial and operational decisions, and considers the use of these measures by our competitors and peers to ensure the adjustments are still relevant and meaningful.
Readers are encouraged to review the reconciliations of the adjusted financial measures used in management's discussion and analysis of the financial condition of the Company to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures provided within the Company's consolidated financial statements.