ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included in Item 8 - “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Results of operations- Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Overview
Strategy
Our principal business objective is to identify, develop, and commercialize novel therapeutic products for disease indications that represent significant areas of clinical need and commercial opportunity. The key elements of our business strategy are outlined below.
Efficiently conduct clinical development to establish clinical proof of concept with our current product candidates. Levosimendan and imatinib both represent novel therapeutic modalities for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension and other cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases of high unmet medical need. We are conducting clinical development with the intent to establish proof of concept in several important disease areas where these therapeutics would be expected to have benefit. Our focus is on conducting well-designed studies to establish a robust foundation for subsequent development, partnership and expansion into complementary areas.
Efficiently explore new high potential therapeutic applications, leveraging third-party research collaborations and our results from related areas. Levosimendan has shown promise in multiple disease areas. We are committed to exploring potential clinical indications where our therapies may achieve best-in-class profile, and where we can address significant unmet medical needs. In order to achieve this goal, we have established collaborative research relationships with investigators from research and clinical institutions and our strategic partners. These collaborative relationships have enabled us to cost effectively explore where our product candidates may have therapeutic relevance, and how it may be utilized to advance treatment over current clinical care. Additionally, we believe we will be able to leverage clinical safety data and preclinical results from some programs to support accelerated clinical development efforts in other areas, saving substantial development time and resources compared to traditional drug development.
Continue to expand our intellectual property portfolio. Our intellectual property is important to our business and we take significant steps to protect its value. We have ongoing research and development efforts, both through internal activities and through collaborative research activities with others, which aim to develop new intellectual property and enable us to file patent applications that cover new applications of our existing technologies or product candidates.
Enter into licensing or product co-development arrangements. In addition to our internal development efforts, an important part of our product development strategy is to work with collaborators and partners to accelerate product development, reduce our development costs, and broaden our commercialization capabilities. We believe this strategy will help us to develop a portfolio of high-quality product development opportunities, enhance our clinical development and commercialization capabilities, and increase our ability to generate value from our proprietary technologies.
Additionally, our Board of Directors continues to review strategic alternatives focused on maximizing stockholder value. This process may not result in any transaction and we do not intend to disclose additional details unless and until we determine further disclosure is appropriate or required.
Opportunities and Trends
On June 2, 2020, we announced preliminary, top-line data from our Phase 2 HELP Study. The primary efficacy analysis, PCWP during exercise did not demonstrate a statistically significant reduction from baseline. Levosimendan did demonstrate a statistically significant reduction in PCWP compared to baseline (p=<0.0017) and placebo (p=<0.0475) when the measurements at rest, with legs up and on exercise were combined. Levosimendan also demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in 6-minute walk distance as compared to placebo (p=0.0329). These findings from the HELP Study represent important discoveries related to the use of levosimendan in PH-HFpEF patients since this is the first study to evaluate levosimendan in PH-HFpEF patients and this is the first study ever conducted of any therapy in PH-HFpEF patients to show such positive improvements in hemodynamics and 6-minute walk distance.
On October 9, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the License with Orion to include two new product formulations containing levosimendan, in a capsule solid oral dosage form, and a subcutaneously administered dosage form containing levosimendan to the scope of the License, subject to specified limitations. We plan to study the utility of the levosimendan oral capsule dosage form in patients who have participated in the open-label extension of the HELP Study and who continue to receive weekly infusions of intravenous levosimendan. These patients are now eligible to participate in the amendment to the HELP Study that will transition them from the intravenous to an oral formulation. The investigators at the centers that participated in the HELP Study have been invited to participate and enroll their patients into this study. The results of this study will inform Tenax Therapeutics about the design of the Phase 3 that has been proposed.
In October 2020, we met with the FDA for an End-of-Phase 2 Meeting to discuss the Phase 2 clinical data and further development of levosimendan in PH-HFpEF patients. The FDA agreed that one or two Phase 3 clinical studies (depending on the size) with a primary endpoint of change in 6-minute walk distance over 12 weeks or a single Phase 3 trial with clinical worsening (e.g., death, hospitalization for heart failure, or decline in exercise capacity) over 24 weeks would be sufficient to demonstrate the effectiveness of levosimendan in PH-HFpEF. The FDA also agreed to a plan to replace weekly intravenous levosimendan dosing with daily oral levosimendan doses in a Phase 3 clinical study. The FDA expressed concern about a safety database as potentially necessary and indicated that the need for a further safety database could be dependent on the final design of the Phase 3 study. This will be addressed when the final Phase 3 protocol is submitted which will better characterize the trial design and primary endpoints.
On January 15, 2021, through our wholly owned subsidiary, Life Newco II, we acquired 100% of the equity of PHPM. In accordance with the terms of the merger agreement between Life Newco II and PHPM, Life Newco II merged with and into PHPM, with PHPM surviving as our wholly owned subsidiary. As a result of the merger, we plan to develop and commercialize pharmaceutical products containing imatinib for the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension.
On May 30, 2019, PHPM met with the FDA to discuss a proposal for a Phase 3 trial of imatinib for PAH. At that meeting PHPM received agreement for a single Phase 3 trial using change in 6-minute walk distance as the primary endpoint (p<0.05). PHPM also received agreement for submission under the 505(b)(2) regulatory pathway, and thereafter received orphan designation. In August of 2019, PHPM was given preliminary advice on its plans to submit an application for Breakthrough Therapy Designation. In July 2020, PHPM received agreement from the FDA for the development of a modified release formulation that would require only a small comparative PK/bioavailability study in 12 volunteers receiving a single dose of the modified release formulation to be compared to a single dose of the existing immediate release formulation. A Phase 3 study is planned with the modified release formulation of imatinib.
The continued spread of COVID-19 globally could adversely affect our clinical trial operations in the United States and elsewhere, including our ability to recruit and retain patients, principal investigators and site staff who, as healthcare providers, may have heightened exposure to COVID-19 if an outbreak occurs in their geography. Further, some patients may be unable to comply with clinical trial protocols if quarantines or travel restrictions impede patient movement or interrupt healthcare services, or if the patients become infected with COVID-19 themselves, which would delay our ability to initiate and/or complete planned clinical and preclinical studies in the future.
As we focus on the development of our existing product candidates, we also continue to position ourselves to execute upon licensing and other partnering opportunities. To do so, we will need to continue to maintain our strategic direction, manage and deploy our available cash efficiently and strengthen our collaborative research development and partner relationships.
During 2021, we are focused on the following initiatives:
-
Working with collaborators and partners to accelerate product development, reduce our development costs, and broaden our developmental capabilities; and
-
Identifying strategic alternatives, including, but not limited to, the potential acquisition of additional products or product candidates.
Financial Overview
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation for executive, finance, legal and administrative personnel, including stock-based compensation. Other general and administrative expenses include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, legal and accounting services, other professional services, and consulting fees. General and administrative expenses and percentage changes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, are as follows:
Personnel costs:
Personnel costs increased approximately $695,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. This increase was due primarily to an increase of approximately $86,000 for the recognized expense for vested employee stock options, an increase of approximately $548,000 in bonuses paid and an overall increase of approximately $51,000 in salaries paid as compared to the same period in the prior year.
Legal and professional fees:
Legal and professional fees consist of the costs incurred for legal fees, accounting fees, capital market expenses, consulting fees and investor relations services, as well as fees paid to our Board of Directors. Legal and professional fees decreased approximately $503,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. This decrease was due primarily to reimbursement of direct costs and legal fees incurred for arbitration proceedings related to our license agreement for levosimendan, and a decrease in costs incurred for investor relations services in the current period.
-
Legal fees decreased approximately $369,000 in the current year. This decrease was due primarily to the reimbursement of approximately $358,000 in costs incurred for arbitration in the current period, as well as a decrease of approximately $170,000 in fees incurred for arbitration proceedings related to our license agreement for levosimendan and a decrease of approximately $34,000 in costs associated with our intellectual property portfolio, partially offset by an increase of approximately $192,000 in legal fees, primarily due to our acquisition of PHPM as compared to the prior year.
-
Investor relations costs decreased approximately $111,000 in the current period. This decrease was primarily due to fees paid to a third-party investor relations firm for direct outreach and communications in the prior year that were not incurred in the current year as well as a decrease in fees paid for conferences and presentations in the current year as compared to the prior year.
Other costs:
Other costs include costs incurred for franchise and other taxes, travel, supplies, insurance, depreciation and other miscellaneous charges. Other costs increased approximately $28,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. This increase was due primarily to an increase of approximately $171,000 for the cost of annual insurance premiums, partially offset by a reduction of approximately $65,000 in travel costs incurred and approximately $67,000 in taxes paid in the current year as compared to the same period in the prior year.
Facilities:
Facilities expenses include costs paid for rent and utilities at our corporate headquarters in North Carolina. Facilities costs remained relatively consistent for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses include, but are not limited to, (i) expenses incurred under agreements with CROs and investigative sites, which conduct our clinical trials and a substantial portion of our pre-clinical studies; (ii) the cost of supplying clinical trial materials; (iii) payments to contract service organizations, as well as consultants; (iv) employee-related expenses, which include salaries and benefits; and (v) facilities, depreciation and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and equipment, depreciation of leasehold improvements, equipment, and other supplies. All research and development expenses are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses and percentage changes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, are as follows:
Clinical and preclinical development:
Clinical and preclinical development costs include, primarily, the costs associated with our Phase 2 HELP Study for levosimendan, which was initiated during fiscal year 2018 and the trial was completed in the current year. The increase of approximately $1.1 million in clinical and preclinical development costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year was primarily due to an increase of approximately $1.5 million in expenditures for CRO costs, partially offset by a reduction of approximately $210,000 in costs for clinical research associates to manage the Phase 2 HELP Study, as well as a decrease of approximately $216,000 in the direct costs associated with clinical sites, clinical drug delivery and enrolled patient costs.
Personnel costs:
Personnel costs increased approximately $34,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to an increase in salaries and bonuses paid in the current year as compared to the prior year.
Other costs:
Other costs decreased approximately $19,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to reductions in costs incurred for travel in the current year as compared to the prior year.
Consulting fees:
Consulting fees increased approximately $10,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to fees paid to an external consultant to assist in review and analysis of our Phase 2 clinical data in the current year as compared to the prior year.
Other income, net
Other income and expense include non-operating income and expense items not otherwise recorded in our consolidated statement of comprehensive loss. These items include, but are not limited to, changes in the fair value of financial assets and derivative liabilities, interest income earned and fixed asset disposals. Other income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, is as follows:
Other income decreased approximately $143,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. This decrease is due primarily to a decrease in the interest earned on our investment in marketable securities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded interest income of approximately $24,000 from our investments in marketable securities. This income is derived from approximately $31,000 in bond interest paid and approximately $7,000 in fair-value adjustments for the year, which compares to approximately $144,000 in bond interest paid, net of charges for amortization of premiums paid and fair-value adjustments during the prior year.
Liquidity, capital resources and plan of operation
We have incurred losses since our inception and as of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $246 million. We will continue to incur losses until we generate sufficient revenue to offset our expenses, and we anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses for at least the next several years. We expect to incur additional expenses related to our development and potential commercialization of levosimendan for pulmonary hypertension and other potential indications, as well as identifying and developing other potential product candidates, and as a result, we will need to generate significant net product sales, royalty and other revenues to achieve profitability.
Liquidity
We have financed our operations since September 1990 through the issuance of debt and equity securities and loans from stockholders. We had total current assets of $6,795,506 and $6,180,829 and working capital of $4,676,543 and $3,648,434 as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Our practice is to invest excess cash, where available, in short-term money market investment instruments and high quality corporate and government bonds.
Clinical and Preclinical Product Development
We are currently developing a new formulation for imatinib and conducting a clinical trial to transition from an intravenous to oral formulation of levosimendan in North America for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension. Our ability to continue to pursue development of our products beyond the third quarter of calendar year 2021 will depend on obtaining license income or outside financial resources. There is no assurance that we will obtain any license agreement or outside financing or that we will otherwise succeed in obtaining any necessary resources.
The continued spread of COVID-19 globally could adversely affect our ability to recruit and retain patients and principal investigators and site staff who, as healthcare providers, may have heightened exposure to COVID-19 if an outbreak occurs in their geography. Further, some patients may be unable to comply with clinical trial protocols if quarantines or travel restrictions impede patient movement or interrupt healthcare services, or if the patients become infected with COVID-19 themselves, which would delay our ability to complete our clinical trials or release clinical trial results. See “Item 1A - Risk Factors” above for additional discussion.
Financings
On July 6, 2020 entered into a definitive agreement with a single healthcare-focused institutional investor, or the Investor, for the issuance and sale of 2,523,611 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $1.0278 per share and pre-funded warrants to purchase up to 652,313 shares of common stock, at a purchase price of $1.0277 per pre-funded warrant (which represents the per share offering price for the common stock less $0.0001, the exercise price of each pre-funded warrant), in a registered direct offering priced at-the-market under Nasdaq rules. Additionally, in a concurrent private placement, we agreed to issue to the Investor unregistered pre-funded warrants to purchase up to 4,607,692 shares of common stock, at the same purchase price as the registered pre-funded warrants, as well as unregistered warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 7,783,616 shares of common stock. The unregistered warrants have an exercise price of $0.903 per share, were immediately exercisable upon issuance, and expire five and one-half years from the date of issuance. The aggregate gross proceeds to us of both offerings were approximately $8.0 million. As part of the offerings and subject to Nasdaq rules, the Investor will have the right to designate two directors to our Board of Directors. The offerings closed on July 8, 2020.
We agreed to pay H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC, or the Placement Agent, a cash fee equal to 7.5% of the gross proceeds of the July 2020 offering, totaling approximately $600,000. We also agreed to pay the Placement Agent $75,000 for non-accountable expenses, a management fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds and up to $12,900 for clearing fees. In addition, we issued designees of the Placement Agent warrants to purchase 583,771 shares of common stock (representing 7.5% of the aggregate number of shares of common stock (or common stock equivalents) sold in the July 2020 offering). The Placement Agent warrants have substantially the same terms as the unregistered warrants, except that the Placement Agent warrants have an exercise price equal to $1.2848, or 125% of the offering price per share of common stock and will be exercisable for five years from the effective date of the July 2020 offering.
The shares of common stock and pre-funded warrants offered in the registered direct offering (including the shares of common stock underlying the pre-funded warrants) were offered and sold pursuant to a “shelf” registration statement on Form S-3 which was declared effective by the SEC on May 23, 2018. The unregistered pre-funded warrants and unregistered warrants described above were offered in a private placement under Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act and Regulation D promulgated thereunder and, along with the shares of common stock underlying the pre-funded warrants and the warrants, have not been registered under the Securities Act, or applicable state securities laws. The net proceeds from the July 2020 offering, after deducting placement agent fees and other direct offering expenses, were approximately $6.5 million. We are using the net proceeds to further our clinical trials of levosimendan, for research and development and general corporate purposes, including working capital and potential acquisitions.
On March 11, 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement with the Investor for the issuance and sale of 750,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $1.1651 per share and pre-funded warrants to purchase up to 1,610,313 shares of common stock, at a purchase price of $1.1650 per pre-funded warrant (which represents the per share offering price for the common stock less $0.0001, the exercise price of each pre-funded warrant), for gross proceeds of approximately $2.75 million, in a registered direct offering priced at-the-market under Nasdaq rules. Additionally, in a concurrent private placement, we also agreed to issue to the Investor unregistered warrants to purchase up to 2,360,313 shares of common stock. The unregistered warrants have an exercise price of $1.04 per share and exercise period commencing immediately upon the issuance date and a term of five and one-half years. The offering closed on March 13, 2020.
We agreed to pay the Placement Agent a cash fee equal to 7.5% of the gross proceeds of the March 2020 offering, totaling approximately $206,250. We also agreed to pay the Placement Agent $75,000 for non-accountable expenses, a management fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds and up to $12,900 for clearing fees. In addition, we issued designees of the Placement Agent warrants to purchase 177,023 shares of common stock (representing 7.5% of the aggregate number of shares of common stock (or common stock equivalents) sold in the March 2020 offering). The Placement Agent warrants have substantially the same terms as the unregistered warrants, except that the Placement Agent warrants have an exercise price equal to $1.4564, or 125% of the offering price per share of common stock and will be exercisable for five years from the effective date of the March 2020 offering.
The shares of common stock and pre-funded warrants offered in the registered direct offering (including the shares of common stock underlying the pre-funded warrants) were offered and sold pursuant to a “shelf” registration statement on Form S-3, which was declared effective by the SEC on May 23, 2018. The unregistered warrants described above were offered in a private placement under Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act, and Regulation D promulgated thereunder and, along with the shares of common stock underlying the warrants, have not been registered under the Securities Act, or applicable state securities laws. The net proceeds from the March 2020 offering, after deducting placement agent fees and other direct offering expenses, were approximately $2.125 million. We intend to use the net proceeds to further our clinical trials of levosimendan, for research and development and general corporate purposes, including working capital and potential acquisitions.
We have an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 on file with the SEC that allows us to periodically offer and sell, individually or in any combination, shares of common stock, shares of preferred stock, debt securities, warrants to purchase shares of common stock or preferred stock or debt securities, and units consisting of any combination of the foregoing types of securities, up to a total of $75.0 million (of which approximately $69.0 million remains available), but not to exceed one-third of our public float in any 12-month period. As of March 25, 2021, our public float (which is the aggregate market value of our outstanding common stock held by non-affiliates) is approximately $23.9 million. Our ability to issue securities under the shelf registration statement is also subject to market conditions.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
On April 30, 2020, we received the PPP Loan in the principal amount of $244,657. The PPP Loan has a two-year term and bears interest at a rate of 1.00% per annum. Monthly principal and interest payments are deferred for sixteen months. Beginning September 30, 2021, we are required to make monthly payments of principal and interest of approximately $31,100 to the Lender. We did not provide any collateral or guarantees for the PPP Loan, nor did we pay any facility charge to obtain the PPP Loan. The note governing the PPP Loan provides for customary events of default, including, among others, those relating to failure to make payment, bankruptcy, breaches of representations, and material adverse effects. We may prepay the principal of the PPP Loan at any time, subject to certain notice requirements.
Under the terms of the CARES Act, Paycheck Protection Program loan recipients can apply for and be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of a loan granted under the program. Such forgiveness will be determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of loan proceeds for payment of payroll costs and any payments of mortgage interest, rent, and utilities. We are using the proceeds from the PPP Loan to fund payroll costs in accordance with the relevant terms and conditions of the CARES Act. However, no assurance is provided that forgiveness for any portion of the PPP Loan will be obtained.
As of December 31, 2020, the current and long-term portions of the PPP Loan were $120,491 and $124,166, respectively.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Net cash used in operating activities. Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $9.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net cash used in operating activities of approximately $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash used for operating activities was due primarily to an increase in our accrued costs related to the Phase 2 clinical trial for levosimendan in the current period.
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities. Net cash provided by investing activities was approximately $20,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to approximately $2,000 used in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash provided by investing activities was primarily due to a decrease in the purchase of marketable securities in the current period.
Net cash provided by financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to approximately $97,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash provided by financing activities was due to net proceeds of approximately $6.5 million from the July 2020 offering, net proceeds of approximately $2.1 million from the March 2020 offering, the issuance of 877,203 shares of common stock upon the exercise of approximately $1.7 million of outstanding warrants and the receipt of approximately $245,000 under the PPP Loan in the current period.
Operating Capital and Capital Expenditure Requirements
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors that include, but are not limited to the following:
-
the initiation, progress, timing and completion of clinical trials for our product candidates and potential product candidates;
-
the outcome, timing and cost of regulatory approvals and the regulatory approval process;
-
delays that may be caused by the global coronavirus pandemic;
-
delays that may be caused by changing regulatory requirements;
-
the number of product candidates that we pursue;
-
the costs involved in filing and prosecuting patent applications and enforcing and defending patent claims;
-
the timing and terms of future collaboration, licensing, consulting or other arrangements that we may enter into;
-
the cost and timing of establishing sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution capabilities;
-
the cost of procuring clinical and commercial supplies of our product candidates;
-
the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products or technologies; and
-
the possible costs of litigation.
Based on our working capital on December 31, 2020, we believe we have sufficient capital on hand to continue to fund operations through the third quarter of calendar year 2021.
We will need substantial additional capital beyond the third quarter of calendar year 2021 and in the future in order to complete the regulatory approval and commercialization of levosimendan and to fund the development and commercialization of other future product candidates. Until we can generate a sufficient amount of product revenue, if ever, we expect to finance future cash needs through public or private equity offerings, debt financings or corporate collaboration and licensing arrangements. Such funding, if needed, may not be available on favorable terms, if at all. In the event we are unable to obtain additional capital, we may delay or reduce the scope of our current research and development programs and other expenses. As a result of our historical operating losses and expected future negative cash flows from operations, we have concluded that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Similarly, the report of our independent registered public accounting firm on our December 31, 2020 consolidated financial statements includes an explanatory paragraph indicating that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern may materially and adversely affect the price per share of our common stock and make it more difficult to obtain financing.
If adequate funds are not available, we may also be required to eliminate one or more of our clinical trials, delaying approval of levosimendan or our commercialization efforts. To the extent that we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience additional significant dilution, and debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants. To the extent that we raise additional funds through collaboration and licensing arrangements, it may be necessary to relinquish some rights to our technologies or our product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. We may seek to access the public or private capital markets whenever conditions are favorable, even if we do not have an immediate need for additional capital at that time. We may also consider strategic alternatives, including a sale of our company, merger, other business combination or recapitalization.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since our inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, including the use of structured finance, special purpose entities or variable interest entities.
Summary of Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates-The preparation of the accompanying consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or GAAP, requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Preclinical Study and Clinical Accruals-We estimate our preclinical study and clinical trial expenses based on the services received pursuant to contracts with several research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage preclinical and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of the agreements vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven expenses and payment flows. Preclinical study and clinical trial expenses include the following:
-
fees paid to CROs in connection with clinical trials;
-
fees paid to research institutions in conjunction with preclinical research studies; and
-
fees paid to contract manufacturers and service providers in connection with the production and testing of active pharmaceutical ingredients and drug materials for use in preclinical studies and clinical trials.
Stock-Based Compensation-We account for stock-based awards to employees in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation, which provides for the use of the fair value-based method to determine compensation for all arrangements where shares of stock or equity instruments are issued for compensation. Fair values of equity securities are determined by management based predominantly on the trading price of our common stock. The values of these awards are based upon their grant-date fair value. That cost is recognized over the period during which the employee is required to provide service in exchange for the reward.
We account for equity instruments issued to non-employees in accordance with ASC 505-50, Accounting for Equity Instruments That Are Issued to Other Than Employees for Acquiring, or in Conjunction with Selling, Goods or Services. Equity instruments issued to non-employees are recorded at their fair value on the measurement date and are subject to periodic adjustment as the underlying equity instruments vest.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, issued an accounting standard intended to simplify accounting for income taxes. It removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740, Income Taxes, and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. This guidance is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020 and early adoption is permitted. We are currently evaluating this standard, but we do not believe the adoption of the new guidance will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In February 2016, the FASB issued an accounting standard intended to improve financial reporting regarding leasing transactions. The standard requires us to recognize on our balance sheet the assets and liabilities for the rights and obligations created by all leased assets. The standard also requires us to provide enhanced disclosures designed to enable users of financial statements to understand the amount, timing, and uncertainty of cash flows arising from all leases, operating and capital, with lease terms greater than 12 months. The standard was effective for financial statements beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim periods within those annual periods. Early adoption was permitted.
We adopted this standard on January 1, 2019, using the required modified-retrospective approach as of the effective date. We elected the package of practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance within the new standard, which among other things, allows us to carryforward the historical lease classification. We made an accounting policy election to account for leases with an initial term of 12 months or less similar to previous guidance for operating leases, under which we recognize those lease payments in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Results for the year ended December 31, 2019 continue to be reported in accordance with historical accounting under previous lease guidance, the ASC Topic 840, Leases.
In June 2016, the FASB issued an accounting standard that amends how credit losses are measured and reported for certain financial instruments that are not accounted for at fair value through net income. This standard requires that credit losses be presented as an allowance rather than as a write-down for available-for-sale debt securities and will be effective for interim and annual reporting periods beginning January 1, 2023, with early adoption permitted. A modified retrospective approach is to be used for certain parts of this guidance, while other parts of the guidance are to be applied using a prospective approach. We do not believe the adoption of this standard will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.