Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations and Financial Condition (MD&A) should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including Part I, “Item 1: Business,” Part II, “Item 6: Selected Financial Data,” and Part II, “Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” The various sections of this MD&A contain a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risk factors described throughout this filing, including Part I, “Item 1A: Risk Factors.” Our actual results may differ materially from those described in any such forward-looking statement.
Business Overview and Environment
TESSCO Technologies Incorporated (“Tessco”, “we”, “our”, “us”, or the “Company”) architects and delivers innovative product and value chain solutions to support wireless systems. Although we sell products to customers in over 50 countries, approximately 97% of our sales are to customers in the United States. We have operations and office facilities in Timonium and Hunt Valley, Maryland, Reno, Nevada and San Antonio, Texas.
On December 2, 2020, we sold most of our Retail inventory and certain other retail-related assets to Voice Comm. In connection with this sale, we assigned or licensed certain Ventev®- related intellectual property to Voice Comm, including our Ventev® trademark for their use in connection with the sale of mobile device and accessory products. Together, this resulted in our exit from our Retail business. Cash proceeds of $9.5 million were received at the time of sale. As part of the sale agreement, we are entitled to royalty payments, up to $3.0 million in the aggregate, on the sale of Ventev® branded products by Voice Comm over a four-year period after closing. Additionally, some customer returns we receive may be resold to Voice Comm over a two-year period after closing. As a result of the disposal, the operating results of our former Retail segment have been included in Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of taxes in the Consolidated Statements of (Loss) Income for all periods presented. We retain the Ventev® tradename for non-mobile device accessory products.
As a result of this sale and our exit from the Retail business during the third quarter of fiscal 2021, we now operate as one business segment, which we had historically referred to as our Commercial segment.
We provide certain information within two key markets: (1) public carriers that are generally responsible for building and maintaining the infrastructure system and provide airtime service to individual subscribers; and (2) value-added resellers and integrators, which includes value-added resellers, the government channel and private system operator
markets. Inventory typically has a life cycle that tends to be tied to changes in regulation or technology and includes products typically used by business entities or governments.
We offer a wide range of products that are classified into three categories: base station infrastructure; network systems; and installation, test and maintenance. Base station infrastructure products are used to build, repair and upgrade wireless telecommunications. Sales of traditional base station infrastructure products, such as base station radios, cable and transmission lines and antennas are in part dependent on capital spending in the wireless communications industry. Network systems products are used to build and upgrade computing and internet networks. In this category, we have also been growing our offering of wireless broadband, network equipment, security and surveillance products, which are not as dependent on the overall capital spending of the industry. Installation, test and maintenance products are used to install, tune, and maintain wireless communications equipment. This category is made up of sophisticated analysis equipment and various frequency-, voltage- and power-measuring devices, replacement parts and components as well as an assortment of tools, hardware and supplies required by service technicians.
The wireless communications distribution industry is competitive and fragmented, and is comprised of several national distributors. In addition, many manufacturers sell direct. Barriers to entry for distributors are relatively low, and the risk of new competitors entering the market is high. Consolidation of larger wireless carriers has and will most likely continue to impact our current and potential customer base. In addition, the agreements or arrangements with our customers or suppliers looking to us for product and supply chain solutions are typically of limited duration and are terminable by either party upon several months or otherwise short notice. Our ability to maintain these relationships is subject to competitive pressures and challenges. We believe, however, that our strength in service, the breadth and depth of our product offering, our information technology system, our large customer base and our purchasing relationships with approximately 300 manufacturers provide us with a significant competitive advantage over new entrants to the market.
Results of Continuing Operations
The following tables summarize the results of our continuing operations for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Fiscal Year 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year 2020
As noted above, we exited our Retail business during fiscal year 2021 and now report activity from that Retail business as discontinued operations. The analysis below reflects activity and results from continuing operations only, including references to Ventev®.
Revenues. Revenue for fiscal year 2021 decreased by 8.7% as compared to fiscal year 2020. Revenue in our public carrier market and value-added resellers and integrators market decreased by 4.2% and 11.5%, respectively. The decline was largely driven by a combination of continued headwinds from the economic downturn and the impact of COVID-19. Both markets were also impacted in the fourth quarter by delays in the global supply chain which delayed our receipt of inventory from our vendors and as a result caused delays in our ability to ship products to our customers. These delays are expected to continue into a substantial portion of fiscal year 2022.
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold for fiscal year 2021 decreased by 7.2% as compared to fiscal year 2020. Cost of goods sold in our public carrier market and value-added resellers and integrators market decreased by 3.2% and 10.1%, respectively. The decline was primarily due to a decrease in related revenue in both markets.
Gross Profit. Gross profit decreased by 15.0% in fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020. This compares to a decline in revenue of 8.7% in fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020. Gross profit in our public carrier market and value-added resellers and integrators market decreased from 12.0% to 11.1% and from 24.1% to 22.9%, respectively. We experienced margin compression within our public carrier market primarily due to a change in customer mix, with increased sales going to larger customers which require better pricing. The margin decline in the value-added resellers and integrators market declined due to product mix, including lower sales of Ventev® products and customer mix. As a result of these drivers on gross profit, overall gross profit margin decreased to 18.1% in fiscal year 2021, compared to 19.5% in fiscal year 2020.
Our ongoing ability to earn revenues and gross profits from customers and suppliers looking to us for product and supply chain solutions is dependent upon a number of factors. The terms, and accordingly the factors, applicable to each relationship often differ. Among these factors are the strength of the customer’s or supplier’s business, the supply and demand for the product or service, including price stability, changing customer or supplier requirements, and our ability to support the customer or supplier and to continually demonstrate that we can improve the way they do business. In addition, the agreements or arrangements on which our customer and supplier relationships are based are typically of limited duration, typically do not include any obligation in respect of any specific product purchase or sale and are terminable by either party upon several months or otherwise short notice. Our customer relationships could also be affected by wireless carrier consolidation or global financial crisis, including the COVID-19 pandemic or other events beyond our control.
We account for inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value and as a result write-offs/write-downs occur due to damage, deterioration, obsolescence, changes in prices and other causes. These expenses were 3% or less of overall purchases for each of the last three fiscal years.
Selling, General, Administrative and Restructuring Expenses. Total selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 7.1% during fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020. Total selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues increased from 22.5% in fiscal year 2020 to 22.9% in fiscal year 2021. The following are descriptions of changes in significant components of selling, general, administrative, goodwill charges and restructuring expenses.
● Compensation and benefits expenses decreased by $6.2 million in fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020, mainly due to lower operations overhead as well as a $1.4 million decrease in health insurance expense.
● Marketing expenses, including travel and entertainment costs, decreased by $2.7 million in fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020, primarily as a result of fewer customer and vendor events and tradeshows as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
● Fiscal year 2021 included $2.6 million of costs, net of insurance recoveries, related to the consent solicitation that concluded during the third quarter.
● The Company also incurred a $0.5 million restructuring charge related to severance expense for the first quarter of fiscal 2020, and a $9.1 million non-cash goodwill impairment loss during fiscal 2020. The goodwill impairment was due to the decline of results in fiscal year 2020 and future year projections, the significant reduction in our market capitalization during the second half of the fiscal year (due to a decrease in stock price) and significant decline in market multiples considered in the market based valuation. There was no restructuring cost or goodwill impairment loss during fiscal 2021.
We continually evaluate the credit worthiness of our existing customer receivable portfolio and provide an appropriate reserve based on this evaluation. We also evaluate the credit worthiness of prospective and current customers and make decisions regarding extension of credit terms to such customers based on this evaluation. Accordingly, we recorded a recovery of bad debts of $0.3 million for fiscal year 2021, and a provision for bad debts of $1.1 million, for fiscal year 2020. The recovery of bad debts for fiscal year 2021 primarily related to receivables written off in fiscal 2020 based on the uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest, Net. Net interest expense decreased from $1.1 million in fiscal year 2020 to $0.6 million in fiscal year 2021. The decrease is primarily related to higher capitalized interest amount. Refer to Note 6 of the financial statements included as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on our borrowings.
Income Taxes, Net Income and Diluted Earnings Per Share. The effective tax rates in fiscal year 2021 and 2020 were 21.1% and 32.4%, respectively. The decrease in the effective tax rate is primarily a result of provisions in the CARES Act which allowed the Company to carry back certain net operating losses up to five years. These net operating losses were applied against net income that was taxed at a higher federal rate prior to the Tax Cuts & Jobs Act which was signed into law in December 2017 (the “2017 Tax Act”) and went into effect in the third quarter of fiscal 2018. The benefit of the carry back provision of the CARES Act was partially offset by valuation allowances on the deferred tax assets. As a result of the factors discussed above, net loss for fiscal year 2021 decreased 7.9% and net loss per diluted share decreased by 9.7%, compared with fiscal year 2020.
Fiscal Year 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year 2019
As noted above, we exited our Retail business during fiscal year 2021 and now report activity from that Retail business as discontinued operations. The analysis below is based on activity and results from continuing operations only, including references to Ventev®.
Revenues. Revenue for fiscal year 2020 decreased by 2.4% as compared to fiscal year 2019. Revenue in our public carrier market and value-added resellers and integrators market decreased by 0.4% and 3.6%, respectively. The decline was primarily because we did not realize the full benefits of sales strategy refinements in the value-added resellers and integrators market.
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold for fiscal year 2020 decreased by 1.6% as compared to fiscal year 2019. Cost of goods sold in our value-added resellers and integrators market decreased by 3.2%, partially offset by a cost of goods sold increase in our public carrier market of 0.7%. The decline was primarily due to a decrease in related revenue in the value-added resellers and integrators market.
The imposition of tariffs on products that we imported increased the costs of those products and adversely affected our gross profits and overall financial performance. A significant portion of our Ventev products are manufactured in foreign countries, including China and increasingly of late, Vietnam. On May 9, 2019, the United States government announced a 25% tariff on a range of products from China that are exported to the U.S. Responding to this, we were successful in moving the manufacturing of a majority of our Ventev products out of China in an effort to mitigate tariff costs, but we continued to incur additional tariff costs on product we have manufactured in, or component parts we continue to source from, China. In January 2020, China and the U.S. entered the first phase of an economic and trade agreement. There is no assurance that a broader trade agreement will be successfully negotiated between the U.S. and China to reduce or eliminate existing tariffs applicable to the business of the Company.
Gross Profit. Gross profit decreased by 5.6% in fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019. This compares to a decline in revenue of 2.4% in fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019. Gross profit in our public carrier market and value-added resellers and integrators market decreased from 12.9% to 12.0% and from 24.5% to 24.1%, respectively. We experienced margin compression within our public carrier market primarily due to a change in customer mix, with increased sales going to larger customers which require better pricing. As a result of these drivers on gross profit, overall gross profit margin decreased to 19.5% in fiscal year 2020, compared to 20.1% in fiscal year 2019.
Selling, General, Administrative and Restructuring Expenses. Total selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 3.5% during fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019. Total selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues decreased from 22.8% in fiscal year 2019 to 22.5% in fiscal year 2020. The following are descriptions of changes in significant components of selling, general, administrative, goodwill charges and restructuring expenses.
● Compensation and benefits expenses decreased by $3.6 million in fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019, mainly due to a decrease in variable compensation in both sales and operations related to the decline in overall revenues.
● Performance bonus expense (including both cash and equity plans) decreased by $2.1 million in fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019. Our bonus programs are typically based on achieving annual performance targets. The relationship between expected performance and actual performance led to lower bonus expenses in fiscal 2020, as compared to fiscal 2019.
● Expenses related to information technology increased by $2.8 million in fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019, primarily due to increased cost to support our sales initiatives and to build more efficient and effective systems.
The Company also incurred a $0.5 million restructuring charge related to severance expense for the first quarter of fiscal 2020, and a $9.1 million non-cash goodwill impairment loss during fiscal 2020. The goodwill impairment was due to the decline of results in fiscal year 2020 and future year projections, the significant reduction in our market capitalization during the second half of the fiscal year (due to decrease in stock price) and significant decline in market multiples considered in the market based valuation.
We continually evaluate the credit worthiness of our existing customer receivable portfolio and provide an appropriate reserve based on this evaluation. We also evaluate the credit worthiness of prospective and current customers and make decisions regarding extension of credit terms to such customers based on this evaluation. Accordingly, we recorded a provision for bad debts of $1.1 million and $1.4 million for fiscal year 2020 and fiscal year 2019, respectively.
Interest, Net. Net interest expense increased from $0.9 million in fiscal year 2019 to $1.1 million in fiscal year 2020. The increase is primarily related to higher borrowing levels on our secured revolving credit facility. Refer to Note 6 of the financial statements included as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on our borrowings.
Income Taxes, Net Income and Diluted Earnings Per Share. The effective tax rates in fiscal year 2020 and 2019 were 32.4% and 24.7%, respectively. The change in the effective tax rate is primarily a result of provisions in the CARES Act which allows the Company to carry back certain net operating losses up to five years. These net operating losses for fiscal year 2020 were applied against net income that was taxed at a higher federal rate prior to the Tax Cuts & Jobs Act which was signed into law in December 2017 (the “2017 Tax Act”) and went into effect in the third quarter of fiscal 2018. The benefit of the carry back provision of the CARES Act was partially offset by valuation allowances recorded in fiscal year 2020 on the deferred tax assets. As a result of the factors discussed above, net loss and diluted loss per share for fiscal year 2020 increased 75.6% and 74.3%, respectively, compared with fiscal year 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In summary, our cash flows were as follows (includes both continuing and discontinued operations):
We used $0.7 million of net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2021. This outflow was driven by net loss (net of depreciation and amortization, gain on the retail sale, and non-cash stock compensation expense), and a decrease in accounts payable partially offset by the decreases in accounts receivable and inventory. A decrease in deferred income tax assets was offset by an increase income taxes receivable. Accounts receivable, inventory, and accounts payable decreased due to our exit of the Retail business during the third quarter of fiscal 2021.
We generated $0.9 million of net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2020. This inflow was driven by net loss (net of depreciation and amortization, goodwill impairment loss, and non-cash stock compensation expense) and a decrease in accounts receivable, partially offset by an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets and an increase in deferred income taxes. Accounts receivable decreased due to the timing of sales at the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020 as compared to the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2019. Prepaid expenses and other current assets increased due to an increase in income taxes receivable. Due to the CARES Act, the Company is able to carry back net operating losses up to five years and receive a refund of taxes paid in prior years.
We generated $8.2 million of net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2019. This inflow was driven by net income (net of depreciation and amortization and non-cash stock compensation expense), an increase in accounts payable and a decrease in inventory, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable. Accounts payable increased due to strategic purchase of inventory during the fourth quarter with extended terms to support our public carrier business. Inventory decreased due to an intentional reduction of overall inventory in line with our efforts to manage working capital. Accounts receivable increased due to the timing of sales at the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2019 as compared to the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2018.
Capital expenditures of $11.9 million in fiscal year 2021 were up from $6.8 million in fiscal year 2020 and from $5.2 million in fiscal year 2019. Fiscal year 2020, 2019 and 2018 capital expenditures were largely comprised of investments in information technology of $11.4 million, $6.8 million, and $4.4 million, respectively, primarily related to the anticipated replacement of our legacy ERP system with a modern SAP ERP system. In fiscal year 2021, we generated $9.2 million in cash proceeds related to the sale of certain retail assets to Voice Comm.
Cash flows generated from financing in fiscal year 2021 were primarily related to borrowings from our line of credit. Cash flows generated from financing in fiscal year 2020 were primarily related to borrowings from our line of credit, partially offset by cash dividends paid to shareholders. During the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020, the Board of Directors decreased the cash dividend from $0.20 to $0.02 in order to reallocate resources to increase investment in the technology and talent to accelerate the Company’s long-term growth. Subsequent to fiscal year 2020, the Board of Directors suspended Tessco’s dividend to further strengthen its cash position as the Company continues to monitor and address the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and other challenges. Cash flows used in financing in fiscal year 2019 were primarily related to cash dividends paid to shareholders partially offset by borrowings from our line of credit.
On October 29, 2020, we entered into a Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) among the Company, the Company’s primary operating subsidiaries as co-borrowers, the Lenders party thereto, and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (“Wells”), as Administrative Agent, swingline lender and an issuing bank, and terminated our previous secured Revolving Credit Facility. The Credit Agreement provides for a senior secured asset based revolving credit facility of up
to $75 million (the “Revolving Credit Facility”), which matures in forty-two months, on April 29, 2024. As of March 28, 2021, borrowings under the secured Revolving Credit Facility totaled $30.6 million; therefore, we then had $44.4 million available, subject to the Borrowing Base limitations and compliance with the other applicable terms of the Credit Agreement discussed in Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement accrue interest at the rates, and the Company is required to pay a monthly commitment fee, as also discussed in Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
At the end of fiscal year 2021, we were in compliance with all required financial covenants applicable under our revolving credit facility with SunTrust Bank.
Working capital (current assets less current liabilities) increased to $67.8 million as of March 28, 2021 as compared to $51.2 million as of March 29, 2020. Shareholders' equity was $76.8 million as of March 28, 2021, and $83.7 million as of March 29, 2020.
We believe that our existing cash, payments from customers, pending tax refunds and availability under our revolving credit facility (including any amendment or replacement thereof), or if needed, financing we believe would be available to us from other sources, will be sufficient to support our operations for at least the next twelve months. We expect to meet short-term liquidity needs through cash on our balance sheet and operating cash flow, supplemented by our revolving credit facility; and we expect to meet long-term liquidity needs through these same resources. If we were to undertake an acquisition or other major capital purchases that require funds in excess of our existing sources of liquidity, we would look to sources of funding from additional credit facilities, debt and/or equity issuances. There can be no assurances that such additional future sources of funding, either to fund an acquisition or major capital purchase, or to support our cash flow needs in the event of the termination of our existing revolving credit facility before it can be replaced with an asset based facility, would be available on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
In addition, our liquidity could be negatively impacted by decreasing revenues and profits resulting from a decrease in demand for our products or a reduction in capital expenditures by our customers, or by the weakened financial conditions of our customers or suppliers, in each case as a result of a possible downturn in the global economy, caused in part by the COVID-19 pandemic among other factors. Anticipated capital expenditures for fiscal year 2022 are expected to range from $6 million to $10 million.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures
We believe that presenting certain non-GAAP financial measures may enhance an investor’s understanding of our financial performance. We further believe that these financial measures are useful in assessing our operating performance from period to period by excluding certain items that we believe are not representative of our core business. We also use certain of these financial measures for business planning purposes, including management incentives.
Accordingly, the below selected financial data includes certain non-GAAP financial measures we believe are commonly used by investors to evaluate our performance and that of our competitors. The use of EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization) and Adjusted EBITDA (EBITDA, less stock compensation and goodwill impairment) should not be considered as an alternative to operating income (loss), net income (loss) or any other performance measures derived in accordance with U.S. GAAP as measures of operating performance, operating cash flows or liquidity.
In accordance with the SEC staff Financial Reporting Manual and in conjunction with the filing of the fiscal 2021 Form 10-K, we elected not to recast the selected financial data for fiscal year 2017 and 2018 for the exit of the Retail business that occurred in fiscal 2021 as discontinued operations. As such, the below selected financial data for fiscal years 2017 and 2018 includes the results of the since divested Retail segment, while fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019 exclude that Retail activity.
Contractual Obligations
The following tables reflect a summary of our contractual cash obligations and other commercial commitments as of March 28, 2021:
(1) We are subject to a variable interest rate on the outstanding balance on our revolving credit facility and a 0.25% fee on the unused portion of our revolving credit facility. This balance includes projected variable interest payments based on there being no movement on the line from what was outstanding at March 28, 2021, with the variable payments based on a static rate of 4.5% on the outstanding balance and 0.25% related to the unused commitment fee.
(2) Other Long-Term Liabilities reflected on the Consolidated Balance Sheet include amounts owed under a Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We have identified the policies below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations:
Revenue Recognition. We account for revenue in accordance with ASC No. 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which we adopted on April 2, 2018, using the modified retrospective method. We recognize revenue when control of promised goods is transferred to the customer. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring the goods.
In most cases, shipments are made using Freight on Board (FOB) shipping terms. FOB destination terms are used for a portion of sales, and revenue for these sales is recorded when the product is received by the customer. Prices are always fixed at the time of sale. Historically, there have not been any material price concessions provided to customers, future discounts provided by the Company, or other incentives subsequent to a sale. The Company sells under normal commercial terms and, therefore, only records sales on transactions where collectability is reasonably assured. The Company recognizes revenues net of sales tax.
We recognize revenues from sales transactions containing sales returns provisions at the time of the sale. The potential for customer returns are considered a component of variable consideration under ASC No. 606 and it is therefore considered when estimating the transaction price for a sale. We use the most likely amount method to determine the amount of expected returns. The amount of expected returns is recognized as a refund liability, representing the obligation to return the customer’s consideration. The return asset is measured at the former carrying amount of the inventory, less any expected costs to recover the goods.
Our current and potential customers are continuing to look for ways to reduce their inventories and lower their total costs, including distribution, order taking and fulfillment costs, while still providing their customers excellent service. Some of these companies have turned to us to implement supply chain solutions, including purchasing inventory, assisting in demand forecasting, configuring, packaging, kitting and delivering products and managing customer and supplier relations, from order taking through cash collections. In performing these solutions, we assume varying levels of involvement in the transactions and varying levels of credit and inventory risk. As our offerings continually evolve to meet the needs of our customers, we constantly evaluate our revenue accounting based on the guidance set forth in accounting standards generally accepted in the United States. When applying this guidance in accordance with the FASB standard regarding revenue recognition for principal-agent considerations, we look at the following indicators: whether we are the primary obligor in the transaction; whether we have general inventory risk; whether we have latitude in establishing price; whether the customer holds us responsible for the acceptability of the product; whether the product returns are handled by us; and whether an obligation exists between the other parties and our customer. Each of our customer relationships is independently evaluated based on the above guidance and revenues are recorded on the appropriate basis. Based on a review of the factors above, in the majority of our sales relationships, we have concluded that we are the principal in the transaction, and we record revenues based upon the gross amounts earned and booked. However, we do have certain relationships where we are not the principal and we record revenues on a net fee basis, regardless of amounts billed (less than 1% of our total revenues for fiscal year 2021).
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. We use estimates to determine the amount of the allowance for doubtful accounts necessary to reduce accounts receivable to their expected net realizable value. We estimate the amount of the required allowance by reviewing the status of past-due receivables and analyzing historical bad debt trends. Actual collection experience has not varied significantly from estimates, due primarily to credit policies, collection experience and our stability as it relates to our current customer base. Typical payments from commercial customers are due 30 days from the date of the invoice. We write-off receivables deemed to be uncollectible to the allowance for doubtful accounts. Accounts receivable balances are not collateralized by our customers.
Inventory Reserves. We establish inventory reserves for excess and obsolete inventory. We regularly review inventory to evaluate continued demand and identify any obsolete or excess quantities of inventory. We record a provision for the difference between excess and obsolete inventory and its estimated realizable value. Estimated realizable value is based on anticipated future product demand, market conditions and liquidation values. Actual results differing from these projections could have a material effect on our results of operations.
Impairment of Long-Lived and Indefinite-Lived Assets. Our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of March 28, 2021, includes indefinite lived intangible assets of $0.8 million. We perform an annual impairment test for the indefinite lived asset on the first day of our fourth quarter. We also periodically evaluate our long-lived assets for potential impairment indicators. The intangible assets impairment test involves an initial qualitative analysis to determine if it is more likely than not that an intangible asset’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. If qualitative factors suggest a possible impairment the Company then performs a quantitative analysis. Our judgments regarding the existence of impairment indicators are based on estimated future cash flows, market conditions, operational performance and legal factors.
Future events, such as significant changes in cash flow assumptions, could cause us to conclude that impairment indicators exist and that the net book value of long-lived assets or intangible assets are impaired. Had the determination been made that the indefinite lived intangible assets were impaired, the value of this asset would have been reduced by an amount up to $0.8 million, resulting in a corresponding charge to operations.
Income Taxes. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of assets and liabilities. We regularly review our deferred tax assets for recoverability. This review is based on historical taxable income, projected future taxable income and the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences. Based on this review, we have established a valuation allowance on the deferred tax assets that are not more likely than not realizable.
We account for income taxes under the FASB’s ASC No. 740 on accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements. This standard prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. It also provides guidance on de-recognition, measurement, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition.
Stock-Based Compensation. We record stock-based compensation in accordance with the FASB standard regarding stock compensation and share-based payments. We account for forfeitures as they occur rather than estimate expected forfeitures. The standard also requires stock awards granted or modified after the adoption of the standard that include both performance conditions and graded vesting to be amortized by an accelerated method rather than the straight-line method.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no material off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements is contained in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Forward-Looking Statements
This Report may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. All statements other than statements of historical facts contained herein, including statements regarding our future results of operations and financial position, strategy and plans, and our expectations for future operations, are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements may generally be identified by the use of the words “may,” “will,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” and similar expressions, but the absence of these words or phrases does not necessarily mean that a statement is not forward looking.
We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events and trends that we believe may affect our financial condition, results of operations, strategy, short- and long-term business operations and objectives, and financial needs. Forward looking statements involve a number of risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those described in or contemplated by any such forward-looking statement for a variety of reasons, including those described in Part I, Item IA “Risk Factors.” In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-looking events and circumstances included herein may not occur, and actual results could differ materially and adversely from those anticipated or implied in the forward-looking statements. Consequently, the reader is cautioned to consider all forward-looking statements in light of the risks to which they are subject. Forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements about:
● our expectations regarding the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations, revenues, profits, customers or suppliers;
● our ability to sustain or grow our customer base and market share;
● our ability to sustain and grow our supplier relationships;
● our expectations regarding the size and growth in markets;
● the needs and demands of our customers and the production capacity of our suppliers;
● trends in the wireless communications industry, our competitors and competing business models;
● the execution of our business plans and strategies;
● our ability to benefit from the disposition of our Retail business, including royalty revenues;
● our ability to benefit from our Commercial business;
● our liquidity and working capital requirements and ability to access capital;
● our ability to secure, maintain and upgrade our information technology, telecommunications and e-commerce systems;
● our ability to anticipate and navigate existing and changes in laws or regulations, including tariffs and trade restrictions, applicable to our business;
● our ability to enter into and perform contracts and to realize anticipated revenues or anticipated savings; and
● our expectations regarding future revenues, expenses and profitability, and financial results generally.
Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, level of activity, performance or achievements. In addition, neither we nor any other person assumes responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of any of these forward-looking statements. Any forward-looking statement made by us in this Annual Report speaks only as of the date on which it is made. We disclaim any duty to update any of these forward-looking statements after the date of this Annual Report to confirm these statements to actual results or revised expectations.
The above list should not be construed as exhaustive and should be read in conjunction with our other disclosures, including but not limited to the risk factors described in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report. Other risks may be described from time to time in our filings made under the securities laws. New risks emerge from time to time. It is not possible for our management to predict all risks.
Available Information
Our internet web site address is: www.tessco.com. We make available free of charge through our website, our Annual Report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act as soon as reasonably practicable after such documents are electronically filed with, or furnished to, the Securities and Exchange Commission. Also available on our website is our Code of Business Conduct and Ethics. We have not incorporated herein by reference the information on our website, and it should not be considered a part of this filing.