ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
BUSINESS DESCRIPTION
Terex is a global manufacturer of aerial work platforms and materials processing machinery. We design, build and support products used in construction, maintenance, manufacturing, energy, minerals and materials management applications. Our products are manufactured in North and South America, Europe, Australia and Asia and sold worldwide. We engage with customers through all stages of the product life cycle, from initial specification and financing to parts and service support. We report our business in the following segments: (i) AWP and (ii) MP.
Further information about our reportable segments appears below and in Note B - “Business Segment Information” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Non-GAAP Measures
In this document, we refer to various GAAP (U.S. generally accepted accounting principles) and non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures disclosed by other companies. We present non-GAAP financial measures in reporting our financial results to provide investors with additional analytical tools which we believe are useful in evaluating our operating results and the ongoing performance of our underlying businesses. We do not, nor do we suggest that investors consider such non-GAAP financial measures in isolation from, or as a substitute for, financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Non-GAAP measures we may use include translation effect of foreign currency exchange rate changes on net sales, gross profit, selling, general & administrative (“SG&A”) costs and operating profit, as well as the net sales, gross profit, SG&A costs and operating profit excluding the impact of acquisitions and divestitures.
As changes in foreign currency exchange rates have a non-operating impact on our financial results, we believe excluding effects of these changes assists in assessment of our business results between periods. We calculate the translation effect of foreign currency exchange rate changes by translating current period results using rates that the comparable prior periods were translated at to isolate the foreign exchange component of fluctuation from the operational component. Similarly, impact of changes in our results from acquisitions and divestitures not included in comparable prior periods may be subtracted from the absolute change in results to allow for better comparability of results between periods.
We calculate a non-GAAP measure of free cash flow. We define free cash flow as Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, plus (minus) increases (decreases) in TFS finance receivables consisting of sales-type leases and commercial loans (“TFS Assets”), less Capital expenditures, net of proceeds from sale of capital assets. We believe this measure of free cash flow provides management and investors further useful information on cash generation or use in our primary operations.
We discuss forward looking information related to expected earnings per share (“EPS”) excluding the impact of potential future acquisitions, divestitures, restructuring and other unusual items. Our 2021 outlook for earnings per share is a non-GAAP financial measure because it excludes unusual items. The Company is not able to reconcile these forward-looking non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable forward-looking GAAP financial measures without unreasonable efforts because the Company is unable to predict with a reasonable degree of certainty the exact timing and impact of such items. The unavailable information could have a significant impact on the Company’s full year 2021 GAAP financial results. This forward looking information provides guidance to investors about our EPS expectations excluding these unusual items that we do not believe are reflective of our ongoing operations.
Working capital is calculated using the Consolidated Balance Sheet amounts for Trade receivables (net of allowance) plus Inventories, less Trade accounts payable and Customer advances. We view excessive working capital as an inefficient use of resources, and seek to minimize the level of investment without adversely impacting ongoing operations of the business. Trailing three months annualized net sales is calculated using net sales for the most recent quarter end multiplied by four. The ratio calculated by dividing working capital by trailing three months annualized net sales is a non-GAAP measure we believe measures our resource use efficiency.
Non-GAAP measures we also use include Net Operating Profit After Tax (“NOPAT”) as adjusted, Income (loss) from operations as adjusted, Cash and cash equivalents as adjusted and Stockholders’ equity as adjusted, which are used in the calculation of our after tax return on invested capital (“ROIC”) (collectively the “Non-GAAP Measures”), which are discussed in detail below.
Overview
The past year was one of transition for Terex. We evolved our “Focus, Simplify, Execute to Win” strategy to its next phase of “Execute, Innovate, Grow”. We are progressing into a leaner organization, with fewer organizational levels, including the elimination and consolidation of management layers. Also, as we right-size our organization, we have been re-evaluating and reducing our company-wide footprint. We recognize that to win in the marketplace we must have a globally cost competitive manufacturing footprint. We have been and will continue to take the actions necessary to achieve this objective. We will also continue to innovate in our products and technology. We are listening to our customers, so our products and services offer the features and benefits which provide value to our customers. We are emphasizing execution, driving innovation and growth, specifically focused on profitable growth.
We were significantly impacted in 2020 by the COVID-19 pandemic. Overall, 2020 demonstrated the resilience of our business and team members to deliver improving results throughout the year against a very challenging backdrop. While the COVID-19 pandemic continued in the second half of 2020, global economic activity has stabilized and begun to gradually recover but remains below pre-COVID-19 levels. In response to the ongoing pandemic, we implemented safety, financial and cost reduction actions.
Although our strategy has evolved, safety is and will remain the top priority of the Company driven by our Zero Harm Safety culture of Think Safe - Work Safe - Home Safe. Our global and regional crisis response teams remain active and our facilities continue refining their preparedness and response plans to ensure they can respond swiftly as local or regional pandemic conditions change. The continuing vigilance of our team members both inside and outside of work and the successful COVID-19 safety measures we implemented early on are effectively protecting our team.
After safety, our top priority is our liquidity. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $1.1 billion in available liquidity. We have taken numerous actions so that we can maintain strong liquidity levels going forward. It is important that all of Terex’s stakeholders, including customers, suppliers, team members and credit and equity investors, have confidence that we have the operational and financial strength to manage successfully through this period of uncertainty. We believe we have ample liquidity to meet our business plans. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for a detailed description of liquidity and working capital levels, including the primary factors affecting such levels.
Throughout 2020, we have made good progress in lowering our costs. Specifically, we have reduced our SG&A cost structure for 2021 by over $100 million as compared to 2019, driven by headcount reductions, footprint reductions, optimizing our information technology spend and automating and digitizing processes. These actions have enabled us to come into 2021 well positioned to meet our target of SG&A percent to sales for 2021 of 12.5%. Given the economic and industry uncertainty posed by the pandemic, we reduced our 2020 capital spending by 35%, although we continued to invest in growth as demonstrated by our new Utilities manufacturing facility and continued expansion of our Changzhou, China facility. We will continue to invest in 2021 with capital spending, net of asset dispositions, expected to be approximately $90 million.
Net sales in 2020 were down 29% compared to 2019 driven by the onset of the pandemic in early 2020. Net sales stabilized and improved in the second half of 2020 as compared to the first half of 2020. As a result, net sales were only down 11% in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the same quarter in 2019. End markets for both AWP and MP continued to recover in the second half of 2020 from the lows in the second quarter of 2020.
Our AWP segment’s 2020 net sales were down 35% from the prior year period driven by end markets in the U.S. and Europe being significantly below last year’s levels as a result of the pandemic. The market and our aerial products sales in China were strong throughout most of 2020 after a slow start to the year caused by the pandemic. Overall, the utilities market was softer in 2020 but did not experience the same levels of decline as our aerials business. We aggressively managed production levels to ensure we were not building excess inventory. Our aggressive production control allowed us to achieve almost a $180 million reduction in aerial products inventory levels year-over-year. We expect the improved customer sentiment demonstrated by our Genie and Utilities customers in the second half of 2020 to continue into 2021 and are encouraged by our backlog for the segment, which is up 10% compared to the prior year. As a result, we anticipate sales of approximately $2.0 billion and an operating margin of approximately 6.5% in 2021.
Our MP segment’s 2020 net sales were down 22% from the prior year period driven by cautious customer sentiment delaying capital purchases of crushing and screening equipment and material handlers. However, net sales stabilized and improved in the second half of 2020 as compared to the first half of 2020. As a result, net sales were only down 3% in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the same quarter in 2019. The MP team has been aggressively managing all elements of cost in a challenging environment. This helped drive the strong financial performance of the MP segment, achieving an operating margin of 11% in 2020, despite the decrease in net sales. We expect MP to continue its consistent operating performance in 2021 and are encouraged by our backlog for the segment, which is up 59% compared to the prior year. As a result, we anticipate sales of approximately $1.4 billion and an operating margin of approximately 12% in 2021.
Throughout 2020, we have been intensely focused on rightsizing our inventory levels to the customer demand environment, especially in our aerial products business. Our focus on net working capital management drove $141 million of free cash flow generation in 2020. Our strong liquidity and expected 2021 free cash flow generation allowed us to initiate our option to prepay a portion of our term loans prior to their maturity date and reinstate a dividend in 2021.
In 2020, our largest market remained North America, which represented approximately 57% of our global sales in continuing operations. As compared to the prior year period, our sales were down double digits in every major geography.
We have seen our markets stabilize and improve over the course of 2020 and we currently expect to see markets improve in 2021 due to the global deployment of COVID-19 vaccines and AWP customers’ fleet replenishment. However, we continue to operate in an unprecedented period and our results could continue to change, negatively or positively.  Disruptions associated with COVID-19, whether it is team member absenteeism or supply chain disruptions, could impact our results. See Part I, Item 1A. - “Risk Factors” for a detailed description of the risks resulting from COVID-19. As a result, we currently expect 2021 earnings per share (“EPS”) to be between $1.95 and $2.35, on net sales of approximately $3.45 billion.
ROIC
ROIC and other Non-GAAP Measures (as calculated below) assist in showing how effectively we utilize capital invested in our operations. ROIC is determined by dividing the sum of NOPAT for each of the previous four quarters by the average of Debt less Cash and cash equivalents plus Stockholders’ equity for the previous five quarters. NOPAT for each quarter is calculated by multiplying Income (loss) from operations by one minus the effective tax rate.
In the calculation of ROIC, we adjust Income (loss) from operations and Stockholders’ equity to remove the effects of the impact of certain transactions in order to create a measure that is useful to understanding our operating results and the ongoing performance of our underlying business without the impact of unusual items as shown in the tables below. Cash and cash equivalents is adjusted to include amounts recorded as held for sale.
Furthermore, we believe returns on capital deployed in TFS do not represent our primary operations and, therefore, TFS Assets and results from operations have been excluded from the Non-GAAP Measures. Debt is calculated using amounts for Current portion of long-term debt plus Long-term debt, less current portion. We calculate ROIC using the last four quarters’ adjusted NOPAT as this represents the most recent 12-month period at any given point of determination. In order for the denominator of the ROIC ratio to properly match the operational period reflected in the numerator, we include the average of five quarters’ ending balance sheet amounts so that the denominator includes the average of the opening through ending balances (on a quarterly basis) thereby providing, over the same time period as the numerator, four quarters of average invested capital.
Terex management and Board of Directors use ROIC as one measure to assess operational performance, including in connection with certain compensation programs. We use ROIC as a metric because we believe it measures how effectively we invest our capital and provides a better measure to compare ourselves to peer companies to assist in assessing how we drive operational improvement. We believe ROIC measures return on the amount of capital invested in our primary businesses, excluding TFS, as opposed to another metric such as return on stockholders’ equity that only incorporates book equity, and is thus a more accurate and descriptive measure of our performance. We also believe adding Debt less Cash and cash equivalents to Stockholders’ equity provides a better comparison across similar businesses regarding total capitalization, and ROIC highlights the level of value creation as a percentage of capital invested. As the tables below show, our ROIC at December 31, 2020 was 3.8%.
Amounts described below are reported in millions of U.S. dollars, except for the effective tax rate. Amounts are as of and for the three months ended for the periods referenced in the tables below.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
2020 COMPARED WITH 2019
Consolidated
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $1,276.7 million when compared to 2019. The decrease in net sales was primarily due to lower demand for aerial work platforms, telehandlers and utility equipment in our AWP segment and materials processing equipment, material handlers, cranes and concrete mixer trucks in our MP segment primarily as a result of COVID-19 adversely affecting our customers’ sentiment and spending, leading to a downturn in our markets.
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $348.5 million when compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower sales in our AWP and MP segments and temporary volume related manufacturing inefficiencies in our AWP segment as a result of the impact of COVID-19.
SG&A costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $81.9 million when compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to cost control measures, including right-sizing our workforce, temporary salary reductions and reduced discretionary spending, taken across all areas of our business, partially offset by severance and restructuring charges taken in 2020.
Income from operations decreased by $266.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the negative impact of COVID-19 on our businesses, partially offset by lower selling, general and administrative expenses.
Aerial Work Platforms
Net sales for the AWP segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $943.7 million when compared to 2019 primarily due to lower demand for aerial work platforms in all major geographies, telehandlers in North America and Europe and utility equipment in North America as a result of COVID-19 adversely affecting our customers’ sentiment and spending, leading to a downturn in our markets.
Income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $195.7 million when compared to 2019 primarily due to lower sales volume, temporary volume related manufacturing inefficiencies as a result of the impact of COVID-19 and severance and restructuring charges, partially offset by reduced spending for selling, general and administrative expenses.
Materials Processing
Net sales for the MP segment decreased by $345.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to 2019 primarily due to decreased demand for materials processing equipment, material handlers and cranes in all major geographies and concrete mixer trucks in North America as a result of COVID-19 adversely affecting our customers’ sentiment and spending, leading to a downturn in our markets.
Income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $84.5 million when compared to 2019 primarily due to lower sales volume as a result of the impact of COVID-19, partially offset by reduced spending for selling, general and administrative expenses.
Corporate and Other / Eliminations
* Not a meaningful percentage
Net sales include on-book financing activities of TFS and elimination of intercompany sales activity among segments. The net sales increase is primarily attributable to lower intercompany sales eliminations, partially offset by lower TFS revenue.
Loss from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $13.6 million when compared to 2019. The decrease in operating loss is primarily due to lower general and administrative spending and reduced personnel expense due to right-sizing our workforce, partially offset by the gain on sale of an investment in 2019 and a specific finance receivable reserve for one customer in 2020.
Interest Expense, Net of Interest Income
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our interest expense, net of interest income, was $62.3 million, or $19.1 million lower than the same period in the prior year due to a decrease in average borrowings and lower rates.
Other Income (Expense) - Net
Other income (expense) - net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was income of $4.9 million, compared to a loss of $6.1 million in 2019. The change was primarily due to foreign exchange translation gains in the current year period compared to losses in 2019, a gain related to the repayment to Terex of a third party note and a positive post-closing adjustment in 2020 related to the settlement of our U.S. defined benefit pension plan in 2018.
Income Taxes
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an income tax expense of $2.0 million on income of $11.0 million, an effective tax rate of 18.2%, as compared to an income tax expense of $37.8 million on income of $247.5 million, an effective tax rate of 15.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The higher effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily due to U.S. tax on foreign income, partially offset by geographic mix and tax benefits from the CARES Act and changes in tax regulations, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income (Loss) from Discontinued Operations - Net of Tax
Loss from discontinued operations - net of tax for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.4 million compared to a loss of $155.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change was due to non-recurring losses in 2019 from recognition of a pre-tax charge of approximately $82 million ($82 million after-tax) to write-down the mobile cranes disposal group to fair value, less costs to sell and the negative performance of our mobile cranes business prior to disposition.
Gain (Loss) on Disposition of Discontinued Operations - Net of Tax
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a loss on disposition of discontinued operations - net of tax of $19.2 million, primarily related to a settlement with Tadano Ltd. and certain of its subsidiaries (“Tadano”) on cash, debt, working capital and certain other items related to the disposition of Demag® mobile cranes business to Tadano.
2019 COMPARED WITH 2018
Consolidated
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased $164.1 million when compared to 2018. The decrease in net sales was primarily due to weakening demand for aerial work platforms in North America and Western Europe in our AWP segment and changes in foreign exchange rates which negatively impacted consolidated net sales by approximately $105 million, partially offset by higher demand for equipment in our MP segment and aerial work platforms in China and utility equipment in our AWP segment.
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased $74.1 million when compared to 2018. The decrease was primarily due to the negative impact of foreign exchange rate changes across all segments and lower sales volume and factory overhead absorption in our AWP segment, partially offset by higher sales volume in our MP segment and favorable price variances in our AWP segment.
SG&A costs for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $3.4 million when compared to 2018 primarily due to increased engineering and selling costs, partially offset by lower personnel costs.
Income from operations decreased by $77.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 when compared to 2018. The decrease was primarily due to the negative effects of foreign exchange rate changes in all segments and lower sales volume and factory overhead absorption in our AWP segment, partially offset by higher sales volume in our MP segment and favorable price variances in our AWP segment.
Aerial Work Platforms
Net sales for the AWP segment for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased $223.8 million when compared to 2018 primarily due to weakening demand for aerial work platforms in North America and Western Europe, partially offset by increased sales in China and higher demand for utility equipment. Net sales were negatively impacted by effects of foreign exchange rate changes, particularly in Europe, of approximately $43 million.
Income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased $104.3 million when compared to 2018. The decrease was primarily due to lower sales volume, lower factory overhead absorption from a decrease in overall production volume, the negative effects of foreign exchange rate changes and higher engineering and selling costs, partially offset by favorable price variances and a change in allocation of health care costs.
Materials Processing
Net sales for the MP segment increased by $25.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 when compared to 2018 primarily due to higher demand for material handlers and mobile crushing and screening equipment, pick and carry equipment primarily in Australia and concrete mixer trucks in North America, partially offset by weakening demand for tower cranes. Net sales were negatively impacted by effects of foreign exchange rate changes, particularly in Europe, of approximately $62 million.
Income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $16.8 million when compared to 2018 primarily due to higher overall sales volume and a customer advance forfeiture, partially offset by the negative effects of foreign exchange rate changes.
Corporate and Other / Eliminations
* Not a meaningful percentage
Net sales include on-book financing activities of TFS and elimination of intercompany sales activity among segments. The net sales increase is primarily due to lower intercompany sales eliminations and increased governmental sales.
Loss from operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased $10.0 million when compared to 2018. The decrease in operating loss is primarily due to lower compensation costs and professional fees and the sale of an equity investment, partially offset by the negative effects of exchange rate changes, a change in allocation of health care costs, severance costs and a specific loss allowance on a finance receivable.
Interest Expense, Net of Interest Income
During the year ended December 31, 2019, our interest expense, net of interest income, was $81.4 million, or $17.3 million higher than the prior year due to an increase in average borrowings, partially offset by lower rates.
Other Income (Expense) - Net
Other income (expense) - net for the year ended December 31, 2019 was a loss of $6.1 million, compared to a loss of $60.6 million in 2018. The change was due primarily to a loss in the prior year of approximately $51 million related to the settlement of our U.S. defined benefit pension plan, as described in Note M - “Retirement Plans and Other Benefits”.
Income Taxes
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized an income tax expense of $37.8 million on income of $247.5 million, an effective tax rate of 15.3%, as compared to an income tax expense of $45.4 million on income of $287.1 million, an effective tax rate of 15.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2018. The lower effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to favorable jurisdictional mix.
Income (Loss) from Discontinued Operations - Net of Tax
Loss from discontinued operations - net of tax for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $155.4 million, compared to a loss of $130.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The loss in 2019 was primarily from recognition of a pre-tax charge of approximately $82 million ($82 million after-tax) to write-down the mobile cranes disposal group to fair value, less costs to sell, and the negative performance of our mobile cranes business.
Gain (Loss) on Disposition of Discontinued Operations - Net of Tax
Gain on disposition of discontinued operations - net of tax for the year ended December 31, 2019, was $0.1 million compared to a gain of $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The gain in 2019 was primarily related to a gain on the sale of our North American mobile crane product lines manufactured in its Oklahoma City facility, partially offset by post-closing adjustments for the sale of MHPS and a loss on the sale of Demag.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Changes in estimates and assumptions used by management could have significant impacts on our financial results. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
We believe the following are among our most significant accounting policies which are important in determining the reporting of transactions and events and which utilize estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and therefore are based on management judgment. Please refer to Note A - “Basis of Presentation” in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for a listing of our accounting policies.
Inventories - In valuing inventory, we are required to make assumptions regarding the level of reserves required to value potentially obsolete or over-valued items at the lower of cost or net realizable value (“NRV”). These assumptions require us to analyze the aging of and forecasted demand for our inventory, forecast future product sales prices, pricing trends and margins, and to make judgments and estimates regarding obsolete or excess inventory. Future product sales prices, pricing trends and margins are based on the best available information at that time including actual orders received, negotiations with our customers for future orders, including their plans for expenditures, and market trends for similar products. Our judgments and estimates for excess or obsolete inventory are based on analysis of actual and forecasted usage. Valuation of used equipment taken in trade from customers requires us to use the best information available to determine the value of the equipment to potential customers. This value is subject to change based on numerous conditions. Inventory reserves are established taking into account age, frequency of use, or sale, and in the case of repair parts, installed base of machines. While calculations are made involving these factors, significant management judgment regarding expectations for future events is involved. Future events that could significantly influence our judgment and related estimates include general economic conditions in markets where our products are sold, new equipment price fluctuations, actions of our competitors, including introduction of new products and technological advances, as well as new products and design changes we introduce. We make adjustments to our inventory reserves based on identification of specific situations and increase our inventory reserves accordingly. As further changes in future economic or industry conditions occur, we may revise estimates that were used to calculate our inventory reserves.
If actual conditions are less favorable than those we have projected, we will increase our reserves for lower of cost or NRV, excess and obsolete inventory accordingly. Any increase in our reserves will adversely impact our results of operations. Establishment of a reserve for lower of cost or NRV, excess and obsolete inventory establishes a new cost basis in the inventory. Such reserves are not reduced until the product is sold.
Guarantees - We have issued guarantees to financial institutions related to financing of equipment purchases by our customers. We assess the expectation of losses or non-performance based on consideration of historical customer reviews, current financial conditions, reasonable and supportable forecasts, equipment collateral value and other factors. Many of these factors, including the assessment of a customer’s ability to pay, are influenced by economic and market factors that cannot be predicted with certainty.
Our customers may fund the acquisition of our equipment through third-party finance companies. In certain instances, we may provide a credit guarantee to the finance company by which we agree to make payments to the finance company should the customer default. Our maximum liability is generally limited to our customer’s remaining payments due to the finance company at the time of default. In the event of a customer default, we are generally able to recover and dispose of the equipment at a minimum loss, if any, to us. Reserves are recorded for expected loss over the contractual period of risk exposure.
There can be no assurance our historical experience in used equipment markets will be indicative of future results. Our ability to recover losses from our guarantees may be affected by economic conditions in used equipment markets at the time of loss. See Note O - “Litigation and Contingencies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our guarantees.
Revenue Recognition - We recognize revenue when goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. In determining when and how revenue is recognized from contracts with customers, we perform the following five-step analysis: (i) identification of contract with customer; (ii) determination of performance obligations; (iii) measurement of the transaction price; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation. The majority of our revenue is recognized at the time of shipment, at the net sales price (transaction price). Estimates of variable consideration, such as volume discounts and rebates, reduce transaction price when it is probable that a customer will attain these types of sales incentives. These estimates are primarily derived from contractual terms and historical experience.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts - Trade accounts receivable are recorded at invoiced amount and do not bear interest. Allowance for doubtful accounts is our estimate of current expected credit losses on existing accounts receivable and determined based on historical customer reviews, current financial conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Account balances are charged off against the allowance when the Company determines it is expected the receivable will not be recovered. There can be no assurance that our estimate of accounts receivable collection will be indicative of future results.
Goodwill - Goodwill is assigned to one or more reporting segments on the date of acquisition. We review our goodwill for impairment annually during the fourth quarter of each fiscal year and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of any one of our reporting units below its respective carrying amount.
In performing the goodwill impairment test, we may first perform a qualitative assessment or bypass the qualitative assessment and proceed directly to performing the quantitative impairment test. A qualitative assessment requires that we consider events or circumstances including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance, changes in management or key personnel, changes in strategy, changes in customers, changes in the composition or carrying amount of a reporting segment’s net assets and changes in our stock price. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair values of our reporting units are greater than the carrying amounts, then a quantitative impairment test does not need to be performed.
If the qualitative assessment indicates a quantitative analysis should be performed or a quantitative analysis is directly elected, we evaluate goodwill for impairment by comparing the fair value of each of our reporting units to its carrying value, including the associated goodwill. To determine the fair values, we use an income approach, along with other relevant market information, derived from a discounted cash flow model to estimate fair value of our reporting units. An impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, if any, would be recognized. The loss recognized would not exceed total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
See Note I - “Goodwill and Intangible Assets, Net” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets - We assess the realizability of our long-lived assets, including definite-lived intangible assets, and to evaluate such assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of such assets (or group of assets) may not be recoverable. Impairment is determined to exist if estimated future undiscounted cash flows are less than carrying value. If an impairment is indicated, assets are written down to their fair value, which is typically determined by a discounted cash flow analysis. Future cash flow projections include assumptions regarding future sales levels and the level of working capital needed to support the assets. We use data developed by business segment management as well as macroeconomic data in making these calculations. There are no assurances that future cash flow assumptions will be achieved. The amount of any impairment then recognized would be calculated as the difference between estimated fair value and carrying value of the asset.
Accrued Warranties - We record accruals for potential warranty claims based on our claim experience. A liability for estimated warranty claims is accrued at the time of sale. The liability is established using historical warranty claims experience for each product sold. Historical claims experience may be adjusted for known design improvements or for the impact of unusual product quality issues. Assumptions are updated for known events that may affect the potential warranty liability. However, actual claims could be higher or lower than amounts estimated, as the amount and value of warranty claims are subject to variation as a result of many factors that cannot be predicted with certainty, including production quality issues, performance of new products, models and technology, changes in weather conditions for product operation, different uses for products and other similar factors.
Defined Benefit Plans - Pension benefits represent financial obligations that will be ultimately settled in the future with employees who meet eligibility requirements. As of December 31, 2020, we maintained an unfunded, nonqualified Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan (the “U.S. SERP”) for certain former U.S. employees. Generally, the U.S. SERP provides a benefit based on average total compensation earned over a participant’s final five years of employment and years of service reduced by benefits earned under any Company retirement program, excluding salary deferrals and matching contributions. In addition, benefits are reduced by Social Security Primary Insurance Amounts attributable to Company contributions.
We maintain defined benefit plans in France, Germany, Italy, India, Switzerland and the U.K. for some of our subsidiaries. The plans in France, Germany, Italy and India are unfunded plans. The plan in the U.K. is frozen. Participation in the German plans is frozen; however, eligible participants are credited with post-freeze service for purposes of determining vesting and the amount of benefits. For our operations in Italy, there are mandatory termination indemnity plans providing a benefit payable upon termination of employment in substantially all cases of termination. We record this obligation based on the mandated requirements. The measure of the current obligation is not dependent on the employees’ future service and therefore is measured at current value. The defined benefit plans in France, India and Switzerland are mandatory benefit plans for all employees.
Plan assets consist primarily of fixed income and equity securities. For non-U.S. funded plans, approximately 74% of the assets are in fixed income securities, 23% are in equity securities and 3% are in real estate securities. These allocations are reviewed periodically and updated to meet the long-term goals of the plans.
Determination of defined benefit pension and post-retirement plan obligations and their associated expenses requires use of actuarial valuations to estimate the benefits employees earn while working, as well as the present value of those benefits. We use the services of independent actuaries to assist with these calculations. Inherent in these valuations are economic assumptions, including expected returns on plan assets, discount rates at which liabilities may be settled, rates of increase of health care costs, rates of future compensation increases as well as employee demographic assumptions such as retirement patterns, mortality and turnover. The actuarial assumptions used may differ materially from actual results due to changing market and economic conditions, higher or lower turnover rates, or longer or shorter life spans of participants. Actual results that differ from the actuarial assumptions used are recorded as unrecognized gains and losses. Unrecognized gains and losses that exceed 10% of the greater of the plan’s projected benefit obligations or the market-related value of assets are amortized to earnings over the shorter of the estimated future service period of the plan participants or the period until any anticipated final plan settlements. The assumptions used in the actuarial models are evaluated periodically and are updated to reflect experience. We believe the assumptions used in the actuarial calculations are reasonable and are within accepted practices in each of the respective geographic locations in which we operate.
Expected long-term rates of return on pension plan assets were 4.00% for the U.K. plan and 2.00% for the Swiss plan at December 31, 2020. Our strategy with regard to the investments in the pension plans is to earn a rate of return sufficient to match or exceed the long-term growth of pension liabilities. The expected rate of return of plan assets represents an estimate of long-term returns on the investment portfolio. These rates are determined annually by management based on a weighted average of current and historical market trends, historical portfolio performance and the portfolio mix of investments. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets at December 31 is used to measure the earnings effects for the subsequent year. The difference between the expected return and the actual return on plan assets affects the calculated value of plan assets and, ultimately, future pension expense (income).
The discount rates were 2.50% for the U.S. SERP and 0.00% to 6.50% with a weighted average of 1.42% for non-U.S. plans at December 31, 2020. The discount rate enables us to estimate the present value of expected future cash flows on the measurement date. The rate used reflects a rate of return on high-quality fixed income investments that match the duration of expected benefit payments at the December 31 measurement date. The discount rate at December 31 is used to measure the year-end benefit obligations and the earnings effects on the subsequent year. Typically, a higher discount rate decreases the present value of benefit obligations.
The U.S. SERP has no expected rate of compensation increase as all participants have retired or have a terminated vested benefit payable in the future. Our U.K. pension plan is frozen so there is no expected rate of compensation increase; however, other non-U.S. plans’ expected rates of compensation increases were 1.00% to 8.00%. The weighted average for all non-U.S. plans of 0.17% at December 31, 2020. These estimated annual compensation increases are determined by management every year and are based on historical trends and market indices.
We have recorded the underfunded status of our defined benefit pension plans as a liability and the unrecognized prior service costs and actuarial gains (losses) as an adjustment to Stockholders’ equity on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The net decrease in the liability and increased funded status of $0.9 million was due primarily to gains incurred on our pension assets partially offset by changes in assumptions from the previous year, primarily decreases in discount rates.
Actual results in any given year will often differ from actuarial assumptions because of demographic, economic and other factors. Market value of plan assets can change significantly in a relatively short period of time. Additionally, the measurement of plan benefit obligations is sensitive to changes in interest rates. As a result, if the equity market declines and/or interest rates decrease, the plans’ estimated benefit obligations could increase, causing an increase in liabilities and a reduction in Stockholders’ Equity.
We expect any future obligations under our plans that are not currently funded will be funded from future cash flows from operations. If our contributions are insufficient to adequately fund the plans to cover our future obligations, or if the performance of assets in our plans does not meet expectations, or if our assumptions are modified, contributions could be higher than expected, which would reduce cash available for our business. Changes in U.S. or foreign laws governing these plans could require additional contributions.
Assumptions used in computing our net pension expense and projected benefit obligation have a significant effect on the amounts reported. A 25 basis point change in each assumption below would have the following effects upon net pension expense and projected benefit obligation, respectively, as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020:
Income Taxes - We estimate income taxes based on enacted tax laws in the various jurisdictions where we conduct business. We recognize deferred income tax assets and liabilities, which represent future tax benefits or obligations of our legal entities. These deferred income tax balances arise from temporary differences due to divergent treatment of certain items for accounting and income tax purposes.
We evaluate our deferred tax assets each period to ensure that estimated future taxable income will be sufficient in character, amount and timing to result in the use of our deferred tax assets. “Character” refers to the type (ordinary income versus capital gain) as well as the source (foreign vs. domestic) of the income we generate. “Timing” refers to the period in which future income is expected to be generated. Timing is important because, in certain jurisdictions, net operating losses (“NOLs”) and other tax attributes expire if not used within an established statutory time frame. Based on these evaluations, we have determined that it is more likely than not that expected future earnings will be sufficient to use most of our deferred tax assets.
We do not provide for income taxes or tax benefits on differences between financial reporting basis and tax basis of our non-U.S. subsidiaries where such differences are reinvested and, in our opinion, will continue to be indefinitely reinvested. If earnings of foreign subsidiaries are not considered indefinitely reinvested, deferred U.S. income taxes, foreign income taxes, and foreign withholding taxes may have to be provided. We do not record deferred income taxes on the temporary difference between the book and tax basis in domestic subsidiaries where permissible. At this time, determination of the unrecognized deferred tax liabilities for temporary differences related to our investment in non-U.S. subsidiaries is not practicable.
Judgments and estimates are required to determine tax expense and deferred tax valuation allowances and in assessing uncertain tax positions. Tax returns are subject to audit and local taxing authorities could challenge tax-filing positions we take. Our practice is to file income tax returns that conform to requirements of each jurisdiction and to record provisions for tax liabilities, including interest and penalties, in accordance with ASC 740, “Income Taxes.” Given the continued changes and complexity in worldwide tax laws, coupled with our geographic scope and size there may be greater exposure to uncertain tax positions. Given the subjective nature of applicable tax laws, results of an audit of some of our tax returns could have a significant impact on our financial statements.
RECENT ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
Please refer to Note A - “Basis of Presentation” in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for a summary of recently issued accounting standards.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We are focused on generating cash and maintaining liquidity (cash and availability under our revolving line of credit) for the efficient operation of our business. At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $670.1 million and undrawn availability under our revolving line of credit of $600 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our available liquidity was stable year-over-year at approximately $1.1 billion primarily due to approximately $130 million of cash provided from disciplined working capital management which was offset by a minimum liquidity requirement of $150 million at December 31, 2020.
Our main sources of funding are cash generated from operations, including cash generated from the sale of receivables, loans from our bank credit facilities and funds raised in capital markets. We have no significant debt maturities until 2023 and we have increased our focus on internal cash flow generation. Our actions to maintain liquidity in 2020 included reducing costs and working capital, delaying certain capital spending projects and the suspension of our share repurchase program and dividend payments. We also amended our revolving credit facility in April 2020 to provide us with additional flexibility to manage the Company. These measures, in conjunction with our expectation to generate approximately $100 million of free cash flow in 2021, will provide us with adequate liquidity to comply with our financial covenants under our bank credit facility, continue to support internal operating initiatives and meet our operating and debt service requirements for at least the next 12 months. See Part II, Item 1A. - “Risk Factors” for a detailed description of the risks resulting from our debt and our ability to generate sufficient cash flow to operate our business.
Our ability to generate cash from operations is subject to numerous factors, including the following:
•The duration and depth of the global economic uncertainty resulting from COVID-19.
•Many of our customers fund their purchases through third-party finance companies that extend credit based on the credit-worthiness of customers and expected residual value of our equipment. Changes either in customers’ credit profile or used equipment values may affect the ability of customers to purchase equipment. There can be no assurance that third-party finance companies will continue to extend credit to our customers as they have in the past.
•As our sales change, the amount of working capital needed to support our business may change.
•Our suppliers extend payment terms to us primarily based on our overall credit rating. Deterioration in our credit rating may influence suppliers’ willingness to extend terms and in turn accelerate cash requirements of our business.
•Sales of our products are subject to general economic conditions, weather, competition, translation effect of foreign currency exchange rate changes, and other factors that in many cases are outside our direct control. For example, during periods of economic uncertainty, our customers have delayed purchasing decisions, which reduces cash generated from operations.
•Availability and utilization of other sources of liquidity such as trade receivables sales programs.
Typically, we have invested our cash in a combination of highly rated, liquid money market funds and in short-term bank deposits with large, highly rated banks. Our investment objective is to preserve capital and liquidity while earning a market rate of interest.
We seek to use cash held by our foreign subsidiaries to support our operations and continued growth plans outside and inside the U.S. through funding of capital expenditures, operating expenses or other similar cash needs of these operations. Most of this cash could be used in the U.S., if necessary, without additional tax cost. Incremental cash repatriated to the U.S. would not be expected to result in material foreign and state tax cost. We will continue to seek opportunities to tax-efficiently mobilize and redeploy funds.
We had free cash flow of $141.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table reconciles Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities to free cash flow (in millions):
(1) Includes $17.8 million of proceeds from sale of capital assets within Proceeds (payments) from disposition of discontinued operations in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Pursuant to terms of our trade accounts receivable factoring arrangements, we sold, without recourse, approximately $406 million and $1,108 million of trade accounts receivable to enhance liquidity during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We also sold approximately $80 million and $226 million of sales-type leases and commercial loans during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Receivable and financial asset sales were down 64% from the prior year period as we maintained strong liquidity levels throughout 2020 resulting in lower reliance on low-cost funding arrangements.
Working capital as a percent of trailing three month annualized net sales was 19.2% at December 31, 2020 which is an improvement over the prior year.
The following tables show the calculation of our working capital in continuing operations and trailing three months annualized sales as of December 31, 2020 (in millions):
On January 31, 2017, we entered into a credit agreement (as amended, the “2017 Credit Agreement”). The 2017 Credit Agreement contains a $400 million senior secured term loan (the “Original Term Loan”). The Original Term Loan portion of the 2017 Credit Agreement bears interest at a rate of LIBOR plus 2.00% with a 0.75% LIBOR floor. On March 7, 2019, we entered into an Incremental Assumption Agreement and Amendment No. 3 (“Amendment No. 3”) to the 2017 Credit Agreement. Amendment No. 3 provided us with an additional term loan (the “2019 Term Loan”) under the 2017 Credit Agreement in the amount of $200 million. The 2019 Term Loan portion of the 2017 Credit Agreement bears interest at a rate of LIBOR plus 2.75% with a 0.75% LIBOR floor (the Original Term Loan together with 2019 Term Loan comprise the “Term Loans” portion of the 2017 Credit Agreement). Net proceeds from the 2019 Term Loan were used to reduce borrowings under the revolving line of credit. On April 23, 2020, we entered into a Loan Modification Agreement and Amendment No. 4 (“Amendment No. 4”) to the 2017 Credit Agreement. The 2017 Credit Agreement contains a $600 million revolving line of credit (the “Revolver”). The 2017 Credit Agreement allows unlimited incremental commitments, which may be extended at the option of existing or new lenders and can be in the form of revolving credit commitments, term loan commitments, or a combination of both, with incremental amounts in excess of $150 million through 2021 ($300 million thereafter) requiring the Company to satisfy a senior secured leverage ratio contained in the 2017 Credit Agreement. Interest rates charged under the Revolver in the 2017 Credit Agreement are subject to adjustment based on our consolidated leverage ratio. Amendment No. 4 extended the term of the Revolver to expire on January 31, 2023. As a result of Amendment No. 4, during 2021, we also obtained financial covenant relief for 2020 and 2021. See Note K - “Long-Term Obligations,” in our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information concerning the 2017 Credit Agreement and Amendment No. 4.
Borrowings under the 2017 Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2020 were $579.9 million, net of discount, on our Term Loans. At December 31, 2020, the weighted average interest rate was 3.00% on our Term Loans. There were no amounts outstanding on our revolving line of credit as of December 31, 2020. In February 2021, we initiated our option to prepay the 2019 Term Loan under the 2017 Credit Agreement prior to its maturity date to reduce our outstanding debt and lower our leverage.
We manage our interest rate risk by maintaining the ratio of fixed and floating rate debt, including use of interest rate derivatives when appropriate. Over the long term, we believe this mix will produce lower interest cost than a purely fixed rate mix while reducing interest rate risk.
Our investment in TFS financial services assets was approximately $114 million, net at December 31, 2020. We remain focused on expanding financing solutions in key markets like the U.S., Europe and China. We also anticipate our continued use of TFS to drive incremental sales by increasing customer financing facilitated through TFS in certain instances. In February 2021, we transferred finance receivables of $89.9 million to TCF National Bank, which qualified for sales treatment under ASC 860. We received $99.4 million cash proceeds from the sale and recognized a net gain of $7.4 million.
In July 2018, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to an additional $300 million of our outstanding shares of common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased 2.5 million shares for $54.6 million under this authorization leaving approximately $141 million available for repurchase under this program. In the first quarter of 2020, our Board of Directors declared a dividend of $0.12 per share, which was paid to our shareholders. In April 2020, we announced that we had suspended further share repurchases and dividend payments for the remainder of 2020. In February 2021, our Board of Directors reinstated our quarterly dividend for 2021 and declared a dividend of $0.12 per share which will be paid on March 19, 2021.
Our ability to access capital markets to raise funds, through sale of equity or debt securities, is subject to various factors, some specific to us and others related to general economic and/or financial market conditions. These include results of operations, projected operating results for future periods and debt to equity leverage. Our ability to access capital markets is also subject to our timely filing of periodic reports with the SEC. In addition, terms of our bank credit facilities, senior notes and senior subordinated notes contain restrictions on our ability to make further borrowings and to sell substantial portions of our assets.
Cash Flows
Cash provided by operations was $225.4 million and $173.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in cash provided by operations was primarily driven by improved working capital efficiency, offset by decreased operating profitability.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $38.5 million, compared to $103.8 million of cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash used in investing activities in the current period relates primarily to capital expenditures. Cash provided by investing activities in the prior period was primarily due to proceeds received from the disposition of Demag and ASV shares, partially offset by capital expenditures.
Cash used in financing activities was $82.8 million and $103.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in cash used in financing activities was primarily due to higher net debt repayments and dividend payments in the prior year, partially offset by higher share repurchases in the current year.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets out our specified contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 (in millions):
(1)Purchase obligations include non-cancellable and cancellable commitments. In many cases, cancellable commitments contain penalty provisions for cancellation.
Long-term debt obligations include expected interest expense. Interest expense is calculated using fixed interest rates for indebtedness that has fixed rates and the implied forward rates for term loan indebtedness as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, our liability for uncertain income tax positions was $3.6 million. The amount of reasonably possible payments in 2021 related to our tax audits worldwide is not significant. Payments may be made in part to mitigate the accrual of interest in connection with income tax audit assessments that may be issued and that we would contest, or may in part be made to settle the matter with tax authorities. Due to the high degree of uncertainty regarding the timing of potential future cash flows associated with remaining liabilities, we are unable to make a reasonable estimate of the amount and period in which these remaining liabilities might be paid.
Additionally, at December 31, 2020, we had outstanding letters of credit that totaled $82.5 million and had issued $143.8 million in credit guarantees of customer financing to purchase equipment.
We maintain defined benefit pension plans for some of our operations in the United States and Europe. It is our policy to fund the retirement plans at the minimum level required by applicable regulations. In 2020, we made cash contributions and payments to the retirement plans of $9.7 million, and we estimate that our retirement plan contributions will be approximately $9.4 million in 2021. Changes in market conditions, changes in our funding levels or actions by governmental agencies may result in accelerated funding requirements in future periods.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
Guarantees
Our customers, from time to time, fund the acquisition of our equipment through third-party finance companies. In certain instances, we may provide a credit guarantee to the finance company by which we agree to make payments to the finance company should the customer default. Our maximum liability is generally limited to our customer’s remaining payments due to the finance company at the time of default. In the event of a customer default, we are generally able to recover and dispose of the equipment at a minimal loss, if any, to us.
We issue, from time to time, residual value guarantees under sales-type leases. A residual value guarantee involves a guarantee that a piece of equipment will have a minimum fair market value at a future date if certain conditions are met by the customer. We are generally able to mitigate some risk associated with these guarantees because maturity of guarantees is staggered, which limits the amount of used equipment entering the marketplace at any one time.
There can be no assurance our historical experience in used equipment markets will be indicative of future results. Our ability to recover losses from our guarantees may be affected by economic conditions in used equipment markets at the time of loss.
See Note O - “Litigation and Contingencies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our guarantees.
CONTINGENCIES AND UNCERTAINTIES
Foreign Exchange and Interest Rate Risk
Our products are sold in over 100 countries around the world and, accordingly, our revenues are generated in foreign currencies, while costs associated with those revenues are only partly incurred in the same currencies. We purchase hedging instruments to manage variability of future cash flows associated with recognized assets or liabilities due to changing currency exchange rates. Primary currencies to which we are exposed are the Euro, British Pound and Australian Dollar. See Risk Factor entitled, “We are subject to currency fluctuations.” in Part I, Item 1A. for further information on our foreign exchange risk.
We manage exposure to interest rates by incurring a mix of indebtedness bearing interest at both floating and fixed rates at inception and maintaining the ratio of floating and fixed rates on this mix of indebtedness using interest rate derivatives when necessary.
See Note J - “Derivative Financial Instruments” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information about our derivatives and