ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This MD&A is intended to assist readers in their analysis of the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and supplemental financial information. It should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K, as well as with the other information contained in this document. Truist’s financial results for 2020 reflect the first full calendar year of operations of the combined Company. Results for 2019 reflect heritage BB&T results prior to the completion of the Merger on December 6, 2019, and Truist results from the Merger closing date forward. For discussion of 2019 results as compared to 2018 results, see "Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Executive Overview
Despite the challenges Truist and its clients faced in 2020, significant progress was made on integration and conversion efforts during the year. Below is an overview on progress in a few key areas.
Integration Efforts
Truist completed the Merger on December 6, 2019, and made significant progress on integration and conversion efforts in 2020. Some milestones include unveiling Truist’s purpose, mission, and values; launching the Truist brand and visual identity; completing the purchase of Truist Center, the new corporate headquarters in Charlotte, NC; launching Truist social media platforms; announcing brand conversions for several business units including Truist Insurance, Truist Securities, and Truist Leadership Institute; launching Truist Foundation and Truist Ventures; beginning early migrations for the mortgage business; and introducing the blended branch program. Recent highlights include:
•Completed the job regrading initiative for all teammates.
•Activated Integrated Relationship Management.
•Migrated correspondent mortgage lenders to the Truist origination ecosystem.
•Executed numerous corporate function integration activities across Audit, Risk, Legal and Finance.
•Truist reaffirmed its commitment to achieving $1.6 billion in net cost saves on a run rate basis by the fourth quarter of 2022.
Supporting Clients
Truist acted swiftly to support clients, teammates and communities in response to the COVID-19 pandemic last year and continues to support these stakeholders. Truist is actively helping clients impacted by COVID-19, providing payment relief assistance for credit cards, personal loans, auto loans, home equity lines of credit, and residential mortgages. Truist was one of the largest lenders of PPP loans in 2020 and remains committed to helping small businesses get access to emergency funds for first and second-draw PPP loans. Truist is working closely with clients, providing resources and guidance to ensure a smooth and efficient experience from application to funding and forgiveness. The carrying value of PPP loans was $11.0 billion as of December 31, 2020.
Supporting Teammates
Through the challenges faced, Truist’s concern for teammates and their families remains a top priority. Truist provided over $100 million in special COVID-19 support to teammates, including bonuses, special reimbursement for childcare and an increase in emergency child- and elder-care benefits, enhanced onsite pay, and steps to enhance wellness and family support. Truist released its first Corporate Social Responsibility report, which included a commitment to increasing the number of racially and ethnically diverse teammates among senior leadership positions from approximately 12% to at least 15%. Truist is also committed to ensuring regular, ongoing pay equity reviews for teammates. On the topic of racial inequity, Truist hosted more than 260 "Days of Understanding" sessions designed to encourage bold dialogue on real world topics in an open, trusting environment. The Company also rolled out enhanced unconscious bias training for teammates and Executive Leadership.
Supporting Communities
In response to COVID-19 in 2020, the Company launched Truist Cares, providing a total of $50 million in philanthropic support to aid charities meeting basic needs, furnishing medical supplies and addressing financial hardships across the nation, and have provided a total of 355 grants to community partners.
Truist is committed to addressing racial and social inequity and has taken a number of actions to expand efforts towards advancing equity, economic empowerment and education for clients, communities and teammates.
42 Truist Financial Corporation
In 2020, Truist provided $78 million to support historically underrepresented communities, including a $40 million initial donation to help establish CornerSquare Community Capital made through the Truist Foundation, Inc. and the Truist Charitable Fund, and approximately $20 million over three years to develop and strengthen partnerships, programs, and scholarships that benefit historically black colleges and universities and their students. The Company increased financial resources for low- and moderate-income communities through a $60 billion Community Benefits Plan from 2020-2022 to support home ownership, small business growth and community revitalization.
Financial Results
Net income available to common shareholders totaled $4.2 billion for 2020, a 38.2% increase from the prior year. On a diluted per common share basis, earnings for 2020 were $3.08, compared to $3.71 for 2019. Truist's results of operations for 2020 produced a return on average assets of 0.90% and a return on average common shareholders' equity of 6.82% compared to prior year ratios of 1.31% and 9.87%, respectively. Results include merger-related and restructuring charges of $860 million ($660 million after-tax) for 2020 compared to $360 million ($285 million after-tax) for 2019, and incremental operating expenses related to the Merger of $534 million ($409 million after-tax) for 2020 compared to $164 million ($127 million after-tax) for 2019. Additionally, the 2020 results include a loss on extinguishment of debt of $235 million ($180 million after-tax) and charitable contributions of $50 million ($38 million after-tax), offset by securities gains of $402 million ($308 million after-tax). The 2019 results include securities losses of $116 million ($90 million after-tax), a reduction in net income available to common shareholders of $46 million arising from the redemption of preferred stock, partially offset by a $14 million after-tax net gain from the sale of residential mortgage loans.
Truist's revenue for 2020 was $22.7 billion. On a TE basis, revenue was $22.8 billion, which represents an increase of $10.2 billion compared to 2019. Net interest income on a TE basis was $14.0 billion, an increase of $6.5 billion compared to the prior year, which reflects a $6.2 billion increase in interest income and a $374 million decrease in interest expense. The increase in net interest income was due primarily to a $152.9 billion increase in average outstanding loans, a $32.6 billion increase in average securities, partially offset by a 78 basis point decrease in earning asset yields.
NIM was 3.22% for 2020, down 20 basis points compared to the prior year. Average earning assets increased $217.2 billion or 100.4%, while average interest-bearing liabilities increased $153.7 billion or 101.8%, and noninterest-bearing deposits increased $59.1 billion or 106.4%. The TE yield on the total loan portfolio for 2020 was 4.33%, down 66 basis points compared to the prior year. The TE yield on the average securities portfolio was 2.09%, down 53 basis points compared to the prior year. The average cost of interest-bearing deposits was 0.32%, down 61 basis points compared to the prior year. The average cost of total deposits was 0.22%, down 42 basis points compared to the prior year.
The provision for credit losses was $2.3 billion, compared to $615 million for the prior year. Net charge-offs were $1.1 billion, compared to $634 million for the prior year. Asset quality ratios were relatively stable at December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year, reflecting diversification benefits of the Merger and effective problem asset resolution. The ratio of the ALLL to net charge-offs was 5.21X for 2020, compared to 2.44X in 2019, reflecting the CECL adoption build, as well as a reserve build in 2020 in connection with COVID-19 and the economic downturn. NPAs increased $703 million year over year, primarily due to PCI loans that would have been classified as nonperforming at December 31, 2019 and loans exiting certain accommodation programs related to the CARES Act.
Noninterest income increased $3.6 billion for the year with nearly all categories of noninterest income being impacted by the Merger. Additional increases in noninterest income were primarily due to higher insurance income driven by improved production levels and acquisitions. Noninterest expense increased $7.0 billion for the year. Excluding merger-related and restructuring charges, incremental operating expenses related to the Merger, the loss on extinguishment of debt, charitable contribution and the impact of an increase of $521 million of amortization expense for intangibles, noninterest expense increased $5.3 billion, primarily reflecting the impact of the Merger.
Truist's total assets at December 31, 2020 were $509.2 billion, an increase of $36.2 billion compared to December 31, 2019, reflecting a $46.1 billion increase in AFS securities, partially offset by an increase in ALLL of $4.3 billion, a decrease in LHFS of $2.3 billion and a decrease in other assets of $1.2 billion.
Total liabilities at December 31, 2020 were $438.3 billion, an increase of $31.8 billion from the prior year, reflecting an increase of $46.4 billion in deposits, partially offset by a decrease of $12.1 billion in short-term borrowings. During 2020, the Company also issued $6.5 billion of senior and subordinated long-term debt.
Total shareholders' equity was $70.9 billion at December 31, 2020, up $4.4 billion compared to the prior year. The increase is due to net income in excess of dividends paid of $1.8 billion and OCI of $1.6 billion. During 2020, Truist issued $3.5 billion in preferred stock, gross of issuance costs, to further strengthen its capital position and redeemed $500 million of series K preferred stock. The increases in shareholders equity were partially offset by a $2.1 billion cumulative effect adjustment related to the adoption of CECL.
Truist Financial Corporation 43
Truist maintained strong capital and liquidity in 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the CET1 ratio was 10.0% and the average LCR was 113%. Truist declared common dividends of $1.80 per share during 2020. The dividend and total payout ratios for 2020 were 58.0% compared to 43.2% for the prior year. In December 2020, Truist’s Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $2.0 billion of the company’s common stock beginning in the first quarter of 2021, consistent with recent FRB capital restriction guidance. In early 2021, Truist declared common dividends of $0.450 per share for the first quarter of 2021.
Key Challenges
Truist's business is dynamic and complex. Consequently, management annually evaluates and, as necessary, adjusts the Company's business strategy in the context of the current operating environment. During this process, management considers the current financial condition and performance of the Company and its expectations for future economic activity from both a national and local market perspective. Achieving key strategic objectives and established long-term financial goals is subject to many uncertainties and challenges. In the opinion of management, the following challenges are the most likely to impact Truist’s near to medium term performance:
•Activating the Company’s culture of striving to make life better for clients, teammates and stakeholders;
•Achieving the benefits from the Merger, including anticipated synergies and cost savings;
•Managing the integration of systems and operations, while safeguarding the Company against external threats;
•Executing the Company’s "T3 strategy" by focusing on personal touch and technology to engender trust and provide distinctive, secure and successful client experiences;
•Driving innovation and remaining attuned to evolving client preferences to succeed in an intensely competitive environment;
•Onboarding and retaining key personnel while maintaining safety protocols to protect clients, teammates and communities; and
•Navigating economic risks and actively managing credit exposures impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
In addition, certain other challenges and unforeseen events could have a near term impact on Truist's financial condition and results of operations. See the sections titled "Forward-Looking Statements" and "Risk Factors" for additional examples of such challenges.
Analysis of Results of Operations
Net Interest Income and NIM
2020 compared to 2019
The net interest margin was 3.22% for the year ended December 31, 2020, down 20 basis points compared to the earlier period. Average earning assets increased $217.2 billion, which primarily reflects a $152.9 billion increase in average total loans and leases, a $32.6 billion increase in average securities, a $28.4 billion increase in average other earning assets and a $3.4 billion increase in interest earning trading assets. Average interest-bearing liabilities increased $153.7 billion. Average interest-bearing deposits increased $131.0 billion, average long-term debt increased $21.0 billion and average short-term borrowings increased $1.7 billion. The significant increases in earnings assets and liabilities are primarily due to the Merger, as well as impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting government stimulus programs.
The yield on the total loan portfolio for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 4.33%, down 66 basis points compared to the earlier period, reflecting the impact of rate decreases and deferred interest for loans granted an accommodation in connection with COVID-19, partially offset by purchase accounting accretion from merged loans. The yield on the average securities portfolio for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 2.09%, down 53 basis points compared to the earlier period primarily due to lower yields on new purchases and higher premium amortization. The average cost of total deposits was 0.22%, down 42 basis points compared to the earlier period. The average cost of interest-bearing deposits was 0.32%, down 61 basis points compared to the earlier period. The average rate on short-term borrowings was 1.35%, down 99 basis points compared to the earlier period. The average rate on long-term debt was 1.75%, down 147 basis points compared to the earlier period. The lower rates on interest-bearing liabilities reflect the lower rate environment. The lower rates on long-term debt also reflect the amortization of the fair value mark on the assumed debt and the issuance of new long-term debt.
As of December 31, 2020, the remaining unamortized fair value marks on the loan and lease portfolio, deposits and long-term debt were $2.4 billion, $19 million and $216 million, respectively. The remaining unamortized fair value mark on loans and leases consists of $1.1 billion for commercial loans and leases and $1.3 billion for consumer loans and leases. These amounts will be recognized over the remaining contractual lives of the underlying instruments or as paydowns occur.
The major components of net interest income and the related annualized yields as well as the variances between the periods caused by changes in interest rates versus changes in volumes are summarized below.
44 Truist Financial Corporation
(1)Yields are stated on a TE basis utilizing federal tax rate. The change in interest not solely due to changes in rate or volume has been allocated based on the pro-rata absolute dollar amount of each. Interest income includes certain fees, deferred costs and dividends.
(2)Total securities include AFS and HTM securities.
(3)Includes cash equivalents, interest-bearing deposits with banks, FHLB stock and other earning assets.
(4)Fees, which are not material for any of the periods shown, are included for rate calculation purposes. NPLs are included in the average balances.
(5)Excludes basis adjustments for fair value hedges.
(6)Total deposit costs were 0.22%, 0.64% and 0.41% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Truist Financial Corporation 45
Provision for Credit Losses
2020 compared to 2019
The provision for credit losses was $2.3 billion, compared to $615 million for the earlier period. The increase in the provision for credit losses
reflects the significant builds to the allowance for credit losses in the first and second quarters of the year due to increased economic stress associated with the pandemic and specific consideration of its impact on certain industries, as well as uncertainty related to performance after the expiration of relief packages and COVID-19, increased loan balances arising from the Merger and the effect of applying the CECL methodology in the current period compared to the incurred loss methodology in the earlier period.
Net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1.1 billion, compared to $634 million for the earlier period. Higher net charge-offs also contributed to the increase in the provision for credit losses and primarily reflect increases as a result of the Merger. The net charge-off rate of 0.36% for the year ended December 31, 2020 was down four basis points compared to the earlier period.
Noninterest Income
Noninterest income is a significant contributor to Truist's financial results. Management focuses on diversifying its sources of revenue to reduce Truist's reliance on traditional spread-based interest income, as certain fee-based activities are a relatively stable revenue source during periods of changing interest rates.
2020 compared to 2019
Noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $3.6 billion compared to the earlier period. The current period includes $402 million of net securities gains primarily from the sale of non-agency MBS in the second quarter of 2020 and agency MBS in the third quarter of 2020. The prior period includes $116 million of net securities losses from the sale of agency MBS. Excluding the net securities gains and losses, noninterest income increased $3.1 billion, with nearly all categories of noninterest income being impacted by the Merger. In addition to the impacts from the Merger, insurance income increased $121 million due to strong production and acquisitions. Service charges on deposits were up despite reduced overdraft incident rates and increased refunds and waivers to support clients impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Residential mortgage banking income was up due to strong production and refinance activity driven by the lower rate environment, partially offset by lower valuations of the mortgage servicing rights and increased amortization driven by higher prepayments speeds. Investment banking and trading income was up, but was negatively impacted by credit valuation adjustments on the derivatives portfolio primarily related to the decline in interest rates and widening of credit spreads.
46 Truist Financial Corporation
Noninterest Expense
The following table provides a breakdown of Truist's noninterest expense:
2020 compared to 2019
Noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was up $7.0 billion compared to the earlier period. Merger-related and restructuring charges and other incremental operating expenses related to the Merger increased $500 million and $370 million, respectively. In addition, the current period was impacted by $235 million of losses on the early extinguishment of long-term debt and a $50 million charitable contribution to the Truist Charitable Fund. Excluding the items mentioned above and the impact of an increase of $521 million of amortization expense for intangibles, noninterest expense increased $5.3 billion, primarily reflecting the impact of the Merger. In addition to the impacts of the Merger, operating costs were elevated due to COVID-19, which resulted in approximately $250 million of expenses compared to the earlier period. This was primarily related to additional on-site pay and bonuses for certain teammates, net occupancy costs for enhanced cleaning and teammate support expenses. Additionally, personnel expenses increased as a result of the completion of a post-Merger reevaluation of job grades that resulted in additional salaries, incentives and equity-based compensation expenses.
Merger-Related and Restructuring Charges
Truist has incurred certain merger-related and restructuring charges, which include:
•severance and personnel-related costs or credits;
•occupancy and equipment charges or credits, which relate to costs or gains associated with lease terminations, obsolete equipment write-offs and the sale of duplicate facilities and equipment;
•professional services, which relate to legal and investment banking advisory fees and other consulting services pertaining to restructuring initiatives or transactions;
•systems conversion and related charges, which represent costs to integrate the entity's information technology systems;
•other merger-related and restructuring charges or credits, which include expenses necessary to convert and combine the acquired branches and operations of merged companies, direct media advertising related to the mergers and acquisitions, asset and supply inventory write-offs, and other similar charges; and
•write-offs related to exiting certain businesses.
Merger-related and restructuring accruals are established when the costs are incurred or once all requirements for a plan to dispose of or outsource certain business functions have been approved by management. Merger and restructuring accruals are re-evaluated periodically and adjusted as necessary. The remaining accruals at December 31, 2020 are generally expected to be utilized within one year, unless they relate to specific contracts that expire later.
The 2020 merger-related and restructuring costs primarily reflect higher charges as a result of the Merger, including costs for severance and other benefits and costs related to exiting facilities, while the 2019 costs primarily reflect branch closures and other restructuring initiatives.
Truist Financial Corporation 47
The following table presents a summary of merger-related and restructuring charges and the related accruals:
(1)The Company recognized $825 million and $298 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to the Merger. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had an accrual of $50 million and $76 million related to the Merger, respectively. The remaining expense and accrual relate to other restructuring activities.
Segment Results
See "Note 21. Operating Segments" for additional disclosures related to Truist's operating segments, the internal accounting and reporting practices used to manage these segments and financial disclosures for these segments, including additional details related to results of operations.
2020 compared to 2019
Consumer Banking and Wealth
Consumer Banking and Wealth had 2,781 banking offices at December 31, 2020, a decrease of 177 offices compared to December 31, 2019. The decrease in offices was driven primarily by the consolidation of 104 branches leveraging the blended branch program strategy beginning in the fourth quarter, as well as 30 branches divested in the third quarter.
Consumer Banking and Wealth net income was $3.1 billion for 2020, an increase of $1.3 billion, or 73.3%, compared to 2019. Segment net interest income increased $4.2 billion primarily due to the Merger. Noninterest income increased $1.7 billion due primarily to the Merger and higher residential mortgage income as a result of the lower rate environment driving mortgage production through refinance activity, partially offset by lower residential mortgage servicing income driven by higher prepayment and an MSR fair value adjustment in 2020. The allocated provision for credit losses increased $491 million primarily due to the Merger. Noninterest expense increased $3.8 billion primarily due to operating expenses and amortization of intangibles related to the Merger and impacts from COVID-19 in 2020. The allocated provision for income taxes increased $378 million due primarily to higher pre-tax income.
Consumer Banking and Wealth average loans and leases held for investment increased $67.9 billion, or 94.9%, compared to 2019 driven primarily by the Merger. Average loan and leases HFI for residential mortgage, home equity and direct lending and indirect auto loans increased $19.8 billion, or 62.4%, $14.2 billion, or 111.6%, and $12.5 billion, or 99.7%, respectively.
Consumer Banking and Wealth average total deposits increased $119.5 billion, or 120.4%, compared to 2019 driven primarily by the Merger and COVID-19 stimulus impacts. Average noninterest-bearing deposits, money market and savings accounts, and time deposits increased $32.5 billion, or 128.7%, $49.8 billion, or 114.8%, and $11.4 billion, or 91.6%, respectively.
48 Truist Financial Corporation
Corporate and Commercial Banking
Corporate and Commercial Banking net income was $2.3 billion for 2020, an increase of $530 million, or 29.6%, compared to 2019. Segment net interest income increased $2.4 billion, primarily due to the Merger. Noninterest income increased $1.3 billion primarily due to the Merger and other increases in investment banking income, partially offset by losses in trading income primarily related to the decline in interest rates and widening of credit spreads. The allocated provision for credit losses increased $1.2 billion primarily due to the Merger as well as increased economic stress associated with the pandemic. Noninterest expense increased $1.9 billion primarily due to operating expenses and amortization of intangibles related to the Merger in 2020. The allocated provision for income taxes increased $103 million due primarily to higher pre-tax income.
Corporate and Commercial Banking average loans and leases held for investment increased $81.6 billion, or 95.9%, compared to 2019 driven primarily by the Merger and growth in corporate loans. Average loans and leases HFI for the Corporate and Institutional Group increased $47.4 billion, or 157.0%, driven primarily by the Merger and growth in commercial and industrial loans, while average loans and leases HFI for Commercial Community Banking increased $34.2 billion, or 62.3%, driven primarily by the Merger, and growth in commercial and industrial loans, and PPP impact.
Corporate and Commercial Banking average total deposits increased $68.0 billion, or 102.7%, compared to 2019 driven primarily by the Merger and COVID-19 stimulus impacts. Average interest checking, noninterest-bearing deposits and money market and savings increased $37.0 billion, or 291.4%, $26.1 billion, or 88.2%, and $4.3 billion, or 18.9%, respectively.
Insurance Holdings
Insurance Holdings net income was $407 million in 2020, an increase of $89 million, or 28.0%, compared to 2019. Noninterest income increased $129 million primarily due to organic growth in commercial property and casualty and other insurance commissions, along with acquisitions made in 2020.
Other, Treasury and Corporate
Other, Treasury and Corporate generated a net loss of $1.3 billion in 2020, compared to a net loss of $637 million in 2019. Segment net interest income decreased $158 million primarily due to a decline in funding charges on assets to other segments relative to the funding credit provided on liabilities. Noninterest income increased $447 million due primarily to the gain on sale of securities in 2020, partially offset by lower income related to certain post-employment benefits. The allocated provision for credit losses increased $27 million primarily due to the provision for unfunded commitments. Noninterest expense increased $1.2 billion primarily due to operating expenses related to the Merger, higher merger-related charges and incremental operating expenses related to the Merger, loss on early extinguishment of long-term debt, and elevated COVID-related expenses in 2020. The benefit for income taxes increased $306 million primarily due to a higher pre-tax loss.
Truist Financial Corporation 49
Analysis of Financial Condition
Investment Activities
Truist’s Board-approved investment policy is carried out by the MRLCC, which meets regularly to review the economic environment and establish investment strategies. The MRLCC also has much broader responsibilities, which are discussed in the "Market Risk Management" section in this MD&A.
Investment strategies are reviewed by the MRLCC based on the interest rate environment, balance sheet mix, actual and anticipated loan demand, funding opportunities and the overall interest rate sensitivity of the Company. In general, the goals of the investment portfolio are: (i) to provide sufficient liquid assets to meet unanticipated deposit and loan fluctuations and overall funds management objectives; (ii) to provide eligible securities to secure public funds, trust deposits and other borrowings; and (iii) to earn an optimal return on funds invested commensurate with meeting the requirements of (i) and (ii) and consistent with the Company’s risk appetite.
Truist Bank invests in securities allowable under bank regulations. These securities may include obligations of the U.S. Treasury, U.S. government agencies, GSEs (including MBS), bank eligible obligations of any state or political subdivision, non-agency MBS, structured notes, bank eligible corporate obligations (including corporate debentures), commercial paper, negotiable CDs, bankers acceptances, mutual funds and limited types of equity securities.
The securities portfolio totaled $120.8 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $74.7 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase was due primarily to a $47.0 billion increase in Agency MBS. The increase in the Agency MBS portfolio includes the redeployment of excess liquidity. During 2020, the Company sold non-Agency MBS, and sold and reinvested residential Agency MBS. These sales were the primary drivers for the gains of $402 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, approximately 1.9% of the securities portfolio was variable rate, compared to 3.6% as of December 31, 2019. The effective duration of the securities portfolio was 4.0 years at December 31, 2020, compared to 4.7 years at December 31, 2019.
U.S. Treasury, GSE and Agency MBS represented 99.6% of the total securities portfolio as of December 31, 2020, compared to 98.7% as of the prior year end.
50 Truist Financial Corporation
The following table presents the securities portfolio at December 31, 2020, segregated by major category of security holdings with ranges of maturities and average yields disclosed:
(1)Yields represent interest computed under the effective interest method on a TE basis using the federal income tax rate and the amortized cost of the securities.
(2)For purposes of the maturity table, MBS, which are not due at a single maturity date, have been included in maturity groupings based on the contractual maturity. The expected life of MBS will differ from contractual maturities because borrowers may have the right to call or prepay the underlying mortgage loans.
Lending Activities
Truist strives to meet the credit needs of its clients while pursuing a balanced strategy of loan profitability, loan growth and loan quality. Management believes that this purpose can best be accomplished by building strong client relationships over time and developing in-depth local market knowledge. The Company employs strict underwriting criteria governing the degree of risk assumed and the diversity of the loan portfolio in terms of type, industry and geographical concentration.
Truist lends to a diverse client base that is geographically dispersed to mitigate concentration risk arising from local and regional economic downturns. International loans were immaterial as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. The following discussion provides additional information on the Company's loan and lease portfolios. Refer to the "Risk Management" section for a discussion of the credit risk management policies used to manage the portfolios.
Commercial Loan and Lease Portfolio
Commercial loans and leases represent the largest category of the Company's loan and lease portfolio. Commercial Community Banking generally targets small-to-middle market businesses with annual sales between $2 million and $500 million, while CIB provides lending solutions to large commercial clients. The commercial loan and lease portfolio consists of lending to public and private business clients and is composed of commercial and industrial, owner occupied, equipment leasing and financing and commercial real estate, as well as government and institutional financing.
Truist Financial Corporation 51
In accordance with the Company's lending policy, each commercial loan undergoes a detailed underwriting process. Commercial loans are typically priced with an interest rate tied to market indices, such as the prime rate, LIBOR, or SOFR and are individually monitored and reviewed for deterioration in the ability of the client to repay the loan. The majority of Truist's commercial loans are secured by real estate, business equipment, inventories and other types of collateral.
Residential Mortgage Loan Portfolio
Truist Bank offers various types of fixed and adjustable-rate loans for the purpose of constructing, purchasing or refinancing residential properties. Truist primarily originates conforming mortgage loans and higher quality jumbo and construction-to-permanent loans for owner-occupied properties. Conforming loans are loans that are underwritten in accordance with the underwriting standards set forth by FNMA and FHLMC. They are generally collateralized by one-to-four-family residential real estate, typically have loan-to-collateral value ratios of 80% or less at origination, or have mortgage insurance as required by investors and are made to borrowers in good credit standing.
Risks associated with mortgage lending include interest rate risk, which is mitigated through the sale of a substantial portion of conforming fixed-rate loans in the secondary mortgage market and an effective MSR hedging process. Credit risk is managed through rigorous underwriting procedures and mortgage insurance. The right to service the loans and receive servicing income is generally retained when conforming loans are sold. Management believes that the retention of mortgage servicing is a relationship driver in retail banking and a part of management's strategy to establish long-term client relationships and offer high quality client service. Truist also purchases residential mortgage loans from correspondent originators. The loans purchased from third party originators are subject to substantially the same underwriting and risk-management criteria as loans originated internally.
Residential Home Equity and Direct Loan Portfolio
The residential home equity and direct loan portfolio is composed of a wide variety of secured and unsecured loans offered through Truist’s branch network, as well as loans originated by LightStream, Truist’s national online consumer lending division. Loans originated through the Truist branch network include revolving home equity lines of credit secured by first or second liens on residential real estate and certain other secured and unsecured lending marketed to qualifying clients and other creditworthy candidates in Truist’s market areas. LightStream provides fixed-rate, unsecured lending to consumers with strong credit through its proprietary online loan origination system.
Indirect Auto Loan Portfolio
The indirect auto portfolio primarily includes secured indirect installment loans to consumers for the purchase of new and used automobiles. The indirect auto portfolio also includes nonprime and near prime automobile finance. Such loans are originated through approved franchised and independent dealers throughout the Truist market area and nationally through Regional Acceptance Corporation. These loans are relatively homogeneous and no single loan is individually significant in terms of its size and potential risk of loss. Indirect auto loans are subject to rigorous lending policies and procedures and are underwritten with note amounts and credit limits that are consistent with the Company's risk philosophy. In addition to its normal underwriting due diligence, Truist uses application systems and scoring systems to help underwrite and manage the credit risk in its indirect auto portfolio.
Indirect Other Loan Portfolio
The indirect other portfolio includes secured indirect installment loans to consumers for the purchase of new and used boats and recreational vehicles. The indirect other portfolio also includes small ticket consumer lending related to the purchase of power sports equipment. These loans are relatively homogeneous and no single loan is individually significant in terms of its size and potential risk of loss. These loans are subject to similar rigorous lending policies and procedures as the indirect auto loan portfolio. The indirect other loan portfolio also includes other indirect lending to consumers to finance home improvements, furniture purchases, and certain elective health-care services. These loans are originated in accordance with strict underwriting criteria as determined by Truist.
Student Loan Portfolio
The student loan portfolio is composed of government guaranteed student loans and certain private student loans originated by third parties. The government guarantee mitigates substantially all of the risk related to principal and interest repayment for this component of the portfolio. Private student loans were purchased from third party originators with credit enhancements that partially mitigate the Company’s credit exposure.
52 Truist Financial Corporation
Credit Card Loan Portfolio
The credit card portfolio consists of the outstanding balances on credit cards. Truist markets credit cards to its existing client base and does not solicit cardholders through nationwide programs or other forms of mass marketing. Such balances are generally unsecured and actively managed.
PCI
Prior to the adoption of CECL, the PCI balance included loans acquired with credit deterioration subsequent to origination as well as loans that were formerly covered by loss sharing agreements. In connection with the adoption of CECL, all loans previously in the PCI portfolio became PCD loans and were transferred to their respective portfolios.
Refer to "Note 5. Loans and ACL" for additional information.
The following table summarizes the loan portfolio:
Loans and leases HFI were $299.7 billion at December 31, 2020, down $108 million compared to 2019.
Commercial loans increased $7.3 billion during 2020. The growth in the commercial portfolio was primarily in commercial and industrial loans and reflects PPP loan originations, which was partially offset by lower utilization of commercial lines. Truist served as the fourth largest PPP lender in 2020. The carrying value of PPP loans was $11.0 billion as of December 31, 2020. Additionally, within the commercial and industrial portfolio, Truist experienced growth in loans from mortgage warehouse lending due to the decline in rates and increased refinance activity. Growth in commercial portfolios was partially offset by a decline in dealer floor plan lending and the transfer of $1.0 billion of certain loans and leases to held for sale related to the decision to exit a small ticket loan and lease portfolio.
Consumer loans decreased $3.2 billion during 2020 primarily due to refinance activity resulting in a decline in residential mortgages and residential home equity and direct loans. This was partially offset by an increase in indirect auto due to expanded client offerings and an improving credit environment.
Credit card loans decreased $780 million during 2020 due to lower business and consumer spending as a result of COVID-19.
LHFS decreased $2.3 billion during 2020 primarily due to the sale of loans that had been placed in LHFS after the close of the Merger and the branch divestiture in connection with the Merger, partially offset by the transfer of $1.0 billion to LHFS due to the decision to exit a small ticket loan and lease portfolio.
Truist Financial Corporation 53
The following table presents a summary of the commercial loan portfolio, segregated by contractual maturities and interest rate terms. Determinations of maturities are based on contractual terms. Truist's credit policy typically does not permit automatic renewal of loans. At the scheduled maturity date (including balloon payment date), the client generally must request a new loan to replace the matured loan and execute either a new note or note modification with rate, terms and conditions negotiated at that time.
Certain residential mortgage loans have an initial period where the borrower is only required to pay the periodic interest. After the interest-only period, the loan will require the payment of both interest and principal over the remaining term. The outstanding balances of variable rate residential mortgage loans in the interest-only phase were approximately $358 million and $392 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
The following table presents the composition of average loans and leases for each of the last five quarters:
Average loans and leases held for investment for the fourth quarter of 2020 were $302.9 billion, down $7.6 billion compared to the third quarter of 2020.
Average commercial loans decreased $5.4 billion, primarily in commercial and industrial loans due to paydowns on commercial lines. This was partially offset by growth in mortgage warehouse lending, dealer floor plan lending and governmental finance loans. The carrying value of PPP loans was down $1.4 billion compared to September 30, 2020, which resulted in a decline of $304 million in average PPP loans compared to the average for the third quarter of 2020. In addition, average commercial loans were impacted by the transfer of $1.0 billion of certain loans and leases to held for sale, which resulted in a decline in the average balance of $323 million compared to the third quarter of 2020.
Average consumer loans decreased $2.2 billion primarily due to seasonally lower loan production and refinance activity resulting in a decline in residential mortgages and residential home equity and direct loans. This was partially offset by an increase in indirect auto loans.
54 Truist Financial Corporation
COVID-19 Lending Activities
The CARES Act created the PPP, which has temporarily expanded the Small Business Administration’s business loan guarantee program. The CARES Act additionally includes provisions that were designed to encourage financial institutions to support borrowers impacted by COVID-19. These modifications are generally not considered a TDR as disclosed in "Note 1. Basis of Presentation." Payment relief assistance includes forbearance, deferrals, extension and re-aging programs, along with certain other modification strategies. The following table provides a summary of accommodations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Excludes approximately 46,000 of active accommodations related to government guaranteed loans totaling approximately $2.3 billion.
(2)Calculated based on accommodation count; includes loans that are less than 30 days past due.
The following table provides a summary of the Company’s exposure related to loans that have exited accommodations:
The following table provides a summary of exposure to industries that management believes are most vulnerable in the current economic environment. These selected industry exposures represent 9.0% of loans held for investment at December 31, 2020. Truist is actively managing these portfolios and will continue to make underwriting or risk acceptance adjustments as appropriate. These exposures decreased $0.8 billion or 2.6% during the fourth quarter. In addition, management is closely monitoring its leveraged lending and small secured real estate portfolios which comprised 3.1% and 1.5% of loans held for investment at December 31, 2020, respectfully.
Truist Financial Corporation 55
Asset Quality
The following tables summarize asset quality information for each of the last five years:
(1)The past due status of loans that received a deferral under the CARES Act is generally frozen during the deferral period.
56 Truist Financial Corporation
Nonperforming assets totaled $1.4 billion at December 31, 2020, up $703 million compared to December 31, 2019 primarily from the adoption of CECL, which resulted in the discontinuation of the pool-level accounting for PCI loans and replaced that with a loan-level evaluation for nonaccrual status. As of December 31, 2019, there was approximately $500 million of PCI loans that would have been classified as nonperforming had the Company evaluated accrual status on a loan level basis. The remaining increase in nonperforming loans held for investment is primarily in commercial and industrial loans and an increase in nonperforming mortgage loans due to loans exiting certain accommodation programs related to the CARES Act. Nonperforming loans and leases represented 0.44% of total loans and leases, up 26 basis points compared to December 31, 2019.
Performing TDRs were up $381 million compared to the prior year primarily in residential mortgage, lease financing and indirect auto loans. This increase primarily reflects the application of acquisition accounting related to the Merger, which resulted in the removal of the TDR designation on all loans that were restructured by SunTrust prior to the Merger date.
Loans 90 days or more past due and still accruing totaled $2.0 billion at December 31, 2020, relatively flat compared to the prior year. In connection with the discontinuation of pool level accounting for PCI loans, loans 90 days or more past due and still accruing decreased as loan-level evaluations resulted in certain loans being placed in nonaccrual status. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in government guaranteed student loans. Additionally, residential mortgage loans 90 days or more past due increased primarily due to the repurchase of delinquent government guaranteed loans. The ratio of loans 90 days or more past due and still accruing as a percentage of loans and leases was 0.67% at December 31, 2020, an increase of 1 basis point from the prior year. Excluding government guaranteed and PCI loans, the ratio of loans 90 days or more past due and still accruing as a percentage of loans and leases was 0.04% at December 31, 2020, up 1 basis point from December 31, 2019.
Loans 30-89 days past due and still accruing totaled $2.2 billion at December 31, 2020, relatively flat compared to the prior year. Loans 30-89 days past due reflects a decrease in PCI loans, offset by a corresponding increase in the portfolios where these loans were transferred in connection with the implementation of CECL. The ratio of loans 30-89 days or more past due and still accruing as a percentage of loans and leases was 0.74% at December 31, 2020, flat compared to the prior year.
Problem loans include NPLs and loans that are 90 days or more past due and still accruing as disclosed in Table 22. In addition, for the commercial portfolio segment, loans that are rated special mention or substandard performing are closely monitored by management as potential problem loans. Refer to "Note 5. Loans and ACL" for additional disclosures related to these potential problem loans.
Applicable ratios are annualized.
(1)Includes LHFS.
(2)This asset quality ratio has been adjusted to remove the impact of government guaranteed mortgage, student and PPP loans, and PCI, as applicable. Management believes the inclusion of such assets in this asset quality ratio results in distortion of this ratio such that it might not be reflective of asset collectability or might not be comparable to other periods presented or to other portfolios that do not have government guarantees or were not impacted by PCI accounting requirements.
Truist Financial Corporation 57
The following table presents activity related to NPAs:
(1)For 2020, includes approximately $500 million of loans previously classified as PCI that would have otherwise been nonperforming as of December 31, 2019.
(2)Includes charge-offs and losses recorded upon sale of $139 million and $228 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(3)Includes charge-offs and losses recorded upon sale of $132 million and $39 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
TDRs occur when a borrower is experiencing, or is expected to experience, financial difficulties in the near term and a concession has been granted to the borrower. As a result, Truist works with borrowers to prevent further difficulties and to improve the likelihood of recovery on a loan. To facilitate this process, a concessionary modification that would not otherwise be considered may be granted, resulting in classification of the loan as a TDR. In accordance with the CARES Act, Truist implemented loan modification programs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in order to provide borrowers with flexibility with respect to repayment terms. Payment relief assistance provided by Truist includes forbearance, deferrals, extension and re-aging programs, along with certain other modification strategies. The Company adopted certain provisions of the CARES Act and other regulatory guidance that provide relief from the requirement to apply TDR accounting to (1) certain modifications of federally backed mortgages upon request from the borrower, and (2) certain modifications of other non-federally backed mortgages for borrowers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic that were less than 30 days past due at December 31, 2019. Refer to "Note 1. Basis of Presentation" for Truist’s policy related to TDRs and COVID-19 loan modifications.
TDRs identified by SunTrust prior to the Merger date are not included in Truist's TDR disclosure because all such loans were recorded at fair value and a new accounting basis was established as of the Merger date. Subsequent modifications are evaluated for potential treatment as TDRs in accordance with Truist's accounting policies.
The following table provides a summary of performing TDR activity:
(1)Includes scheduled principal payments, prepayments and payoffs of amounts outstanding.
(2)Represent loans that no longer meet the requirements necessary to reflect the loan in accruing status.
TDR classification may be removed due to the passage of time if the loan: (i) did not include a forgiveness of principal or interest, (ii) has performed in accordance with the modified terms (generally a minimum of six months), (iii) was reported as a TDR over a year-end reporting period, and (iv) reflected an interest rate on the modified loan that was no less than a market rate at the date of modification. TDR classification may also be removed for an accruing loan upon the occurrence of a subsequent non-concessionary modification granted at market terms and within current underwriting guidelines. In connection with consumer TDRs, a NPL will be returned to accruing status when (i) the borrower has resumed paying the full amount of the scheduled contractual interest and principal payments, (ii) management concludes that all principal and interest amounts contractually due (including arrearages) are reasonably assured of repayment, and (iii) there is a sustained period of repayment performance, generally a minimum of six months.
58 Truist Financial Corporation
The following table provides further details regarding the payment status of TDRs outstanding at December 31, 2020:
(1)Past due performing TDRs are included in past due disclosures and nonperforming TDRs are included in NPL disclosures.
Truist Financial Corporation 59
ACL
Activity related to the ACL is presented in the following tables:
The ACL totaled $6.2 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $1.9 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase in the allowance for credit losses was primarily due to the adoption of CECL. Upon adoption, the Company recorded a $3.1 billion increase in the allowance for credit losses, including $2.8 billion that was charged to retained earnings before tax, and $378 million related to the gross up for PCD loans. The remaining increase in the allowance for credit losses primarily reflects deteriorated economic conditions. As of December 31, 2020, the allowance for loan and lease losses was 1.95% of loans and leases held for investment. The allowance for credit losses includes $5.8 billion for loans and leases and $364 million for the reserve for unfunded commitments.
At December 31, 2020, the allowance for loan and lease losses was 4.39 times nonperforming loans and leases held for investment, compared to 3.41 times at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, the allowance for loan and lease losses was 5.21 times annualized net charge-offs, compared to 2.44 times at December 31, 2019.
60 Truist Financial Corporation
Net charge-offs during 2020 totaled $1.1 billion, up $485 million compared to the prior year. The increase in net charge-offs primarily reflects the Merger. As a percentage of average loans and leases, annualized net charge-offs were 0.36%, down four basis points compared to the prior year. Current year net charge-offs include $97 million of charge-offs related to the implementation of CECL, which required a gross-up of loan carrying values in connection with the establishment of an allowance on PCD loans. Management performed a comprehensive review of PCD assets during the year and concluded in certain situations that a charge-off was required. Excluding these additional charge-offs, net charge-offs would have been an annualized 0.33% of average loans and leases for 2020, down seven basis points compared to the prior year.
The following table presents an allocation of the ALLL. The entire amount of the allowance is available to absorb losses occurring in any category of loans and leases.
Truist monitors the performance of its home equity loans and lines secured by second liens similarly to other consumer loans and utilizes assumptions specific to these loans in determining the necessary ALLL. Truist also receives notification when the first lien holder, whether Truist or another financial institution, has initiated foreclosure proceedings against the borrower. When notified that the first lien is in the process of foreclosure, Truist obtains valuations to determine if any additional charge-offs or reserves are warranted. These valuations are updated at least annually thereafter.
Truist has limited ability to monitor the delinquency status of the first lien, unless the first lien is held or serviced by Truist. As a result, using migration assumptions that are based on historical experience and adjusted for current trends, Truist estimates the volume of second lien positions where the first lien is delinquent and adjusts the ALLL to reflect the increased risk of loss on these credits. Finally, Truist also provides additional reserves for second lien positions when the estimated combined current loan to value ratio for the credit exceeds 100%. As of December 31, 2020, Truist held or serviced the first lien on 30.6% of its second lien positions.
Truist Financial Corporation 61
Other Assets
The components of Other assets are presented in the following table:
Funding Activities
Deposits are the primary source of funds for the Company's lending and investing activities. Scheduled payments and maturities from portfolios of loans and investment securities also provide a stable source of funds. FHLB advances, other secured borrowings, Federal funds purchased and other short-term borrowed funds, as well as long-term debt issued through the capital markets, all provide supplemental liquidity sources. Funding activities are monitored and governed through Truist's overall ALM process under the governance and oversight of the MRLCC, which is further discussed in the "Market Risk Management" section in MD&A. The following section provides a brief description of the various sources of funds.
Deposits
Deposits are obtained principally from individuals and businesses within Truist's branch network and include noninterest-bearing checking accounts, interest-bearing checking accounts, savings accounts, money market deposit accounts, CDs and IRAs. Deposit account terms vary with respect to the minimum balance required, the time period the funds must remain on deposit and service charge schedules. Interest rates paid on specific deposit types are determined based on (i) competitor deposit rates, (ii) the anticipated amount and timing of funding needs, (iii) the availability and cost of alternative sources of funding, and (iv) anticipated future economic conditions and interest rates. Deposits are attractive sources of funding because of their stability and relative cost.
The following table presents deposits for each of the last five years:
Deposits totaled $381.1 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $46.4 billion from December 31, 2019. The growth in deposits reflects solid growth in all non-time deposit categories resulting from pandemic-related client behavior and government stimulus programs. Time deposits decreased primarily due to maturities of wholesale negotiable certificates of deposit and higher-cost personal and business accounts.
62 Truist Financial Corporation
The following table presents average deposits for each of the last five quarters:
Average deposits for the fourth quarter of 2020 were $375.3 billion, an increase of $3.1 billion compared to the prior quarter. Average noninterest-bearing and interest checking deposit growth was strong for the fourth quarter of 2020 driven by anticipated seasonal inflows in addition to continued growth resulting from pandemic-related client behavior. Average time deposits decreased primarily due to maturity of wholesale negotiable certificates of deposit and higher-cost personal and business accounts.
Average noninterest-bearing deposits represented 33.9% of total deposits for the fourth quarter of 2020, compared to 33.3% for the prior quarter. The cost of average total deposits was 0.07% for the fourth quarter, down three basis points compared to the prior quarter. The cost of average interest-bearing deposits was 0.11% for the fourth quarter, down four basis points compared to the prior quarter.
The following table summarizes the maturities of time deposits above $100,000:
Borrowings
The types of short-term borrowings that have been, or may be, used by the Company include Federal funds purchased, securities sold under repurchase agreements, master notes, commercial paper, short-term bank notes and short-term FHLB advances. Short-term borrowings fluctuate based on the Company's funding needs. While deposits remain the primary source for funding loan originations, management uses short-term borrowings as a supplementary funding source for loan growth and other balance sheet management purposes. The following table summarizes certain information for the past three years with respect to short-term borrowings excluding trading liabilities, hedges, and collateral in excess of derivative exposure:
At December 31, 2020, short-term borrowings totaled $6.1 billion, a decrease of $12.1 billion compared to December 31, 2019, due primarily to a decrease of $10.8 billion in short-term FHLB advances. These borrowing sources were replaced with deposit funding.
Truist Financial Corporation 63
Average short-term borrowings were $10.1 billion, or 2.4% of total funding for 2020, as compared to $8.5 billion, or 4.1% for the prior year. The increase in the average amount was due to the Merger. Average short-term borrowings decreased as a percentage of funding sources due to strong deposit growth.
Long-term debt provides funding and, to a lesser extent, regulatory capital, and primarily consists of senior and subordinated notes issued by Truist and Truist Bank. Long-term debt totaled $39.6 billion at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1.7 billion compared to December 31, 2019. During 2020, the Company issued $4.8 billion of senior notes with interest rates from 1.125% to 1.95% maturing in 2023 to 2030, $500 million in floating rate senior notes maturing in 2023 and $1.3 billion of subordinated notes with an interest rate of 2.25% maturing in 2030. These issuances were partially offset by the redemption of $4.6 billion of senior notes during 2020 and a decrease of $3.3 billion in long-term FHLB advances. FHLB advances represented 2.2% of total outstanding long-term debt at December 31, 2020, compared to 10.0% at December 31, 2019. The average cost of long-term debt was 1.75% for the year ended December 31, 2020, down 147 basis points compared to the same period in 2019. Truist entered into $20 billion of FHLB advances during 2020 to build liquidity and ensure the Company was able to meet the funding needs of its clients. As market conditions stabilized and deposits increased, these advances were repaid and the Company recognized a loss of $235 million on the early extinguishment of debt. The repayment of these advances improved net interest income, the net interest margin and the leverage ratios.
Shareholders' Equity
Total shareholders' equity was $70.9 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $4.4 billion from December 31, 2019. This increase includes the gross issuance of $3.5 billion of preferred stock during the year, $4.5 billion in net income available to common shareholders and an increase of $1.6 billion in AOCI, which was partially offset by $2.1 billion related to the adoption of CECL and $2.7 billion for common and preferred dividends. In addition, Truist redeemed $500 million of its Series K preferred stock during 2020. Truist's book value per common share at December 31, 2020 was $46.52, compared to $45.66 at December 31, 2019.
Refer to "Note 12. Shareholders' Equity" for additional disclosures related to preferred stock issuances.
Risk Management
Truist maintains a comprehensive risk management framework supported by people, processes and systems to identify, measure, monitor, manage and report significant risks arising from its exposures and business activities. Effective risk management involves optimizing risk and return while operating in a safe and sound manner and promoting compliance with applicable laws and regulations. The Company’s risk management framework promotes the execution of business strategies and objectives in alignment with its risk appetite.
Truist has developed and employs a risk taxonomy that further guides business functions in identifying, measuring, responding to, monitoring and reporting on possible exposures to the organization. The risk taxonomy drives internal risk conversations and enables Truist to clearly and transparently communicate to stakeholders the level of potential risk the Company faces, both presently and in the future, and the Company’s position on managing it to acceptable levels.
Truist is committed to fostering a culture that supports identification and escalation of risks across the organization. All teammates are responsible for upholding the Company’s purpose, mission, and values, and are encouraged to speak up if there is any activity or behavior that is inconsistent with the Company’s culture. The Truist code of ethics guides the Company’s decision making and informs teammates on how to act in the absence of specific guidance.
Truist seeks an appropriate return for the risk taken in its business operations. Risk-taking activities are evaluated and prioritized to identify those that present attractive risk-adjusted returns, while preserving asset value and capital.
Compensation decisions take into account a teammate's adherence to, and successful implementation of, Truist's risk values and associated policies and procedures. The Company's compensation structure supports its core values and sound risk management practices in an effort to promote judicious risk-taking behavior.
Truist employs a comprehensive change management program to manage the risks associated with integrating heritage BB&T and heritage SunTrust. The Board and Executive Leadership oversee the change management program, which is designed to ensure key decisions are reviewed and that there is appropriate oversight of integration activities.
Truist's purpose, mission and values are the foundation for the risk management framework utilized at Truist and therefore serve as the basis on which the risk appetite and risk strategy are built. Truist's RMO provides independent oversight and guidance for risk-taking across the enterprise. In keeping with the belief that consistent values drive long-term behaviors, Truist's RMO has established the following risk values which guide teammates’ day-to-day activities:
64 Truist Financial Corporation
•Managing risk is the responsibility of every teammate.
•Proactively identifying risk and managing the inherent risks of their businesses is the responsibility of the business units.
•Managing risk with a balanced approach which includes quality, profitability, and growth.
•Measuring what is managed and managing what is measured.
•Utilizing sound and consistent risk management practices.
•Thoroughly analyzing risk quantitatively and qualitatively.
•Realizing lower cost of capital from high quality risk management.
Truist places significant emphasis on risk management oversight and maintains a separate Board-level Risk Committee, which assists the Board in its oversight of the Company’s risk management function. The Committee is responsible for approving and periodically reviewing the Company’s risk management framework and risk management policies as well as monitoring the Company’s risk profile, approving risk appetite statements, and providing input to management regarding Truist's risk appetite and risk profile.
The RMO is led by the CRO and is responsible for overseeing the identification, measurement, monitoring, management and reporting of risk. The CRO has direct access to the Board to communicate any risk issues (current or emerging) as well as the performance of the risk management activities throughout the enterprise.
As illustrated below, the risk management framework is supported by three lines of defense. The following figure describes the roles of the three lines of defense:
Truist’s Risk Governance framework is designed to provide comprehensive Board and Executive Leadership risk oversight, maintaining a committee governance structure that is designed to ensure alignment and execution of the risk management framework. The committee structure provides a mechanism to allow for efficient aggregation and escalation of risk information from the BUs up to the risk programs, Executive Leadership and ultimately the Board.
Truist Financial Corporation 65
The executive level committees include the ERC, ECRPMC, MRLCC, EBPCC, TMC and DC, each of which is chaired by a member of Executive Leadership. These committees provide oversight of each of the primary risk types.
The ERC establishes a fully integrated view of risks across the company, provides broad strategic oversight of all risk types, and oversees corporate-wide strategies for identifying, assessing, controlling, measuring, monitoring and reporting risk at the enterprise level.
The ERC is responsible for maintaining an effective risk management framework and monitoring its adoption and execution across the enterprise. The ERC is chaired by the CRO and its membership includes all members of Executive Leadership and the General Auditor.
The principal types of inherent risk include market, credit, liquidity, compliance, strategic, reputational, operational and technology risks. The following is a discussion of these risks.
Market Risk
Market risk is the risk to current or anticipated earnings, capital or economic value arising from changes in the market value of portfolios, securities, or other financial instruments. Market risk results from changes in the level, volatility or correlations among financial market risk factors or prices, including interest rates, credit spreads, foreign exchange rates, equity, and commodity prices.
Effective management of market risk is essential to achieving Truist's strategic financial objectives. Truist's most significant market risk exposure is to interest rate risk in its balance sheet; however, market risk also results from underlying product liquidity risk, price risk and volatility risk in Truist's BUs. Interest rate risk results from differences between the timing of rate changes and the timing of cash flows associated with assets and liabilities (re-pricing risk); from changing rate relationships among different yield curves affecting bank activities (basis risk); from changing rate relationships across the spectrum of maturities (yield curve risk); and from interest-related options inherently embedded in bank products (options risk).
The primary objectives of effective market risk management are to minimize adverse effects from changes in market risk factors on net interest income, net income and capital and to offset the risk of price changes for certain assets and liabilities recorded at fair value. At Truist, market risk management also includes the enterprise-wide IPV function.
66 Truist Financial Corporation
Interest Rate Market Risk
As a financial institution, Truist is exposed to interest rate risk both on its assets and on its liabilities. Since interest rate changes are out of the control of any private sector institution, Truist actively manages its interest rate risk exposure through the strategic repricing of its assets and liabilities, taking into account the volumes, maturities and mix, with the goal of keeping net interest margin as stable as possible. Truist primarily uses three methods to measure and monitor its interest rate risk: (i) simulations of possible changes to net interest income over the next two years based on gradual changes in interest rates; (ii) analysis of interest rate shock scenarios; and (iii) analysis of economic value of equity based on changes in interest rates.
The Company’s simulation model takes into account assumptions related to prepayment trends, using a combination of market data and internal historical experiences for deposits and loans, as well as scheduled maturities and payments and the expected outlook for the economy and interest rates. These assumptions are reviewed and adjusted monthly to reflect changes in current interest rates compared to the rates applicable to Truist’s assets and liabilities. The model also considers Truist's current and prospective liquidity position, current balance sheet volumes and projected growth and/or contractions, accessibility of funds for short-term needs and capital maintenance.
Deposit betas are an important assumption in the interest rate risk modeling process. Truist applies an average deposit beta (the sensitivity of deposit rate changes relative to market rate changes) of approximately 50% to its non-maturity interest-bearing deposit accounts when determining its interest rate sensitivity. Non-maturity, interest-bearing deposit accounts include interest checking accounts, savings accounts and money market accounts that do not have a contractual maturity. Truist also regularly conducts sensitivity analyses on other key variables, including noninterest-bearing deposits, to determine the impact these variables could have on the Company’s interest rate risk position. The predictive value of the simulation model depends upon the accuracy of the assumptions, but management believes that it provides helpful information for the management of interest rate risk.
The following table shows the effect that the indicated changes in interest rates would have on net interest income as projected for the next 12 months assuming a gradual change in interest rates as described below.
(1)The Down 25 and 50 rates are floored at one basis point and may not reflect Down 25 and 50 basis points for all rate indices.
Truist has established parameters related to interest rate sensitivity measures that prescribe a maximum impact on net interest income under different interest rate scenarios that would result in an escalation to the Board. The following parameters and interest rate scenarios are considered Truist's primary measures of interest rate risk:
•Maximum impact on net interest income of 7.5% for the next 12 months assuming a 25 basis point change in interest rates each quarter for four quarters; and a
•Maximum impact on net interest income of 10% for an immediate 100 basis point parallel change in rates.
This interest rate shock analysis is designed to create an outer bound of acceptable interest rate risk.
Management considers how the interest rate risk position could be impacted by changes in balance sheet mix. Liquidity in the banking industry has been very strong during the current economic cycle. Much of this liquidity increase has resulted in growth in noninterest-bearing demand deposits. Consistent with the industry, Truist has seen a significant increase in this funding source. The behavior of these deposits is one of the most important assumptions used in determining the interest rate risk position of Truist. A decrease in the amount of these deposits in the future would reduce the asset sensitivity of Truist’s balance sheet because the Company would increase interest-bearing funds to offset the loss of this advantageous funding source.
The following table shows the results of Truist's interest-rate sensitivity position assuming the loss of demand deposits and an associated increase in managed rate deposits under various scenarios. For purposes of this analysis, Truist modeled the incremental beta of managed rate deposits for the replacement of the demand deposits at 100%.
Truist Financial Corporation 67
(1)The base scenario is equal to the annualized hypothetical percentage change in net interest income at December 31, 2020 as presented in the preceding table.
Truist also uses an EVE analysis to focus on longer-term projected changes in asset and liability values given potential changes in interest rates. This measure allows Truist to analyze interest rate risk that falls outside the net interest income simulation period. The EVE model is a discounted cash flow of the portfolio of assets, liabilities and derivative instruments. The difference in the present value of assets minus the present value of liabilities is defined as EVE.
The following table shows the effect that the indicated changes in interest rates would have on EVE:
Truist uses financial instruments including derivatives to manage interest rate risk related to securities, commercial loans, MSRs and mortgage banking operations, long-term debt and other funding sources. During October 2020, Truist initiated a new investment securities fair value hedging program, using fixed interest rate swaps to hedge prepayable securities. Truist also uses derivatives to facilitate transactions on behalf of its clients and as part of associated hedging activities. As of December 31, 2020, Truist had derivative financial instruments outstanding with notional amounts totaling $322.9 billion, with an associated net fair value of $3.3 billion. See "Note 19. Derivative Financial Instruments" for additional disclosures.
LIBOR in its current form was anticipated to no longer be available after 2021. For most tenors of U.S. dollar LIBOR, subject to the results of a consultation period ending January 2021, the administrator of LIBOR is considering extending publication until June 30, 2023. Tenors used infrequently by Truist, including one week and two month U.S. dollar LIBOR, are still anticipated to cease publication at December 31, 2021, based on this new guidance. Truist has U.S. dollar LIBOR-based contracts that extend beyond June 30, 2023. To prepare for the transition to an alternative reference rate, management has formed a cross-functional project team to address the LIBOR transition. The project team has performed an assessment to identify the potential risks related to the transition from LIBOR to a new index. The project team provides updates to Executive Leadership and the Board.
Contract fallback language for existing loans and leases is under review and certain contracts will need updated provisions for the transition. Current fallback language used for new, renewed, and modified contracts is generally consistent with ARRC recommendations. Updates to current fallback language will be evaluated according to new regulatory guidance for the extension of timelines for the transition and expectations for production of U.S. dollar LIBOR contracts during 2021. Truist continues to manage the impact of these contracts and other financial instruments, systems implications, hedging strategies, and related operational and market risks on established project plans for business and operational readiness for the transition. Market risks associated with this change are dependent on the alternative reference rates available and market conditions at transition. For a further discussion of the various risks associated with the potential cessation of LIBOR and the transition to alternative reference rates, refer to the section titled "Item1A. Risk Factors." In 2020, Truist began offering SOFR-based lending solutions to wholesale and consumer clients, and entered into SOFR-based derivative contracts. Truist expects SOFR to become a more commonly-used pricing benchmark across the industry. Truist continues to evaluate SOFR for additional product offerings and other alternative reference rates as replacements for LIBOR.
Market risk from trading activities
As a financial intermediary, Truist provides its clients access to derivatives, foreign exchange and securities markets, which generate market risks. Trading market risk is managed using a comprehensive risk management approach, which includes measuring risk using VaR, stress testing and sensitivity analysis. Risk metrics are monitored against a suite of limits on a daily basis at both the trading desk level and at the aggregate portfolio level, which is intended to ensure that exposures are in line with Truist's risk appetite.
Truist is also subject to risk-based capital guidelines for market risk under the Market Risk Rule.
68 Truist Financial Corporation
Covered Trading Positions
Covered positions subject to the Market Risk Rule include trading assets and liabilities, specifically those held for the purpose of short-term resale or with the intent of benefiting from actual or expected short-term price movements, or to lock in arbitrage profits. Truist’s trading portfolio of covered positions results primarily from market making and underwriting services for the Company’s clients, as well as associated risk mitigating hedging activity. The trading portfolio, measured in terms of VaR, consists primarily of four sub-portfolios of covered positions: (i) credit trading, (ii) fixed income securities, (iii) interest rate derivatives and (iv) equity derivatives. As a market maker across different asset classes, Truist’s trading portfolio also contains other sub-portfolios, including foreign exchange, loan trading, and commodity derivatives; however, these portfolios do not generate material trading risk exposures.
Valuation policies, procedures, and methodologies exist for all covered positions. Additionally, trading positions are subject to independent price verification. See "Note 19. Derivative Financial Instruments," "Note 18. Fair Value Disclosures," and "Critical Accounting Policies" herein for discussion of valuation policies, procedures and methodologies.
Securitizations
As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate market value of on-balance sheet securitization positions subject to the Market Risk Rule was not material. Consistent with the Market Risk Rule requirements, the Company performs pre-purchase due diligence on each securitization position to identify the characteristics including, but not limited to, deal structure and the asset quality of the underlying assets, that materially affect valuation and performance. Securitization positions are subject to Truist’s comprehensive risk management framework, which includes daily monitoring against a suite of limits. There were no off-balance sheet securitization positions during the reporting period.
Correlation Trading Positions
The trading portfolio of covered positions did not contain any correlation trading positions as of December 31, 2020.
VaR-Based Measures
VaR measures the potential loss of a given position or portfolio of positions at a specified confidence level and time horizon. Truist utilizes a historical VaR methodology to measure and aggregate risks across its covered trading positions. Prior to the integration of the two institutional broker dealer businesses to form Truist Securities in the third quarter of 2020, Truist operated two historical VaR models and the aggregate company-wide VaR across the systems was determined additively with no benefit of diversification. The heritage BB&T VaR model was retired following the formation of Truist Securities. Following the formation of Truist Securities, VaR is calculated on a consolidated basis using the Truist VaR engine. For risk management purposes, the VaR calculation is based on a historical simulation approach and measures the potential trading losses using a one-day holding period at a one-tail, 99% confidence level. For Market Risk Rule purposes, the Company calculates VaR using a 10-day holding period and a 99% confidence level. Due to inherent limitations of the VaR methodology, such as the assumption that past market behavior is indicative of future market performance, VaR is only one of several tools used to measure and manage market risk. Other tools used to actively manage market risk include stress testing, profit and loss attribution, and stop loss limits.
The trading portfolio’s VaR profile is influenced by a variety of factors, including the size and composition of the portfolio, market volatility and the correlation between different positions. A portfolio of trading positions is typically less risky than the sum of the risk from each of the individual sub-portfolios, because, under normal market conditions, risk within each category partially offsets the exposure to other risk categories. The following table summarizes certain VaR-based measures for both the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The increase from the prior year was mainly due to the integration of the heritage SunTrust trading business and the market volatility due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As illustrated in the tables below, the inclusion of volatility levels observed in March 2020 in the 12-month VaR historic look-back window led to a convergence between VaR and Stressed VaR measures.
Truist Financial Corporation 69
Stressed VaR-based measures
Stressed VaR, another component of market risk capital, is calculated using the same internal models as used for the VaR-based measure. Stressed VaR is calculated over a ten-day holding period at a one-tail, 99% confidence level and employs a historical simulation approach based on a continuous twelve-month historical window selected to reflect a period of significant financial stress for the Company’s trading portfolio. The following table summarizes Stressed VaR-based measures:
The increase from the prior year in stressed VaR-based measures was due to the integration of heritage SunTrust trading business after the Merger and the market volatility due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Specific Risk Measures
Specific risk is a measure of idiosyncratic risk that could result from risk factors other than broad market movements (e.g. default, event risks). The Market Risk Rule provides fixed risk weights under a standardized measurement method while also allowing a model-based approach, subject to regulatory approval. Truist utilizes the standardized measurement method to calculate the specific risk component of market risk regulatory capital. As such, incremental risk capital requirements do not apply.
VaR Model Backtesting
In accordance with the Market Risk Rule, the Company evaluates the accuracy of its VaR model through daily backtesting by comparing aggregate daily trading gains and losses (excluding fees, commissions, reserves, net interest income, and intraday trading) from covered positions with the corresponding daily VaR-based measures generated by the model.
There were seven company-wide VaR backtesting exceptions during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, which led to a sudden and significant repricing of instruments in financial markets during the first and second quarters of 2020, as well as an increase in market volatility and deterioration in overall market liquidity. In accordance with established policy and procedure, all company-wide VaR backtesting exceptions are thoroughly reviewed in the context of VaR model use and performance. Following such reviews, Truist determined that the VaR model performed in line with expectations and that the significant moves in underlying market risk factors caused by the COVID-19 pandemic would not typically have been captured within the 1-day VaR measure.
70 Truist Financial Corporation
Model Risk Management
MRM is responsible for the independent model validation of all decision tools and models including trading market risk models. The validation activities are conducted in accordance with MRM policy, which incorporates regulatory guidance related to the evaluation of model conceptual soundness, ongoing monitoring and outcomes analysis. As part of ongoing monitoring efforts, the performance of all trading risk models are reviewed regularly to preemptively address emerging developments in financial markets, assess evolving modeling approaches, and to identify potential model enhancement.
Stress Testing
The Company uses a comprehensive range of stress testing techniques to help monitor risks across trading desks and to augment standard daily VaR and other risk limits reporting. The stress testing framework is designed to quantify the impact of extreme, but plausible, stress scenarios that could lead to large unexpected losses. Stress tests include simulations for historical repeats and hypothetical risk factor shocks. All trading positions within each applicable market risk category (interest rate risk, equity risk, foreign exchange rate risk, credit spread risk, and commodity price risk) are included in the Company's comprehensive stress testing framework. Management reviews stress testing scenarios on an ongoing basis and makes updates, as necessary, which is intended to ensure that both current and emerging risks are captured appropriately. Management also utilizes stress analyses to support the Company’s capital adequacy assessment standards. See the "Capital" section of this MD&A for additional discussion of capital adequacy.
Credit Risk
Credit risk is the risk to current or anticipated earnings or capital arising from the default, inability or unwillingness of a borrower, obligor, or counterparty to meet the terms of any financial obligation to Truist or otherwise perform as agreed. Credit risk exists in all activities where success depends on the performance of a borrower, obligor, or counterparty. Credit risk arises when Truist funds are extended, committed, invested, or otherwise exposed through actual or implied contractual agreements, whether on or off-balance sheet. Credit risk increases when the credit quality of an issuer whose securities or other instruments the bank holds deteriorates.
Truist has established the following general practices to manage credit risk:
•limiting the amount of credit that individual lenders may extend to a borrower;
•establishing a process for credit approval accountability;
•careful initial underwriting and analysis of borrower, transaction, market and collateral risks;
•ongoing servicing and monitoring of individual loans and lending relationships;
•continuous monitoring of the portfolio, market dynamics and the economy; and
•periodically reevaluating the Company's strategy and overall exposure as economic, market and other relevant conditions change.
Truist Financial Corporation 71
The following discussion describes the underwriting procedures and overall risk management of Truist's lending function.
Underwriting Approach
The loan portfolio is a primary source of profitability and risk; therefore, proper loan underwriting is critical to Truist's long-term financial success. Truist's underwriting approach is designed to define acceptable combinations of specific risk-mitigating features that promote credit relationships that conform to Truist's risk philosophy. Provided below is a summary of the most significant underwriting criteria used to evaluate new loans and loan renewals:
•Cash flow and debt service coverage - cash flow adequacy is a necessary condition of creditworthiness, meaning that loans must either be clearly supported by a borrower's cash flow or, if not, must be justified by secondary repayment sources.
•Secondary sources of repayment - alternative repayment funds are a significant risk-mitigating factor as long as they are liquid, can be easily accessed, and provide adequate resources to supplement the primary cash flow source.
•Value of any underlying collateral - loans are generally secured by the asset being financed. Because an analysis of the primary and secondary sources of repayment is the most important factor, collateral, unless it is liquid, does not justify loans that cannot be serviced by the borrower's normal cash flows.
•Overall creditworthiness of the client, taking into account the client's relationships, both past and current, with Truist and other lenders - Truist's success depends on building lasting and mutually beneficial relationships with clients, which involves assessing their financial position and background.
•Level of equity invested in the transaction - in general, borrowers are required to contribute or invest a portion of their own funds prior to any loan advances.
Refer to the "Lending Activities" section in this MD&A for a discussion of each loan and lease portfolio.
Liquidity Risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that (i) Truist will be unable to meet its obligations as they come due because of an inability to obtain adequate funding (funding liquidity risk), or (ii) Truist cannot easily unwind or offset specific exposures without significantly lowering market prices because of inadequate market depth or market disruptions (market liquidity risk).
Compliance Risk
Compliance risk is the risk to current or anticipated earnings or capital arising from violations of laws, rules or regulations, or from non-conformance with prescribed practices, internal policies and procedures or ethical standards. This risk exposes Truist to fines, civil monetary penalties, payment of damages and the voiding of contracts. Compliance risk can result in diminished reputation, reduced franchise or enterprise value, limited business opportunities and lessened expansion potential.
Strategic Risk
Strategic risk is the risk of financial loss, diminished stakeholder confidence, or negative impact to human capital resulting from ineffective strategy setting and execution, adverse business decisions, or lack of responsiveness to changes in the banking industry and operating environment. Truist is committed to fulfilling its overall strategic objectives by selecting business strategies and operating businesses in a manner consistent with achieving profitability/earnings growth and maintaining strong confidence and trust with its key stakeholder constituencies.
Reputation Risk
Reputation risk is the risk to current or anticipated earnings, capital, enterprise value, the Truist brand, and public confidence arising from negative publicity or public opinion, whether real or perceived, regarding Truist's business practices, products, services, transactions, or other activities undertaken by Truist, its representatives, or its partners. A negative reputation may impair Truist's relationship with clients, teammates, communities or shareholders, and it is often a residual risk that arises when other risks are not managed properly.
Operational Risk
Operational risk is the risk to current or anticipated earnings or capital arising from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from external events. It includes legal risk, which is the risk of loss arising from defective transactions, litigation or claims made, or the failure to adequately protect company-owned assets. An operational loss occurs when an event results in a loss or reserve originating from operational risk.
72 Truist Financial Corporation
Model Risk
Model risk is the risk to current or anticipated earnings or capital from decisions based on incorrect or misused model outputs. Truist uses models for many purposes, including the valuation of financial positions, estimation of credit losses, and the measurement of risk. Valuation models are used to value certain financial instruments for which quoted prices may not be readily available. Valuation models are also used as inputs for VaR, the estimation of VaR itself, regulatory capital, stress testing and the ACL. Models are owned by the applicable BUs, who are responsible for the development, implementation and use of their models. Oversight of these functions is performed by the MRM, which is a component of the RMO. Once models have been approved, model owners are responsible for the maintenance of an appropriate operating environment and must monitor and evaluate the performance of the models on a recurring basis. Models are updated in response to changes in portfolio composition, industry and economic conditions, technological capabilities and other developments.
MRM manages model risk in a holistic manner through a suite of model governance and model validation activities. The risk of each model is assessed and classified into various risk tiers. Additionally, MRM maintains an enterprise-wide model inventory containing relevant model information. Regarding model validation, MRM utilizes internal validation analysts and managers with skill sets in predictive modeling to perform detailed reviews of model development, implementation and conceptual soundness. On certain occasions, the MRM will also engage external parties to assist with validation efforts. Once in a production environment, MRM assesses a model’s performance on a periodic basis through ongoing monitoring reviews. MRM tracks issues that have been identified during model validation or through ongoing monitoring, and engages with model owners to ensure their timely remediation. MRM gauges model risk utilizing a collection of key risk indicators, which are periodically reported to relevant committees, including but not limited to, the Model Risk Management Committee as well as the Board Risk Committee. MRM will also present model risk topics to the Board Risk Committee as necessary.
Merger Integration Risk
The Truist Merger Program was designed to ensure successful integration following the Merger through strong governance practices and controls, with processes, metrics and reporting exemplifying a strong risk culture. The core Truist Merger Program structure consists of key stakeholders from each line of business. Integration activities and risk mitigation are monitored through established workgroups and Truist Merger Program leadership, with oversight and escalation into the Merger Oversight Committee (as the primary committee), TMC and Board Technology Committee.
Technology Risk
Technology risk is the business risk associated with the use, ownership, operation, involvement, influence and adoption of information technology across the Company. Truist has defined and adopted a technology risk framework that provides the foundation for technology risk strategy, program and oversight and defines key objectives, operating model components, risk domains and capabilities to manage this risk.
Digital technology is constantly evolving, and new and unforeseen threats and actions by others may disrupt operations or result in losses beyond Truist’s risk control thresholds. Truist maintains a comprehensive risk-based information security / cybersecurity framework implemented through people, processes, and technology whereby Truist actively monitors and evaluates threats, events, and the performance of its business operations and continually adapts its risk mitigation activities accordingly.
Truist's framework aligns with those of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, the International Standards Organization 27000 series, the IT Governance Institute, and the Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology, as well as conforms with the requirements and guidance from applicable regulatory authorities, including the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council. In addition, Truist’s framework, which includes internally and externally focused capabilities, drives the development and implementation of Truist’s holistic data security strategy that is designed to reduce risk while enabling Truist’s corporate business objectives.
Truist has built an organization with dedicated, skilled talent to operationalize Truist’s cybersecurity strategy. The cybersecurity strategy is enabled by continuous enhancement of Truist’s multilayered defenses including advanced capabilities for early and rapid cyber threat identification, detection, protection, response, and recovery. Truist participates in the federally recognized financial sector information sharing organization structure, known as the Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis Center as a key part of the Company’s cyber threat intelligence and response programs, as well as other industry organizations and initiatives that promote industry best practices such as harmonized cybersecurity standards, cyber readiness, and secure consumer financial data sharing.
To further mitigate the risks presented by an evolving cyber threat landscape, Truist provides data protection guidance to clients and promotes data protection awareness and accountability through mandatory teammate training. Truist conducts scenario-driven test exercises simulating impacts and consequences developed through analysis of real-world technology incidents as well as known and anticipated cyber threats. These exercises are designed to assess the viability of Truist’s crisis response and management programs and provide the basis for continuous improvement.
Truist Financial Corporation 73
Truist’s cybersecurity risk program is overseen by Executive Leadership and the Board. Regular updates on the status of the cybersecurity risk program, including information security risks and incidents, emerging threats, and control environment, are aggregated and escalated to Executive Leadership and the Board. Additionally, Truist has a Cyber Incident Response Team that manages significant cyber-specific events with escalation up to Executive Leadership and the Board. Truist’s framework requires annual exercises at a minimum to test Truist’s preparedness. The Board devotes significant time and attention to its oversight of cyber security risk and approves related information security policies. Although Truist has invested substantial resources to manage and reduce cybersecurity risk, it is not possible to completely eliminate this risk. Truist obtains insurance that protects against certain losses, expenses, and damages associated with cybersecurity risk. See Item 1A, "Risk Factors," for additional information regarding cybersecurity risk.
Liquidity
Liquidity represents the continuing ability to meet funding needs, including deposit withdrawals, repayment of borrowings and other liabilities, and funding of loan commitments. In addition to the level of liquid assets, such as cash, cash equivalents and AFS securities, other factors affect the ability to meet liquidity needs, including access to a variety of funding sources, maintaining borrowing capacity, growing core deposits, loan repayment and the ability to securitize or package loans for sale.
Truist monitors the ability to meet client demand for funds under both normal and stressed market conditions. In considering its liquidity position, management evaluates Truist's funding mix based on client core funding, client rate-sensitive funding and national markets funding. In addition, management evaluates exposure to rate-sensitive funding sources that mature in one year or less. Management also measures liquidity needs against 30 days of stressed cash outflows for Truist and Truist Bank. To ensure a strong liquidity position and compliance with regulatory requirements, management maintains a liquid asset buffer of cash on hand and highly liquid unencumbered securities. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, Truist's liquid asset buffer, as a percent of total assets, was 20.2% and 16.5%, respectively.
The LCR rule directs large U.S. banking organizations to hold unencumbered high-quality liquid assets sufficient to withstand projected 30-day total net cash outflows, each as defined under the LCR rule. As of January 1, 2020, Truist is subject to the Category III reduced LCR requirements. Truist's average LCR was 113% for the three months ended December 31, 2020, well above the regulatory minimum of 100%.
Parent Company
The Parent Company serves as the primary source of capital for the operating subsidiaries. The Parent Company's assets consist primarily of cash on deposit with Truist Bank, equity investments in subsidiaries, advances to subsidiaries, and notes receivable from subsidiaries. The principal obligations of the Parent Company are payments on long-term debt. The main sources of funds for the Parent Company are dividends and management fees from subsidiaries, repayments of advances to subsidiaries, and proceeds from the issuance of equity and long-term debt. The primary uses of funds by the Parent Company are investments in subsidiaries, advances to subsidiaries, dividend payments to common and preferred shareholders, retirement of common stock, and payments on long-term debt.
See "Note 22. Parent Company Financial Information" for additional information regarding dividends from subsidiaries and debt transactions.
Access to funding at the Parent Company is more sensitive to market disruptions. Therefore, Truist prudently manages cash levels at the Parent Company to cover a minimum of one year of projected cash outflows which includes unfunded external commitments, debt service, common and preferred dividends and scheduled debt maturities, without the benefit of any new cash inflows. Truist maintains a significant buffer above the projected one year of cash outflows. In determining the buffer, Truist considers cash requirements for common and preferred dividends, unfunded commitments to affiliates, serving as a source of strength to Truist Bank, and being able to withstand sustained market disruptions that could limit access to the capital markets. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Parent Company had 43 months and 29 months, respectively, of cash on hand to satisfy projected cash outflows, and 22 months and 20 months, respectively, when including the payment of common stock dividends.
Truist Bank
Truist carefully manages liquidity risk at Truist Bank. Truist Bank's primary source of funding is client deposits. Continued access to client deposits is highly dependent on public confidence in the stability of Truist Bank and its ability to return funds to clients when requested.
Truist Bank maintains a number of diverse funding sources to meet its liquidity requirements. These sources include unsecured borrowings from the capital markets through the issuance of senior or subordinated bank notes, institutional CDs, overnight and term Federal funds markets, and retail brokered CDs. Truist Bank also maintains access to secured borrowing sources including FHLB advances, repurchase agreements, and the FRB discount window. At December 31, 2020, Truist Bank had approximately $198.7 billion of available secured borrowing capacity, which represents approximately 9.4 times the amount of wholesale funding maturities in one-year or less. In addition to secured borrowing sources, Truist had excess eligible cash at the Federal Reserve Bank of $13.4 billion at December 31, 2020.
74 Truist Financial Corporation
The ability to raise funding at competitive prices is affected by the rating agencies' views of the Parent Company's and Truist Bank's credit quality, liquidity, capital and earnings. Management meets with the rating agencies on a regular basis to discuss current outlooks. In April 2020, DBRS revised its outlook for Truist and Truist Bank from "positive" to "stable," citing economic deterioration related to COVID-19. DBRS affirmed all other ratings for Truist and Truist Bank. Additionally, Fitch revised its outlook for Truist and Truist Bank from "stable" to "negative," also citing pandemic-related economic deterioration. Fitch downgraded Truist’s subordinated debt to A-, and upgraded Truist’s preferred stock to BBB, in order to align these ratings to its recently revised bank rating methodology.
In July 2020, Fitch completed the implementation of its revised bank rating methodology. As a result, Fitch downgraded Truist’s senior unsecured debt to A and affirmed Truist Bank’s senior unsecured and subordinated debt ratings. This rating action taken by Fitch was solely a function of implementing its revised bank rating methodology and did not reflect a change in Fitch’s current or expected view of Truist’s or Truist Bank’s credit fundamentals.
The ratings for Truist and Truist Bank by the major rating agencies are detailed in the table below:
Truist has a contingency funding plan designed to ensure that liquidity sources are sufficient to meet ongoing obligations and commitments, particularly in the event of a liquidity contraction. This plan is designed to examine and quantify the organization's liquidity under various "stress" scenarios. Additionally, the plan provides a framework for management and other critical personnel to follow in the event of a liquidity contraction or in anticipation of such an event. The plan addresses authority for activation and decision making, liquidity options, and the responsibilities of key departments in the event of a liquidity contraction.
Management believes current sources of liquidity are adequate to meet Truist's current requirements and plans for continued growth. See "Note 9. Other Assets and Liabilities," "Note 11. Borrowings" and "Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies" for additional information regarding outstanding balances of sources of liquidity and contractual commitments and obligations.
Truist Financial Corporation 75
Contractual Obligations, Commitments, Contingent Liabilities and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The following table presents Truist's contractual obligations by payment date as of December 31, 2020. The payment amounts represent amounts contractually due. The table excludes liabilities recorded where management cannot reasonably estimate the timing of any payments that may be required. UTBs, which represent a reserve for tax positions taken or expected to be taken, which ultimately may not be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities, have been excluded from the table below since the ultimate amount and timing of any future tax settlements are uncertain. Refer to "Note 14. Income Taxes" for additional details related to UTBs.
(1)Amounts include imputed interest of $5 million related to finance leases.
(2)Based on estimated payment dates.
(3)Includes accrued interest and future contractual interest obligations. Variable rate payments are based upon the rate in effect at December 31, 2020.
(4)Represents obligations to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding. Many of the purchase obligations have terms that are not fixed and determinable and are included in the table above based upon the estimated timing and amount of payment. In addition, certain of the purchase agreements contain clauses that would allow Truist to cancel the agreement with specified notice; however, that impact is not included in the table above.
(5)Although technically unfunded plans, rabbi trusts and insurance policies on the lives of certain of the covered employees are available to finance future benefit plan payments.
Truist's commitments include investments in affordable housing projects throughout its market area, renewable energy credits, and private equity funds. Refer to "Note 1. Basis of Presentation" and "Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies" for further discussion of these commitments. In addition, Truist enters into derivative contracts to manage various financial risks. Further discussion of derivative instruments is included in "Note 1. Basis of Presentation" and "Note 19. Derivative Financial Instruments." Further discussion related to the nature of Truist's obligations is included in "Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies." Further discussion of Truist's commitments is included in "Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies" and "Note 18. Fair Value Disclosures."
76 Truist Financial Corporation
Capital
The maintenance of appropriate levels of capital is a management priority and is monitored on a regular basis. Truist's principal goals related to the maintenance of capital are to provide adequate capital to support Truist's risk profile consistent with the Board-approved risk appetite, provide financial flexibility to support future growth and client needs, comply with relevant laws, regulations, and supervisory guidance, achieve optimal credit ratings for Truist and its subsidiaries and provide a competitive return to shareholders. Risk-based capital ratios, which include CET1 capital, Tier 1 capital and Total capital are calculated based on regulatory guidance related to the measurement of capital and risk-weighted assets.
Truist regularly performs stress testing on its capital levels and is required to periodically submit the Company's capital plans and stress testing results to the banking regulators. Management regularly monitors the capital position of Truist on both a consolidated and bank-level basis. In this regard, management's overriding policy is to maintain capital at levels that are in excess of internal capital targets, which are above the regulatory "well capitalized" minimums. Management has implemented stressed capital ratio minimum targets to evaluate whether capital ratios calculated after the effect of alternative capital actions are likely to remain above minimums specified by the FRB for the annual CCAR process. Breaches of stressed minimum targets prompt a review of the planned capital actions included in Truist's capital plan.
(1)The Truist targets are subject to revision based on finalization of pending regulatory guidance and other strategic factors.
(2)Truist's goal is to maintain capital levels above all regulatory minimums.
(3)Reflects a SCB of 270 basis points for Truist.
During the first quarter of 2020, as market conditions evolved, Truist received Board approval to establish new interim operating targets that provide for sufficient capital levels while allowing the company to support clients through the economic downturn. These interim operating targets will be evaluated as economic conditions evolve.
While nonrecurring events or management decisions may result in the Company temporarily falling below its operating targets for one or more of these ratios, it is management's intent to return to these operating targets within a reasonable period of time through capital planning. Such temporary decreases below the operating minimums shown above are not considered an infringement of Truist's overall capital policy, provided a return above the minimums is forecasted to occur within a reasonable time period.
In August 2020, the Federal Reserve informed Truist of its SCB of 270 basis points for risk-based capital ratios. This buffer was determined based on stress testing results developed by the Federal Reserve and is effective from October 1, 2020 through September 30, 2021, at which point a revised SCB will be calculated and provided to Truist. Consistent with the Federal Reserve’s mandate across the industry, Truist resubmitted its capital plan in November 2020 to reflect changes in financial markets and the macroeconomic outlook. Truist’s review of the results of the 2020 CCAR supervisory stress test notes that the modeled outcomes shown by the FRB differ from those calculated by the Company. Truist believes those differences are attributable in part to the application of purchase accounting associated with the Merger. Purchase accounting adjustments could result in a reduction in provision expense and an increase in pre-provision net revenue. These differences could result in higher capital ratios than were reflected in the CCAR results.
In December 2020, the Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $2.0 billion of the Company’s common stock beginning in the first quarter of 2021, as well as certain other actions to optimize Truist’s capital position. Management’s intention is to maintain an approximate 10% Common Equity Tier 1 ratio after considering strategic actions such as non-bank acquisitions or stock repurchases, as well as changes in risk-weighted assets. Any stock repurchase activity will be informed by economic and regulatory considerations as well as Truist’s capital position, earnings outlook, and capital deployment priorities.
Payments of cash dividends and repurchases of common shares are the methods used to manage any excess capital generated. In addition, management closely monitors the Parent Company's double leverage ratio (investments in subsidiaries as a percentage of shareholders' equity). The active management of the subsidiaries' equity capital, as described above, is the process used to manage this important driver of Parent Company liquidity and is a key element in the management of Truist's capital position.
Truist Financial Corporation 77
Management intends to maintain capital at Truist Bank at levels that will result in classification as "well-capitalized" for regulatory purposes. Secondarily, it is management's intent to maintain Truist Bank's capital at levels that result in regulatory risk-based capital ratios that are generally comparable with peers of similar size, complexity and risk profile. If the capital levels of Truist Bank increase above these guidelines, excess capital may be transferred to the Parent Company in the form of special dividend payments, subject to regulatory and other operating considerations.
Management's capital deployment plan in order of preference is to focus on (i) organic growth, (ii) dividends, and (iii) strategic opportunities and/or share repurchases depending on opportunities in the marketplace and Truist's interest and ability to proceed with acquisitions.
Truist Bank's capital ratios are presented in the following table:
(1)The leverage ratio is calculated using end of period Tier 1 capital and quarterly average tangible assets. The timing of the Merger impacted the 4Q19 result.
(2)Truist Bank became subject to the supplementary leverage ratio as of January 1, 2020.
Truist's capital ratios are presented in the following table:
(1)The leverage ratio is calculated using end of period Tier 1 capital and quarterly average tangible assets. The timing of the Merger impacted the 4Q19 result.
(2)Truist became subject to the supplementary leverage ratio as of January 1, 2020.
(3)Tangible common equity and related measures are non-GAAP measures that exclude the impact of intangible assets, net of deferred taxes, and their related amortization. These measures are useful for evaluating the performance of a business consistently, whether acquired or developed internally. Truist's management uses these measures to assess the quality of capital and returns relative to balance sheet risk. These capital measures are not necessarily comparable to similar capital measures that may be presented by other companies.
Capital ratios improved compared to year-end 2020, due to growth in CET1 capital, partially offset by higher risk-weighted assets. Truist's capital levels remain strong compared to the regulatory levels for well capitalized banks at December 31, 2020. Truist’s other capital measures also improved as Truist issued various capital instruments to strengthen its capital position. Truist issued $3.5 billion of preferred stock and redeemed $500 million of Series K preferred stock during 2020. In addition, Truist issued $1.3 billion of subordinated debt. During 2020,Truist paid $2.4 billion in common stock dividends or $1.80 per share, which resulted in a total payout ratio of 58.0% for the year.
78 Truist Financial Corporation
(1)Loans and leases are net of unearned income and include LHFS.
Fourth Quarter 2020 Results Compared to Fourth Quarter 2019
Total taxable-equivalent revenues were $5.7 billion for the fourth quarter of 2020, an increase of $2.0 billion compared to the earlier quarter, reflecting an increase of $1.1 billion in taxable-equivalent net interest income and an increase of $887 million in noninterest income.
Net interest margin was 3.08%, down 33 basis points compared to the earlier quarter. Average earning assets increased $175.6 billion. The increase in average earning assets reflects a $114.5 billion increase in average total loans and leases and a $41.4 billion increase in average securities. Average other earning assets increased $17.5 billion primarily due to higher interest-earning balances at the Federal Reserve. Average interest-bearing liabilities increased $107.3 billion compared to the earlier quarter. Average interest-bearing deposits increased $101.9 billion, average long-term debt increased $10.4 billion and average short-term borrowings decreased $5.0 billion. The significant increases in earning assets and liabilities are primarily due to the Merger, as well as impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting government stimulus programs.
The yield on the total loan portfolio for the fourth quarter of 2020 was 4.12%, down 79 basis points compared to the earlier quarter, reflecting the impact of rate decreases, partially offset by purchase accounting accretion from merged loans. The yield on the average securities portfolio was 1.60%, down 105 basis points compared to the earlier quarter primarily due to lower yields on new purchases.
The average cost of total deposits was 0.07%, down 50 basis points compared to the earlier quarter, and the average cost of interest-bearing deposits was 0.11%, down 71 basis points compared to the earlier quarter. The average rate on short-term borrowings was 0.77%, down 138 basis points compared to the earlier quarter. The average rate on long-term debt was 1.64%, down 128 basis points compared to the earlier quarter. The lower rates on interest-bearing liabilities reflect the lower rate environment. The lower rates on long-term debt also reflect the amortization of the fair value mark on the assumed debt and the issuance of new long-term debt.
The provision for credit losses was $177 million, compared to $171 million for the earlier quarter. Net charge-offs for the fourth quarter of 2020 totaled $205 million compared to $192 million in the earlier quarter. The net charge-off rate for the current quarter of 0.27% was down 13 basis points compared to the fourth quarter of 2019.
Truist Financial Corporation 79
Noninterest income for the fourth quarter of 2020 increased $887 million compared to the earlier quarter. The earlier quarter included a loss of $116 million from the sale of securities. Excluding the securities losses, noninterest income increased $771 million, with nearly all categories of noninterest income being impacted by the Merger. Insurance income increased $36 million due to strong production and premium growth, as well as acquisitions. Investment banking and trading income, commercial real estate related income, wealth management income and residential mortgage banking income all had improved performance compared to the combined levels from the earlier quarter. Service charges on deposits continued to rebound, but remained below 2019 combined levels due to reduced overdraft incident rates.
Noninterest expense for the fourth quarter of 2020 was up $1.3 billion compared to the earlier quarter. Merger-related and restructuring charges and other incremental operating expenses related to the Merger increased $85 million and $78 million, respectively. Excluding the merger-related items mentioned above and the impact of an increase of $101 million of amortization expense for intangibles, adjusted noninterest expense was up $994 million primarily reflecting the impact of the Merger.
The provision for income taxes was $311 million for the fourth quarter of 2020, compared to $153 million for the earlier quarter. This produced an effective tax rate for the fourth quarter of 2020 of 19.0%, compared to 17.4% for the earlier quarter. The higher effective tax rate is primarily due to higher pre-tax income.
Reclassifications
In certain circumstances, reclassifications have been made to prior period information to conform to the current presentation. Such reclassifications had no effect on previously reported shareholders' equity or net income. Refer to "Note 1. Basis of Presentation" for additional discussion regarding reclassifications.
Critical Accounting Policies
The accounting and reporting policies of Truist are in accordance with GAAP and conform to the accounting and reporting guidelines prescribed by bank regulatory authorities. The financial position and results of operations are affected by management's application of accounting policies, including estimates, assumptions and judgments made to arrive at the carrying value of assets and liabilities and amounts reported for revenues and expenses. Different assumptions in the application of these policies could result in material changes in the consolidated financial position and/or consolidated results of operations and related disclosures. Understanding Truist's accounting policies is fundamental to understanding the consolidated financial position and consolidated results of operations. Accordingly, Truist's significant accounting policies and effects of new accounting pronouncements are discussed in detail in "Note 1. Basis of Presentation."
The following is a summary of Truist's critical accounting policies that are highly dependent on estimates, assumptions and judgments. These critical accounting policies are reviewed with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors on a periodic basis.
ACL
Truist's policy is to maintain an ACL, which represents management's best estimate of expected future credit losses related to the loan and lease portfolios and off-balance sheet lending commitments at the balance sheet date. Estimates of expected future loan and lease losses are determined by using statistical models and management’s judgement. The models are designed to forecast probability of default, exposure at default and loss given default by correlating certain macroeconomic forecast data to historical experience. The models are generally applied at the portfolio level to pools of loans with similar risk characteristics. The macroeconomic data used in the models is based on forecasted variables for the reasonable and supportable period of two years. Beyond this forecast period the models gradually revert to long-term historical loss conditions over a one year period. Expected losses are estimated through contractual maturity, giving appropriate consideration to expected prepayments unless the borrower has a right to renew that is not cancellable or it is reasonably expected that the loan will be modified as a TDR.
A qualitative allowance which incorporates management’s judgement is also included in the estimation of expected future loan and lease losses, including qualitative adjustments in circumstances where the model output is inconsistent with management’s expectations with respect to expected credit losses. This allowance is used to adjust for limitations in modeled results related to the current economic conditions and capture risks in the portfolio such as considerations with respect to the impact of current economic events, the outcomes of which are uncertain. These events may include, but are not limited to, political conditions, legislation that may directly or indirectly affect the banking industry and economic conditions affecting specific geographical areas and industries in which Truist conducts business.
Loans and leases that do not share similar risk characteristics and significant loans that are considered collateral-dependent are individually evaluated. For these loans, the ALLL is determined through review of data specific to the borrower and related collateral, if any. For TDRs, default expectations and estimated prepayment speeds that are specific to each of the restructured loan populations are incorporated in the determination of the ALLL.
80 Truist Financial Corporation
The methodology used to determine an estimate for the RUFC is similar to that used to determine the funded component of the ALLL and is measured over the period there is a contractual obligation to extend credit that is not unconditionally cancellable. The RUFC is adjusted for factors specific to binding commitments, including the probability of funding and exposure at default. A detailed discussion of the methodology used in determining the ACL is included in "Note 1. Basis of Presentation."
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The vast majority of assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis are based on either quoted market prices or market prices for similar instruments. Refer to "Note 18. Fair Value Disclosures" for additional disclosures regarding the fair value of financial instruments and "Note 2. Business Combinations" for additional disclosures regarding business combinations.
Securities
Truist generally utilizes a third-party pricing service in determining the fair value of its AFS investment securities, whereas trading securities are priced internally. Fair value measurements for investment securities are derived from market-based pricing matrices that were developed using observable inputs that include benchmark yields, benchmark securities, reported trades, offers, bids, issuer spreads and broker quotes. Management performs procedures to evaluate the fair values provided by the third-party service provider. These procedures, which are performed independent of the responsible BU, include comparison of pricing information received from the third party pricing service to other third-party pricing sources, review of additional information provided by the third-party pricing service and other third-party sources for selected securities and back-testing to compare the price realized on security sales to the daily pricing information received from the third-party pricing service. The Enterprise Valuation Committee, which provides oversight to Truist's enterprise-wide IPV function, is responsible for the comparison of pricing information received from the third-party pricing service or internally to other third-party pricing sources, approving tolerance limits determined by IPV for price comparison exceptions, reviewing significant changes to pricing and valuation policies and reviewing and approving the pricing decisions made on any illiquid and hard-to-price securities. When market observable data is not available, which generally occurs due to the lack of liquidity or inactive markets for certain securities, the valuation of the security is subjective and may involve substantial judgment by management to reflect unobservable input assumptions.
MSRs
Truist's primary class of MSRs for which it separately manages the economic risks relates to residential mortgages. Residential MSRs do not trade in an active, open market with readily observable prices. While sales of MSRs do occur, the precise terms and conditions typically are not readily available. Accordingly, Truist estimates the fair value of residential MSRs using a stochastic OAS valuation model to project residential MSR cash flows over multiple interest rate scenarios, which are then discounted at risk-adjusted rates. The OAS model considers portfolio characteristics, contractually-specified servicing fees, prepayment assumptions, delinquency rates, late charges, other ancillary revenue, costs to service and other economic factors. Truist reassesses and periodically adjusts the underlying inputs and assumptions in the OAS model to reflect market conditions and assumptions that a market participant would consider in valuing the residential MSR asset.
Fair value estimates and assumptions are compared to industry surveys, recent market activity, actual portfolio experience and, when available, observable market data. Due to the nature of the valuation inputs, residential MSRs are classified within Level 3 of the valuation hierarchy. The value of residential MSRs is significantly affected by mortgage interest rates available in the marketplace, which influence mortgage loan prepayment speeds. In general, during periods of declining interest rates, the value of MSRs declines due to increasing prepayments attributable to increased mortgage-refinance activity. Conversely, during periods of rising interest rates, the value of residential MSRs generally increases due to reduced refinance activity. Truist typically hedges against market value changes in the residential MSRs. Refer to "Note 8. Loan Servicing" for quantitative disclosures reflecting the effect that changes in management's assumptions would have on the fair value of residential MSRs.
LHFS
Truist originates certain residential and commercial mortgage loans for sale to investors that are measured at fair value. The fair value is primarily based on quoted market prices for securities backed by similar types of loans. Changes in the fair value are recorded as components of residential mortgage income and commercial real estate related income, while the related origination costs are generally recognized in personnel expense when incurred. The changes in fair value are largely driven by changes in interest rates subsequent to loan funding and changes in the fair value of servicing associated with the LHFS. Truist uses various derivative instruments to mitigate the economic effect of changes in fair value of the underlying loans. LHFS also includes certain loans, generally carried at LOCOM, where management has committed to a formal plan of sale and the loans are available for immediate sale. Adjustments to reflect unrealized gains and losses resulting from changes in fair value, up to the original carrying amount, and realized gains and losses upon ultimate sale are classified as noninterest income. The fair value of these loans is estimated using observable market prices when available, although may also incorporate other unobservable inputs such as indicative bids or broker price opinions. Refer to "Note 1. Basis of Presentation" for further description of the Company’s accounting for LHFS.
Truist Financial Corporation 81
Trading Loans
Truist elects to measure certain loans at fair value for financial reporting where fair value aligns with the underlying business purpose. Specifically, loans included within this classification include trading loans that are (i) purchased in connection with the Company’s TRS business, (ii) part of the loan sales and trading business within the C&CB segment, or (iii) backed by the SBA. Refer to "Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies," and "Note 19. Derivative Financial Instruments," for further discussion of the Company’s TRS business. The loans purchased in connection with the Company’s TRS and sales and trading businesses are primarily commercial and corporate leveraged loans valued based on quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active by a third party pricing service. SBA loans are fully guaranteed by the U.S. government as to contractual principal and interest and there is sufficient observable trading activity upon which to base the estimate of fair value.
Derivative Assets and Liabilities
Truist uses derivatives to manage various financial risks and in a dealer capacity to facilitate client transactions. Truist mitigates credit risk by subjecting counterparties to credit reviews and approvals similar to those used in making loans and other extensions of credit. In addition, certain counterparties are required to provide collateral to Truist when their unsecured loss positions exceed certain negotiated limits. The fair values of derivative financial instruments are determined based on quoted market prices and internal pricing models that use market observable data for interest rates, foreign exchange, equity and credit. The fair value of interest rate lock commitments, which are related to mortgage loan commitments, is based on quoted market prices adjusted for commitments that Truist does not expect to fund and includes the value attributable to the net servicing fee. Refer to "Note 19. Derivative Financial Instruments" for further information on the Company’s derivatives.
Purchased loans
The fair value for purchased loans in a business combination is based on a discounted cash flow methodology that considers credit loss expectations, market interest rates and other market factors such as liquidity from the perspective of a market participant. Loans are grouped together according to similar characteristics and are treated in the aggregate when applying various valuation techniques. The probability of default, loss given default and prepayment assumptions are key factors driving credit losses which are embedded into the estimated cash flows. These assumptions are informed by internal data on loan characteristics, historical loss experience, and current and forecasted economic conditions. The interest and liquidity component of the estimate is determined by discounting interest and principal cash flows through the expected life of each loan. The discount rates used for loans are based on current market rates for new originations of comparable loans and include adjustments for liquidity. The discount rate does not include a factor for credit losses as that has been included as a reduction to the estimated cash flows.
Intangible Assets
The acquisition method of accounting requires that assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations are recorded at their fair values. This often involves estimates based on third party valuations or internal valuations based on discounted cash flow analyses or other valuation techniques, which are inherently subjective. The amortization of definite-lived intangible assets is based upon the estimated economic benefits to be received, which is also subjective. Business combinations also typically result in goodwill, which is subject to ongoing periodic impairment tests based on the fair values of the reporting units to which the acquired goodwill relates. Refer to "Note 1. Basis of Presentation" for a description of the impairment testing process.
At December 31, 2020, Truist’s reporting units with goodwill balances were CB&W, C&CB and IH. Management reviews the goodwill of each reporting unit for impairment on an annual basis as of October 1 or more often if events or circumstances indicate that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is below its carrying value. For its annual impairment review, Truist elected to perform a quantitative test of each of its reporting units. The quantitative impairment test estimates the fair value of the reporting units using the income approach and the market approach, weighted 60% and 40%, respectively. The income approach utilizes a discounted cash flow analysis. The market approach utilizes comparable public company information, key valuation multiples and considers a market control premium associated with cost synergies and other cash flow benefits that arise from obtaining control over a reporting unit.
The inputs and assumptions specific to each reporting unit are incorporated in the valuations, including projections of future cash flows, discount rates, and applicable valuation multiples based on the comparable public company information. Truist also assesses the reasonableness of the aggregate estimated fair value of the reporting units by comparison to its market capitalization over a reasonable period of time, including consideration of historic bank control premiums and the current market.
82 Truist Financial Corporation
Multi-year financial forecasts are developed for each reporting unit by considering several inputs and assumptions such as net interest margin, expected credit losses, noninterest income, noninterest expense and required capital. Of these inputs, the projection of net interest margin is the most significant to the financial projections of the CB&W and C&CB reporting units. The long-term growth rate used in determining the terminal value of each reporting unit was 2.5% as of October 1, 2020, based on management's assessment of the minimum expected terminal growth rate of each reporting unit. Discount rates are estimated based on the Capital Asset Pricing Model, which considers the risk-free interest rate, market risk premium, beta, and unsystematic risk adjustments specific to a particular reporting unit. The discount rates are also calibrated based on risks related to the projected cash flows of each reporting unit. The discount rates utilized for the CB&W, C&CB and IH reporting units as of October 1, 2020 were 11%, 10%, and 9%, respectively.
Based on the Company’s annual impairment analysis of goodwill as of October 1, it was determined for the CB&W, C&CB and IH reporting units that the respective reporting unit's fair value was in excess of its respective carrying value as of October 1, 2020; however, for the C&CB reporting unit the fair value of the reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by less than 10%, indicating that the goodwill of this reporting unit may be at risk of impairment. Circumstances that could negatively impact the fair value for the C&CB reporting unit in the future include an increase in the applicable discount rate, an increase in required capital, or deterioration in the C&CB reporting unit’s forecasts.
The estimated fair value of the reporting unit is highly sensitive to changes in these estimates and assumptions; therefore, in some instances, changes in these assumptions could impact whether the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than its carrying value. The Company performs sensitivity analyses around these assumptions in order to assess the reasonableness of the assumptions, and the resulting estimated fair values. The analysis of the C&CB reporting unit at October 1, 2020, indicated that if the discount rate was increased 100 basis points, the reporting unit's fair value would be less than its carrying value, resulting in goodwill impairment. Ultimately, future potential changes in these assumptions may impact the estimated fair value of a reporting unit and cause the fair value of the reporting unit to be below its carrying value. Additionally, a reporting unit's carrying value could change based on market conditions, asset growth, or the risk profile of those reporting units, which could impact whether the fair value of a reporting unit is less than carrying value.
The Company monitored events and circumstances during the fourth quarter of 2020, including the continuing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, concluding that it was not more-likely-than-not that the fair value of one or more of its reporting units is below its respective carrying amount as of December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
Truist is subject to income tax laws of the U.S., its states, and the municipalities in which the Company conducts business. In estimating the net amount due to or to be received from tax jurisdictions either currently or in the future, the Company assesses the appropriate tax treatment of transactions and filing positions after considering statutes, regulations, judicial precedent, and other pertinent information. The income tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and the relevant government taxing authorities. Significant judgment is required in determining the tax accruals and in evaluating the Company’s tax positions, including evaluating uncertain tax positions. Changes in the estimate of accrued taxes occur periodically due to changes in tax rates, interpretations of tax laws and new judicial guidance, the status of examinations by the tax authorities, and newly enacted statutory and regulatory guidance that could impact the relative merits and risks of tax positions. These changes, when they occur, impact tax expense and can materially affect operating results. Truist reviews tax positions quarterly and adjusts accrued taxes as new information becomes available.
Deferred income tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable in future years. Such assets arise due to temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as from NOL and tax credit carryforwards. The Company regularly evaluates the realizability of DTAs, recognizing a valuation allowance if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more-likely-than-not that some portion or all of the DTA will not be realized. In determining whether a valuation allowance is necessary, the Company considers the level of taxable income in prior years to the extent that carrybacks are permitted under current tax laws, as well as estimates of future pre-tax and taxable income and tax planning strategies that would, if necessary, be implemented. Truist currently maintains a valuation allowance for certain state carryforwards and certain other state DTAs. For additional income tax information, refer to "Note 1. Basis of Presentation" and "Note 14. Income Taxes."
Pension and Postretirement Benefit Obligations
Truist offers various pension plans and postretirement benefit plans to teammates. Calculation of the obligations and related expenses under these plans requires the use of actuarial valuation methods and assumptions, which are subject to management judgment and may differ significantly if different assumptions are used. The discount rate assumption used to measure the postretirement benefit obligations is set by reference to a high-quality corporate bond yield curve and the individual characteristics of the plans such as projected cash flow patterns and payment durations. In 2020, in connection with the merger of the BB&T and SunTrust pension plans Truist refined the corporate bond yield curve used in determining the discount rate and moved to a AA Above Median yield curve from the previously used AA rated bond yield curve. The impact of this change was an increase of approximately 11 basis points in the discount rate as of December 31, 2020.
Truist Financial Corporation 83
Management also considered the sensitivity that changes in the expected return on plan assets and the discount rate would have on pension expense. For the Company’s qualified plans, a decrease of 25 basis points in the discount rate would result in additional pension expense of approximately $27 million for 2021, while a decrease of 100 basis points in the expected return on plan assets would result in an increase of approximately $149 million in pension expense for 2021. Refer to "Note 15. Benefit Plans" for disclosures related to the benefit plans.
84 Truist Financial Corporation
ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of Truist Financial Corporation
Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Truist Financial Corporation and its subsidiaries (the "Company") as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive income, changes in shareholders’ equity and cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2020, including the related notes (collectively referred to as the "consolidated financial statements"). We also have audited the Company's internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020 based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2020 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by COSO.
Change in Accounting Principle
As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company changed the manner in which it accounts for the allowance for credit losses in 2020.
Basis for Opinions
The Company's management is responsible for these consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in Management's Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting appearing under Item 9A. Our responsibility is to express opinions on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and on the Company's internal control over financial reporting based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
Truist Financial Corporation 85
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the current period audit of the consolidated financial statements that were communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that (i) relate to accounts or disclosures that are material to the consolidated financial statements and (ii) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matters below, providing separate opinions on the critical audit matters or on the accounts or disclosures to which they relate.
Allowance for Credit Losses for Certain Commercial and Consumer Portfolios
As described in Notes 1 and 5 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company’s allowance for credit losses (ACL) represents management's best estimate of expected future credit losses related to loan and lease portfolios and off-balance sheet lending commitments at the balance sheet date. The consolidated ACL balance was $6.2 billion as of December 31, 2020, including $2.9 billion for commercial portfolios and $2.6 billion for consumer portfolios. Estimates of expected future credit losses are determined by management using quantitative models and by applying qualitative adjustments to the modeled results. The models are designed to forecast probability of default, exposure at default, and loss given default by correlating certain macroeconomic forecast data to historical experience. The models are applied to pools of loans with similar risk characteristics. The macroeconomic forecast data used in the quantitative models is based on forecasted variables for a reasonable and supportable period. The qualitative adjustments incorporate management judgment and are used to account for limitations in modeled results related to current economic conditions and other risks in the portfolios.
The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures relating to the ACL for certain commercial and consumer portfolios is a critical audit matter are (i) the significant judgment by management in determining the ACL quantitative model results and certain qualitative adjustments, (ii) a high degree of auditor judgment, subjectivity, and effort in performing procedures and evaluating the audit evidence related to the quantitative model results and certain qualitative adjustments, and (iii) the audit effort involved the use of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge.
Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall opinion on the consolidated financial statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating to the ACL estimation process for certain commercial and consumer portfolios, which included controls related to the quantitative model results and certain qualitative adjustments. These procedures also included, among others, testing management’s process for determining the ACL for certain commercial and consumer portfolios quantitative model results and certain qualitative adjustments, including evaluating the appropriateness of the quantitative models and management’s methodology, testing the data used in the estimate, and evaluating the reasonableness of judgments used by management in estimating certain qualitative adjustments. Professionals with specialized skill and knowledge were used to assist in evaluating the appropriateness of these quantitative models and the reasonableness of judgments used by management relating to certain qualitative adjustments.
86 Truist Financial Corporation
Annual Goodwill Impairment Assessment - CB&W and C&CB Reporting Units
As described in Notes 1 and 7 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company’s consolidated goodwill balance was $24.4 billion as of December 31, 2020. The goodwill associated with the CB&W and C&CB reporting units was $15.8 billion and $6.2 billion as of December 31, 2020, respectively. Management reviews the goodwill of each reporting unit for impairment on an annual basis as of October 1, or more often, if events or circumstances indicate that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is below its carrying value. Management determines the fair value of reporting units using the income approach and the market approach. For the income approach, management determines the fair value of the reporting units using a discounted cash flow analysis by utilizing a multi-year financial forecast for each reporting unit by considering several inputs and assumptions including net interest margin, expected credit losses, noninterest income, noninterest expense and required capital.
The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures relating to the annual goodwill impairment assessment for the CB&W and C&CB reporting units is a critical audit matter are (i) the significant judgment by management when determining the fair value of these reporting units using the income approach, (ii) a high degree of auditor judgment, subjectivity, and effort in performing procedures and evaluating the audit evidence related to management’s discount rates and net interest margin assumptions used in the income approach, and (iii) the audit effort involved the use of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge.
Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall opinion on the consolidated financial statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating to management’s annual goodwill impairment assessment, including controls over the valuation of the CB&W and C&CB reporting units. These procedures also included, among others, testing management’s process for determining the fair value of the CB&W and C&CB reporting units, evaluating the appropriateness of management’s income approach, testing the data used in the income approach, and evaluating the discount rates and net interest margin assumptions used by management in the income approach. Evaluating management’s assumptions related to the discount rates and net interest margin involved evaluating whether the assumptions were reasonable considering the current and past performance of the reporting units and consistency with external market and industry data. Professionals with specialized skill and knowledge were used to assist in the evaluation of the appropriateness of the income approach and the discount rate assumption.
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
Charlotte, North Carolina
February 24, 2021
We have served as the Company's auditor since 2002.
Truist Financial Corporation 87
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
TRUIST FINANCIAL CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARIES
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
88 Truist Financial Corporation
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
TRUIST FINANCIAL CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARIES
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Truist Financial Corporation 89
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
TRUIST FINANCIAL CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARIES
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
90 Truist Financial Corporation
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY
TRUIST FINANCIAL CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARIES
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Truist Financial Corporation 91
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
TRUIST FINANCIAL CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARIES
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
92 Truist Financial Corporation
NOTE 1. Basis of Presentation
Truist Financial Corporation is a purpose-driven financial services company committed to inspire and build better lives and communities. With the combined history of BB&T and SunTrust, Truist has leading market share in many high-growth markets in the country. The Company offers a wide range of services including retail, small business and commercial banking; asset management; capital markets; commercial real estate; corporate and institutional banking; insurance; mortgage; payments; specialized lending; and wealth management. Headquartered in Charlotte, North Carolina, Truist is the sixth-largest commercial bank in the U.S. The Company operates and measures business activity across three business segments: Consumer Banking and Wealth, Corporate and Commercial Banking, and Insurance Holdings. For additional information on the Company’s business segments, see "Note 21. Operating Segments."
General
See the Glossary of Defined Terms at the beginning of this Report for terms used herein. The accounting and reporting policies are in accordance with GAAP. Additionally, where applicable, the policies conform to the accounting and reporting guidelines prescribed by regulatory authorities. The following is a summary of significant accounting policies.
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Truist Financial Corporation and those subsidiaries that are wholly or majority owned by Truist or over which Truist exercises control. Intercompany accounts and transactions are eliminated in consolidation. The results of operations of companies or assets acquired are included from the date of acquisition. Results of operations associated with entities or net assets sold are included through the date of disposition.
Truist holds investments in certain legal entities that are considered VIEs. VIEs are legal entities in which equity investors do not have sufficient equity at risk for the entity to independently finance its activities, or as a group, the holders of the equity investment at risk lack the power through voting or similar rights to direct the activities of the entity that most significantly impact its economic performance, or do not have the obligation to absorb the expected losses of the entity or the right to receive expected residual returns of the entity. Consolidation of a VIE is required if a reporting entity is the primary beneficiary of the VIE.
Investments in VIEs are evaluated to determine if Truist is the primary beneficiary. This evaluation gives appropriate consideration to the design of the entity and the variability that the entity was designed to create and pass along, the relative power of each party, and to Truist's obligation to absorb losses or receive residual returns of the entity. Truist has variable interests in certain entities that are not required to be consolidated, including affordable housing and other partnership interests. Refer to "Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies" for additional disclosures regarding Truist's VIEs.
Investments in entities for which the Company has the ability to exercise significant influence, but not control, over operating and financing decisions are accounted for using the equity method of accounting. These investments are included in Other assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at cost, adjusted to reflect the Company’s portion of income, loss, or dividends of the investee. Truist records its portion of income or loss in Other noninterest income in the Consolidated Statements of Income. These investments are periodically evaluated for impairment.
The Company reports any noncontrolling interests in its subsidiaries in the equity section of the Consolidated Balance Sheets and separately presents the income or loss attributable to the noncontrolling interest of a consolidated subsidiary in its Consolidated Statements of Income.
Reclassifications
Certain amounts reported in prior periods' consolidated financial statements have been reclassified to conform to the current presentation.
Use of Estimates in the Preparation of Financial Statements
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Truist Financial Corporation 93
Business Combinations
Truist accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method. The accounts of an acquired entity are included as of the date of acquisition, and any excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired is capitalized as goodwill. See "Note 2. Business Combinations" for further discussion of the Merger and its impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents includes cash and due from banks and interest-bearing deposits with banks that have original maturities of three months or less. Accordingly, the carrying amount of such instruments is considered a reasonable estimate of fair value. Restricted cash was immaterial at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Securities Financing Activities
The Company borrows securities and purchases securities under agreements to resell as part of its securities financing activities. On the acquisition date of these securities, the Company and related counterparty agree on the amount of collateral required to secure the principal amount loaned under these agreements. The Company monitors collateral values daily and calls for additional collateral to be provided as warranted under the respective agreements.
Short-term borrowings include securities sold under agreements to repurchase, which are accounted for as collateralized financing transactions and are recorded at the amounts at which the securities were sold, plus accrued interest within Short-term borrowings.
Trading Activities
Various trading assets and liabilities are used to accommodate the investment and risk management activities of the Company's clients. Product offerings to clients include debt securities, loans traded in the secondary market, equity securities, derivative contracts, and other similar financial instruments. The Company elects to apply fair value accounting to trading loans. Trading loans include: (i) loans held in connection with the Company's trading business primarily consisting of commercial and corporate leveraged loans; (ii) certain SBA loans guaranteed by the U.S. government; and (iii) loans made or acquired in connection with the Company’s TRS business. Other trading-related activities include acting as a market maker for certain debt and equity security transactions, derivative instrument transactions, and foreign exchange transactions. Trading assets and liabilities are measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognized within Noninterest income in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Income. Interest income on trading account securities is included in Interest on other earning assets. For additional information on the Company’s trading activities, see "Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies" and "Note 18. Fair Value Disclosures."
Investment Securities
The Company invests in various debt securities primarily for liquidity management purposes and as part of the overall ALM process to optimize income and market performance. Investments in debt securities that are not held for trading purposes are classified as AFS.
Interest income on securities is recognized in income on an accrual basis. Premiums and discounts are amortized into interest income using the effective interest method over the contractual life of the security. As prepayments are received, a proportionate amount of the related premium or discount is recognized in income so that the effective interest rate on the remaining portion of the security continues unchanged.
AFS securities are reported at estimated fair value, with unrealized gains and losses reported in AOCI, net of deferred income taxes, in the Shareholders' equity section of the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Gains or losses realized from the sale of AFS securities are determined by specific identification and are included in noninterest income.
An unrealized loss exists when the current fair value of an individual security is less than its amortized cost basis. AFS debt securities in an unrealized loss position are evaluated at the balance sheet date to determine whether such losses are credit-related. Credit losses are measured on an individual basis and recognized in an ACL. Changes in expected credit losses are recognized in the Provision for credit losses in the Consolidated Statements of Income. Municipal securities are evaluated for impairment using a municipal bond credit scoring tool that leverages historical municipal market data to estimate probability of default and loss given default at the issuer level. U.S. Treasury securities, government guaranteed securities, and other securities issued by GSEs are either explicitly or implicitly guaranteed by the US government, are highly rated by rating agencies and have a long history of no credit losses. There was no ACL on the Company’s AFS debt securities at December 31, 2020.
94 Truist Financial Corporation
Prior to the adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, investment securities in an unrealized loss position were evaluated quarterly for OTTI. Truist considered such factors as the length of time and the extent to which the fair value was below amortized cost, long term expectations and recent experience regarding principal and interest payments, Truist's intent to sell and whether it was more-likely-than-not that the Company would be required to sell those securities before the anticipated recovery of the amortized cost basis.
The credit component of an OTTI loss was recognized in earnings and the non-credit component was recognized in AOCI, net of tax, in situations where Truist did not intend to sell the security and it was more-likely-than-not that Truist would have been required to sell the security prior to recovery. Subsequent to recognition of OTTI, an increase in expected cash flows was recognized as a yield adjustment over the remaining expected life of the security based on an evaluation of the nature of the increase.
Equity Securities
Equity securities that are not classified as trading assets or liabilities are recorded in Other assets on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. Equity securities with readily determinable fair values are considered marketable and measured at fair value, with changes in the fair value recognized as a component of Noninterest income in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Income. Marketable equity securities include mutual fund investments and other publicly traded equity securities. Dividends received from marketable equity securities and FHLB stock are recognized within Interest income in the Consolidated Statements of Income. Equity securities that are not accounted for under the equity method and that do not have readily determinable fair values are considered non-marketable and are accounted for at cost minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or similar investment of the same issuer. Any adjustments to the carrying value of these non-marketable equity securities are recognized in Other noninterest income in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Income. Non-marketable equity securities include FHLB stock and other equity investments. For additional information on the Company’s equity securities, see "Note 18. Fair Value Disclosures."
LHFS
LHFS includes residential and commercial mortgage loans that management intends to sell in the secondary market and other loans that management has an active plan to sell.
The Company elects to apply fair value accounting to substantially all residential and commercial mortgage loans that are originated with the intent to be sold in the secondary market. Direct loan origination fees associated with these loans are recorded as Residential mortgage and Commercial real estate related income. The majority of direct origination costs are recorded in Personnel expense. The fair value of these loans is derived from observable current market prices when available and includes loan servicing value. When observable market prices are not available, the Company uses judgment and estimates fair value using internal models that reflect assumptions consistent with those that would be used by a market participant in estimating fair value.
First lien residential mortgage LHFS are transferred in conjunction with GNMA and GSE securitization transactions, whereby the loans are exchanged for cash or securities that are readily redeemable for cash with servicing rights retained. Net gains/losses on the sale of residential mortgage LHFS are recorded at inception of the associated interest rate lock commitments and reflect the change in value of the loans resulting from changes in interest rates from the time the Company enters into interest rate lock commitments with borrowers until the loans are sold, adjusted for pull through rates and excluding hedge transactions initiated to mitigate this market risk. Commercial mortgage LHFS are sold to FNMA and FHLMC and the Company also issues and sells GNMA commercial MBS backed by FHA insured loans. The loans and securities are exchanged for cash with servicing rights retained. Gains and losses on sales of residential and commercial mortgage loans are included in Residential mortgage and Commercial real estate income, respectively.
LHFS also includes specifically identified loans where management has committed to a formal plan of sale and the loans are available for immediate sale. These loans are generally recorded at LOCOM. Origination fees and costs for such loans are capitalized in the basis of the loan and are included in the calculation of realized gains and losses upon sale. Adjustments to reflect unrealized losses resulting from changes in fair value and realized gains and losses upon ultimate sale of the loans are classified as Noninterest income in the Consolidated Statements of Income. The fair value of these loans is estimated using observable market prices when available, but may also incorporate consideration of other unobservable inputs such as indicative bids, broker price opinions or other information derived from internal or external data sources.
In certain circumstances, the Company may transfer certain loans from HFI to LHFS. At the time of transfer, any credit losses are subject to charge-off in accordance with the Company’s policy and are recorded as a reduction in the ALLL. Any subsequent losses, including those related to interest rate or liquidity-related valuation adjustments are recorded as a component of Noninterest income in the Consolidated Statements of Income. For additional information on the Company’s LHFS, see "Note 18. Fair Value Disclosures."
Truist Financial Corporation 95
Loans and Leases
The Company's accounting methods for loans differ depending on whether the loans are originated or purchased, and if purchased, whether or not the loans reflect credit deterioration since the date of origination such that at the date of acquisition there is more than an insignificant deterioration in credit.
Originated Loans and Leases
Loans and leases that management has the intent and ability to hold for the foreseeable future or until maturity or payoff are reported at their outstanding principal balances net of any unearned income, charge-offs, and unamortized fees and costs. Interest and fees on loans and leases includes certain loan fees and deferred direct costs associated with the lending process recognized over the contractual lives of the loans using the effective interest method.
Purchased Loans
Purchased loans are recorded at their fair value at the acquisition date.
Fair values for purchased loans are based on a discounted cash flow methodology that considers credit loss expectations, market interest rates and other market factors such as liquidity from the perspective of a market participant. Loans are grouped together according to similar characteristics and treated in the aggregate when applying various valuation techniques. The probability of default, loss given default and prepayment assumptions are the key factors driving credit losses which are embedded into the estimated cash flows. These assumptions are informed by internal data on loan characteristics, historical loss experience, and current and forecasted economic conditions. The interest and liquidity component of the estimate are determined by discounting interest and principal cash flows through the expected life of the underlying loans. The discount rates used for loans are based on current market rates for new originations of comparable loans and include adjustments for liquidity. The discount rates do not include a factor for credit losses as that has been included as a reduction to the estimated cash flows.
Beginning January 1, 2020, purchased loans are evaluated upon acquisition and classified as either PCD, which indicates that the loan reflects more-than-insignificant deterioration in credit quality since origination, or non-PCD. Truist considers a variety of factors in connection with the identification of more-than-insignificant deterioration in credit quality, including but not limited to risk grades, delinquency, nonperforming status, previous troubled debt restructurings or bankruptcies and other qualitative factors that indicate deterioration in credit quality since origination.
For PCD loans, the initial estimate of expected credit losses is determined using the same methodology as other loans held for investment and recognized as an adjustment to the acquisition price of the asset; thus, the sum of the loans’ purchase price and initial ALLL estimate represents the initial amortized cost basis. The difference between the initial amortized cost basis and the par value is the non-credit discount or premium. For non-PCD loans, the difference between the fair value and the par value is considered the fair value mark. The initial ALLL for non-PCD loans is recorded with a corresponding charge to the Provision for credit losses in the Consolidated Statements of Income. Subsequent changes in the ALLL related to PCD and non-PCD loans are recognized in the Provision for credit losses.
The non-credit discount or premium related to PCD loans and the fair value mark on non-PCD loans are amortized or accreted to Interest and fees on loans and leases over the contractual life of the loans using the effective interest method for amortizing loans, and using a straight-line approach for interest-only loans and loans associated with a revolving commitment. In the event of prepayment, unamortized discounts or premiums are recognized in Interest and fees on loans and leases.
96 Truist Financial Corporation
TDRs
Modifications to a borrower's debt agreement are considered TDRs if a concession is granted for economic or legal reasons related to a borrower's financial difficulties that otherwise would not be considered. TDRs are undertaken to improve the likelihood of recovery on the loan and may take the form of modifications that result in the stated interest rate of the loan being lower than the current market rate for new debt with similar risk, other modifications to the structure of the loan that fall outside of normal underwriting policies and procedures, or in certain limited circumstances, forgiveness of principal or interest. A restructuring that results in only a delay in payments that is insignificant is not considered an economic concession. In accordance with the CARES Act, Truist implemented loan modification programs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in order to provide borrowers with flexibility with respect to repayment terms. Payment relief assistance provided by Truist includes forbearance, deferrals, extension and re-aging programs, along with certain other modification strategies. The Company adopted certain provisions of the CARES Act and other regulatory guidance that provide relief from the requirement to apply TDR accounting to (1) certain modifications of federally backed mortgages upon request from the borrower, and (2) certain modifications of other non-federally backed mortgages for borrowers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic that were less than 30 days past due at December 31, 2019. In other circumstances the Company applied TDR relief provided by the regulatory agencies for borrowers who received short-term modifications as a result of COVID-19 and were less than 30 days past due at the time that the Company's COVID-19 loan modification program was implemented, or for federally backed loans, the modification was mandated by the government in response to COVID-19.
TDRs can be classified as performing or nonperforming, depending on the individual facts and circumstances of the borrower and an evaluation as to whether the borrower will be able to repay the loan based on the modified terms. In circumstances where the TDR involves charging off a portion of the loan balance, Truist classifies these TDRs as nonperforming.
The decision to maintain a commercial TDR on performing status is based on a current, well documented credit evaluation of the borrower's financial condition and prospects for repayment under the modified terms. This evaluation includes consideration of the borrower's current capacity to pay, which among other things may include a review of the borrower's current financial statements, an analysis of cash flow available to pay debt obligations, and an evaluation of secondary sources of payment from the borrower and any guarantors. This evaluation also includes an evaluation of the borrower's current willingness to pay, which may include a review of past payment history, an evaluation of the borrower's willingness to provide information on a timely basis, and consideration of offers from the borrower to provide additional collateral or guarantor support. The credit evaluation may also include review of cash flow projections, consideration of the adequacy of collateral to cover all principal and interest and trends indicating improving profitability and collectability of receivables.
The evaluation of mortgage and other consumer loans includes an evaluation of the client's debt-to-income ratio, credit report, property value and certain other client-specific factors that impact the clients’ ability to make timely principal and interest payments on the loan.
TDR classification may be removed due to the passage of time if the loan: (i) did not include a forgiveness of principal or interest, (ii) has performed in accordance with the modified terms (generally a minimum of six months), (iii) was reported as a TDR over a year-end reporting period, and (iv) reflected an interest rate on the modified loan that was no less than a market rate at the date of modification. TDR classification may also be removed for an accruing loan upon the occurrence of a subsequent non-concessionary modification granted at market terms and within current underwriting guidelines. In connection with consumer TDRs, a NPL will be returned to accruing status when (i) the borrower has resumed paying the full amount of the scheduled contractual interest and principal payments, (ii) management concludes that all principal and interest amounts contractually due (including arrearages) are reasonably assured of repayment, and (iii) there is a sustained period of repayment performance, generally a minimum of six months.
NPAs
NPAs include NPLs and foreclosed property. Foreclosed property consists of real estate and other assets acquired as a result of clients' loan defaults.
Truist Financial Corporation 97
Truist's policies for placing loans on nonperforming status conform to guidelines prescribed by bank regulatory authorities. Truist classifies loans and leases as past due when the payment of principal and interest based upon contractual terms is greater than 30 days delinquent or if one payment is past due. Payment deferrals granted as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic do not result in a loan becoming past due. The following table summarizes the delinquency thresholds that are a factor used in evaluating nonperforming classification and the timing of charge-off evaluations:
(1)Loans may be returned to performing status when (i) the borrower has resumed paying the full amount of the scheduled contractual interest and principal payments, (ii) management concludes that all principal and interest amounts contractually due (including arrearages) are reasonably assured of repayment, and (iii) there is a sustained period of repayment performance, generally a minimum of six months.
(2)Or when it is probable that principal or interest is not fully collectible, whichever occurs first.
(3)Depends on product type, loss mitigation status, status of the government guaranty, if applicable, and certain other product-specific factors.
(4)Student loans are not placed in nonperforming status, which reflects consideration of governmental guarantees or accelerated charge-off policies related to certain non-guaranteed portfolios.
(5)Claims related to government guaranteed loans may be filed once the loans reach 270 days past due. The non-guaranteed balance, which ranges from 2-3%, is charged off once the claim proceeds related to the guaranteed portion have been received.
(6)Credit cards are generally not placed on nonperforming status, but are fully charged off at specified delinquency dates consistent with regulatory guidelines.
When commercial loans are placed on nonperforming status, a charge-off is recorded, as applicable, to decrease the carrying value of such loans to the estimated recoverable amount. Consumer and credit card loans are subject to charge-off at a specified delinquency date consistent with regulatory guidelines.
Certain past due loans may remain on performing status if management determines that it does not have concern over the collectability of principal and interest. Generally, when loans are placed on nonperforming status, accrued interest receivable is reversed against interest income in the current period and amortization of deferred loan fees and expenses for originated loans, and fair value marks for purchased loans, is suspended. For commercial loans and certain consumer loans, payments received for interest and lending fees thereafter are applied as a reduction to the remaining principal balance as long as concern exists as to the ultimate collection of the principal. Interest income on nonperforming loans is recognized after the principal has been reduced to zero. If and when borrowers demonstrate the ability to repay a loan classified as nonperforming in accordance with its contractual terms, the loan may be returned to performing status upon meeting all regulatory, accounting and internal policy requirements.
Accrued interest is included in Other assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Accrued interest receivable balances are not considered in connection with the ACL estimation process, as such amounts are generally reversed against interest income when the loan is placed in nonperforming status. The Company has deferred interest income recognition on the estimated uncollectible portion of accrued interest on loans that were provided payment relief assistance in connection with the CARES Act.
Assets acquired as a result of foreclosure are initially recorded at fair value less estimated cost to sell and subsequently carried at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Net realizable value equals fair value less estimated selling costs. Any excess of cost over net realizable value at the time of foreclosure is charged to the ALLL. NPAs are subject to periodic revaluations of the collateral underlying impaired loans and foreclosed real estate. The periodic revaluations are generally based on the appraised value of the property and may include additional liquidity adjustments based upon the expected retention period. Truist's policies require that valuations be updated at least annually and that upon foreclosure, the valuation must not be more than six months old, otherwise an update is required. Any subsequent changes in value as well as gains or losses from the disposition of these assets are recognized in Other noninterest expense in the Consolidated Statements of Income. For additional information on the Company’s loan and lease activities, see "Note 5. Loans and ACL."
98 Truist Financial Corporation
ACL
The ACL includes the ALLL and RUFC. The ACL represents management's best estimate of expected future credit losses related to loan and lease portfolios and off-balance sheet lending commitments at the balance sheet date. The ALLL is a valuation account that is deducted from or added to the loans’ amortized cost basis to present the net amount expected to be collected on loans. The entire amount of the ACL is available to absorb losses on any loan category or lending-related commitment. Loan or lease balances deemed to be uncollectible are charged off against the ALLL. Expected recoveries of amounts previously charged off are incorporated into the ALLL estimate, with such amounts capped at the aggregate of amounts previously charged off. Changes to the ACL are made by charges to the Provision for credit losses, which is reflected in the Consolidated Statements of Income. The RUFC is recorded in Other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Portfolio segments represent the level at which Truist develops and documents a systematic methodology to determine its ACL. Truist’s loan and lease portfolio consists of three portfolio segments; commercial, consumer and credit card. The expected credit loss models are generally developed one level below the portfolio segment level. In certain instances, loans are further disaggregated by similar risk characteristics, such as business sector, client type, funding type, type of collateral, whether loan payments are interest-only and whether interest rates are fixed or variable. Larger loans and leases that do not share similar risk characteristics or that are considered collateral-dependent are individually evaluated. For these loans, the ALLL is determined through review of data specific to the borrower and related collateral, if any. Such estimates may be based on current loss forecasts, an evaluation of the fair value of the underlying collateral or in certain circumstances the present value of expected cash flows discounted at the loan's effective interest as described further below. The commercial portfolio segment models use a risk rating approach to estimate the ALLL. Truist may also consider specific environmental, social, and governance considerations in the risk rating methodology for commercial loans. The consumer and credit card models use a delinquency-based approach to estimate the ALLL. In addition to these quantitatively calculated components, the ALLL includes qualitatively calculated components.
Truist maintains a collectively calculated ALLL for loans with similar risk characteristics. The collectively calculated ALLL is estimated using relevant available information from internal and external sources relating to past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Truist maintains quantitative models to forecast expected credit losses. The credit loss forecasting models use portfolio balances, macroeconomic forecast data, portfolio composition and loan attributes as the primary inputs. Loss estimates are informed by historical loss experience adjusted for macroeconomic forecast data and current and expected portfolio risk characteristics. Expected losses are estimated through contractual maturity unless the borrower has a right to renew that is not cancellable or it is reasonably expected that the loan will be modified as a TDR.
The Scenario Committee provides guidance, selection, and approval for enterprise-sanctioned macroeconomic forecast data, including the macroeconomic forecast data for use in the ACL process. Forecasted economic conditions are developed using third party macroeconomic forecast data across scenarios adjusted based on management’s expectations over a reasonable and supportable forecast period of two years. Assumptions revert to long term historic averages gradually over a one year period. Macroeconomic forecast data used in estimating the expected losses vary by loan portfolio and include employment factors, estimated collateral values and market indicators as described by portfolio segment below. A qualitative allowance which incorporates management’s judgement is also included in the estimation of expected future loan and lease losses, including qualitative adjustments in circumstances where the model output is inconsistent with management’s expectations with respect to expected credit losses. This allowance is used to adjust for limitations in modeled results related to the current economic conditions, and capture risks in the portfolio such as considerations with respect to the impact of current economic events, the outcomes of which are uncertain. These events may include, but are not limited to, legislation that may directly or indirectly affect the banking industry and economic conditions affecting specific geographical areas and industries in which Truist conducts business.
The methodology for determining the RUFC is inherently similar to that used to determine the funded component of the ALLL and is measured over the period there is a contractual obligation to extend credit that is not unconditionally cancellable. The RUFC is adjusted for factors specific to binding commitments, including the probability of funding and exposure at default.
The ACL is monitored by the ACL Committee. The ACL Committee approves the ACL estimate and may recommend adjustments where necessary based on portfolio performance and other items that may impact credit risk.
Prior to the adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, the ACL represented management’s estimate of probable credit losses incurred in the loan and lease portfolios and off-balance sheet lending commitments at the balance sheet date. The estimation of the allowance for credit losses prior to 2020 did not consider reasonable and supportable forecasts that could have affected the collectability of the reported amounts.
The following provides a description of accounting policies, methodologies and credit quality indicators related to each of the portfolio segments:
Truist Financial Corporation 99
Commercial
The majority of loans in the commercial lending portfolio are assigned risk ratings based on an assessment of conditions that affect the borrower's ability to meet contractual obligations under the loan agreement. This process includes reviewing borrowers' financial information, historical payment experience, credit documentation, public information, and other information specific to each borrower. Risk ratings are reviewed on an annual basis, or more frequently for many relationships based on the policy requirements regarding various risk characteristics. While this review is largely focused on the borrower's ability to repay the loan, Truist also considers the capacity and willingness of a loan's guarantors to support the loan as a secondary source of repayment. When a guarantor exhibits the documented capacity and willingness to support the loan, Truist may consider extending the loan maturity and/or temporarily deferring principal payments if the ultimate collection of both principal and interest is reasonably assured. In these cases, Truist may determine the loan is not impaired due to the documented capacity and willingness of the guarantor to repay the loan. Loans are considered impaired when the borrower (or guarantor in certain circumstances) does not have the cash flow capacity or willingness to service the debt according to contractual terms, or it does not appear reasonable to assume that the borrower will continue to pay according to the contractual agreement. The following table summarizes risk ratings that Truist uses to monitor credit quality in its commercial portfolio:
Loans are generally pooled one level below the portfolio segment for the collectively calculated ALLL based on factors such as business sector, project and property type, line of business, collateral, loan type, obligor exposure, and risk grade or score. Commercial loss forecasting models are expected loss frameworks that use macroeconomic forecast data across scenarios and current portfolio attributes as inputs. The models forecast probability of default, exposure at default and loss given default by correlating certain macroeconomic forecast data to historical experience. The primary macroeconomic drivers for the commercial portfolios include unemployment trends, U.S. real GDP, corporate credit spreads, rental rates and property values.
Truist's policy is to review and individually evaluate the reserve for all nonperforming lending relationships and TDRs with an outstanding balance of $5 million or more, as such lending relationships do not typically share similar risk characteristics with others. Individually evaluated reserves are based on current forecasts, the present value of expected cash flows discounted at the loan's effective interest rate or the value of collateral, which is generally based on appraisals, recent sales of foreclosed properties and/or relevant property-specific market information. Truist has elected to measure expected credit losses on collateral-dependent loans based on the fair value of the collateral. Loans are considered collateral dependent when it is probable that Truist will be unable to collect principal and interest according to the contractual terms of the agreement and repayment is expected to be provided substantially by the sale or continued operation of the underlying collateral. Commercial loans are typically secured by real estate, business equipment, inventories and other types of collateral.
Consumer and Credit Card
The majority of the ALLL related to the consumer and credit card lending portfolios is calculated on a collective basis. Loans are pooled one level below the portfolio segment for the collectively calculated ALLL based on factors such as collateral, loan type, line of business and sales channel. Consumer portfolio models are expected loss frameworks that use macroeconomic forecast data across scenarios and current portfolio attributes as inputs. The models forecast probability of default, exposure at default and loss given default by correlating certain macroeconomic forecast data to historical experience. The primary macroeconomic drivers for the consumer portfolios include unemployment trends, the primary 30-year mortgage rate, home price indices and used car prices.
Residential mortgages and revolving home equity lines of credit are generally collateralized by one-to-four-family residential real estate, typically have loan-to-collateral value ratios of 80% or less at origination, and are made to borrowers in good credit standing. The indirect auto and indirect other portfolios include secured indirect installment loans to consumers for the purchase of new and used automobiles, boats and recreational vehicles. The student loan portfolio is composed of government guaranteed student loans and certain private student loans. The government guarantee mitigates substantially all of the risk related to principal and interest repayment for this component of the portfolio. Private student loans were originated with a credit enhancement from a third-party which partially mitigates the Company’s credit exposure. During 2020, the Company discontinued new origination of private student loans. The credit card portfolio and other arrangements within the indirect other and residential home equity and direct portfolios are generally unsecured and are actively managed.
Truist uses performing status to monitor credit quality in its consumer and credit card portfolios. Delinquency status is the primary factor considered in determining whether a loan should be classified as nonperforming.
The ALLL for loans classified as a TDR is based on analyses capturing the expected credit losses and the impact of the concession over the remaining life of the asset.
100 Truist Financial Corporation
Expected recoveries for consumer and credit card loans are included in the estimation of the ALLL based on historical experience.
Premises and Equipment
Premises, equipment, finance leases and leasehold improvements are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization are computed primarily using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the related assets and is recorded within the corresponding Noninterest expense categories on the Consolidated Statements of Income. Leasehold improvements are amortized using the straight-line method over the shorter of the improvements’ estimated useful lives or the lease term. An impairment loss on a long-lived asset or asset group, including premises and equipment and a ROU asset, is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of a long-lived asset exceeds its fair value based on the undiscounted cash flows.
Lessee operating and finance leases
Truist has operating and finance leases for data centers, corporate offices, branches, retail centers, and certain equipment, and determines if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Operating leases with an original lease term in excess of one year are included in Other assets and Other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Finance leases are included in Premises and equipment and Long-term debt in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
ROU assets represent the right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent the obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating and finance lease assets and liabilities are recognized at the commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. Operating lease costs are recorded in Net occupancy expense or Equipment expense based on the underlying asset. Truist uses an implicit interest rate in determining the present value of lease payments when readily determinable, and a collateralized incremental borrowing rate when an implicit rate is not available. Lease terms consider options to extend or terminate based on the determination of whether such renewal or termination options are deemed reasonably certain.
Lease agreements that contain non-lease components are generally accounted for as a single lease component. Variable costs, such as maintenance expenses, property and sales taxes, association dues and index based rate increases, are expensed as they are incurred.
The impairment policy for a ROU asset is discussed within the Premises and Equipment section above.
Bank-Owned Life Insurance
Life insurance policies on certain current and former directors, officers and teammates, for which Truist is the owner and beneficiary are stated at the cash surrender value within Other assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Changes in cash surrender value and proceeds from insurance benefits are recorded in Income from bank-owned life insurance in the Consolidated Statements of Income.
Income Taxes
The Company’s provision for income taxes is based on income and expense reported for financial statement purposes after adjustments for permanent differences such as interest income from lending to tax-exempt entities, tax credits, and amortization expense related to qualified affordable housing investments. In computing the provision for income taxes, the Company evaluates the technical merits of its income tax positions based on current legislative, judicial, and regulatory guidance. The deferral method of accounting is used on investments that generate investment tax credits, such that the investment tax credits are recognized as a reduction to the related investment. Additionally, the Company recognizes all excess tax benefits and deficiencies on employee share-based payments as a component of the Provision for income taxes in the Consolidated Statements of Income. These tax effects, generally determined upon the exercise of stock options or vesting of restricted stock, are treated as discrete items in the period in which they occur. The provision for income taxes does not reflect the tax effects of unrealized gains and losses and other income and expenses recorded in AOCI. For additional information related to the Company's unrealized gains and losses, see "Note 13. AOCI."
DTAs and DTLs result from differences between the timing of the recognition of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and for income tax purposes. These deferred assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that are expected to apply in the periods in which the DTAs or DTLs are expected to be realized. Subsequent changes in the tax laws require adjustment to these deferred assets and liabilities with the cumulative effect included in the Provision for income taxes for the period in which the change is enacted. A valuation allowance is recognized for a DTA, if based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the DTA will not be realized.
Truist Financial Corporation 101
Interest and penalties related to the Company’s tax positions are recognized as a component of the Provision for income taxes in the Consolidated Statements of Income. For additional information on the Company’s activities related to income taxes, see "Note 14. Income Taxes."
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company records derivative contracts at fair value in Other assets and Other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Accounting for changes in the fair value of a derivative depends upon whether or not it has been designated in a formal, qualifying hedging relationship. Changes in the fair value of derivatives not designated in a hedging relationship are recognized within Noninterest income in the Consolidated Statements of Income. This includes derivatives that the Company enters into in a dealer capacity to facilitate client transactions and as a risk management tool to economically hedge certain identified risks associated with assets carried at fair value such as MSRs, along with certain interest rate lock commitments on residential mortgage and commercial loans that are a normal part of the Company’s operations. The Company also evaluates contracts, such as brokered deposits and debt, to determine whether any embedded derivatives are required to be bifurcated and separately accounted for as freestanding derivatives.
Certain derivatives used as risk management tools are designated as accounting hedges and are used to mitigate the Company’s exposure to changes in interest rates or other identified market risks. The Company prepares written hedge documentation for all derivatives which are designated as hedges of (i) changes in the fair value of a recognized asset or liability (fair value hedge) attributable to a specified risk or (ii) a forecasted transaction, such as the variability of cash flows to be received or paid related to a recognized asset or liability (cash flow hedge). The written hedge documentation includes identification of, among other items, the risk management objective, hedging instrument, hedged item and methodologies for assessing and measuring hedge effectiveness, along with support for management’s assertion that the hedge will be highly effective. Methodologies related to hedge effectiveness include (i) statistical regression analysis of changes in the cash flows of the actual derivative and hypothetical derivatives, or (ii) statistical regression analysis of changes in the fair values of the actual derivative and the hedged item.
For designated hedging relationships, the Company generally performs subsequent assessments of hedge effectiveness using a qualitative approach.
Below is a summary of the cash flow and fair value hedge programs utilized by Truist:
102 Truist Financial Corporation
Derivatives expose the Company to risk that the counterparty to the derivative contract does not perform as expected. The Company manages its exposures to counterparty credit risk associated with derivatives by entering into transactions with counterparties with defined exposure limits based on their credit quality and in accordance with established policies and procedures. All counterparties are reviewed regularly as part of the Company’s credit risk management practices and appropriate action is taken to adjust the exposure limits to certain counterparties as necessary. The Company’s derivative transactions are generally governed by ISDA agreements or other legally enforceable industry standard master netting agreements. In certain cases and depending on the nature of the underlying derivative transactions, bilateral collateral agreements are also utilized.
The Company and its subsidiaries are subject to OTC derivative clearing requirements, which require certain derivatives to be cleared through central clearing houses. These clearing houses require the Company to post initial and variation margin to mitigate the risk of non-payment, the latter of which is received or paid daily based on the net asset or liability of the contracts. The Company applies settlement to market treatment for the cash collateralizing derivative contracts with certain centrally cleared counterparties. Derivative balances with these counterparties are considered settled by the collateral, and the implementation of the settlement to market treatment was applied based on the effective date of rulebook changes made by the applicable counterparties.
When the Company has more than one outstanding derivative transaction with a single counterparty, and there exists a legal right of setoff with that counterparty, the Company considers its exposure to the counterparty to be the net fair value of its derivative positions with that counterparty. If the net fair value is positive, then the corresponding asset value also reflects cash collateral held. The Company offsets derivative transactions with a single counterparty as well as any cash collateral paid to and received from that counterparty for derivative contracts that are subject to ISDA or other legally enforceable netting arrangements and meet accounting guidance for offsetting treatment.
For additional information on the Company’s derivative activities, see "Note 18. Fair Value Disclosures" and "Note 19. Derivative Financial Instruments."
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the cost in excess of the fair value of net assets acquired (including identifiable intangibles) in transactions accounted for as business combinations. Truist allocates goodwill to the reporting unit(s) that are expected to benefit from the synergies of the business combination.
The goodwill of each reporting unit is reviewed for impairment on an annual basis as of October 1 or more often if events or circumstances indicate that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is below its carrying value. If, after assessing all relevant events or circumstances, Truist concludes that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is below its carrying value, then an impairment test is required. Truist may also elect to bypass the qualitative assessment and proceed directly to the impairment test. In the quantitative test, the fair value of a reporting unit is compared to the carrying value of the reporting unit. If the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than the carrying value, then there is no impairment. If the fair value is less than the carrying value, then an impairment loss is recorded for the amount that the carrying value exceeds the fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill assigned to the reporting unit. The quantitative impairment test estimates the fair value of the reporting units using the income approach and the market approach. The income approach utilizes a discounted cash flow analysis. The market approach utilizes comparable public company information, key valuation multiples and considers a market control premium associated with cost synergies and other cash flow benefits that arise from obtaining control over a reporting unit.
The inputs and assumptions specific to each reporting unit are incorporated in the valuations, including projections of future cash flows, discount rates and applicable valuation multiples based on comparable public company information. Truist also assesses the reasonableness of the aggregate estimated fair value of the reporting units by comparison to its market capitalization over a reasonable period of time, including consideration of historic bank control premiums and the current market.
CDI and other intangible assets include premiums paid for acquisitions of core deposits and other identifiable intangible assets. Intangible assets other than goodwill, which are determined to have finite lives, are amortized over their useful lives, based upon the estimated economic benefits received. For additional information on the Company’s activities related to goodwill and other intangibles, see "Note 7. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets."
Truist Financial Corporation 103
MSRs
Truist has two classes of MSRs for which it separately manages the economic risks: residential and commercial. Both classes of MSRs are accounted for primarily at fair value with changes in fair value recorded in Residential mortgage income and Commercial real estate related income on the Consolidated Statements of Income. The fair value of servicing rights is impacted by a variety of factors, including prepayment assumptions, discount rates, delinquency rates, contractually-specified servicing fees, servicing costs, and underlying portfolio characteristics. These risks are hedged with various derivative instruments that are intended to mitigate the income statement effect to changes in fair value. The underlying assumptions and estimated values are corroborated by values received from independent third parties and comparisons to market transactions. For additional information on the Company’s servicing rights, see "Note 8. Loan Servicing."
Fair Value Measurement
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Depending on the nature of the asset or liability, the Company uses various valuation techniques and assumptions when estimating fair value. The Company classifies inputs used in valuation techniques within the fair value hierarchy discussed in "Note 18. Fair Value Disclosures."
When measuring assets and liabilities at fair value, the Company considers the principal or most advantageous market in which it would transact and considers assumptions that market participants would use when pricing the asset or liability. Assets and liabilities that are required to be measured at fair value on a recurring basis include trading securities, derivative instruments, AFS securities, and certain other equity securities. Assets and liabilities that the Company has elected to measure at fair value on a recurring basis include trading loans, loans originated to be sold and classified as LHFS, and residential and commercial MSRs. Other assets and liabilities are measured at fair value on a non-recurring basis, such as when assets are evaluated for impairment, the basis of accounting is lower of cost or market, or for disclosure purposes. Examples of these non-recurring fair value measurements include certain LHFS and loans and leases held for investment, OREO, certain cost or equity method investments, and intangible and long-lived assets. For additional information on the Company’s valuation of assets and liabilities held at fair value, see "Note 18. Fair Value Disclosures."
Equity-Based Compensation
Truist maintains various equity-based compensation plans that provide for the granting of RSAs, RSUs and PSUs to selected teammates and directors. Truist values share-based awards at the grant date fair value and recognizes the expense over the requisite service period taking into account retirement eligibility. Compensation expense is recognized in Personnel expense in the Consolidated Statements of Income. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur. For additional information on the Company’s stock-based compensation plans, see "Note 15. Benefit Plans."
Pension and Postretirement Benefit Obligations
Truist offers various pension plans and postretirement benefit plans to teammates. Calculation of the obligations and related expenses under these plans requires the use of actuarial valuation methods and assumptions. The discount rate assumption used to measure the pension and postretirement benefit obligations is set by reference to a high quality corporate bond yield curve and the individual characteristics of the plan such as projected cash flow patterns and payment durations. The expected long-term rate of return on assets is based on the expected returns for each major asset class in which the plan invests, adjusted for the weight of each asset class in the target mix.
Revenue Recognition
In the ordinary course of business, the Company recognizes two primary types of revenue in its Consolidated Statements of Income, Interest income and Noninterest income. The Company’s principal source of revenue is interest income from loans and securities, which is recognized on an accrual basis using the effective interest method. For information on the Company’s policies for recognizing interest income on loans and securities, see the "Loans and Leases," "LHFS," "Trading Activities," and "Investment Securities" sections within this Note.
Noninterest income includes revenue from various types of transactions and services provided to clients. The Company recognizes revenue from contracts with customers as performance obligations are satisfied. Performance obligations are typically satisfied in one year or less. Truist elected the practical expedient to expense the incremental costs of obtaining a contract when incurred when the amortization period is one year or less. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, remaining performance obligations consisted primarily of insurance and investment banking services for contracts with an original expected length of one year or less.
104 Truist Financial Corporation
Insurance income
Insurance commissions are received on the sale of insurance products as agent or broker, and revenue is recognized at a point in time upon the placement date of the insurance policies, representing the Company’s related performance obligations. Payment is normally received within the policy period. In addition to placement, Truist also provides insurance policy related risk management services. The Company’s execution of these risk management services represents its performance obligations. Revenue is recognized over time as these services are provided. Performance-based commissions are recognized when received or earlier when, upon consideration of past results and current conditions, the revenue is deemed not probable of reversal. Insurance commissions are included in the IH operating segment. Refer to "Note 21. Operating Segments" for information on segment results.
Transaction and service-based revenues
Transaction and service-based revenues include Service charges on deposits, Wealth management income, Card and payment related fees, and Investment banking income. Revenue is recognized at a point in time when the transactions occur or over time as services are performed over primarily monthly or quarterly periods. Payment is typically received in the period the transactions occur or, in some cases, within 90 days of the service period. Fees may be fixed or, where applicable, based on a percentage of transaction size or managed assets. These revenues, and their relationship to the Company’s operating segments, are further described by type below. Refer to "Note 21. Operating Segments" for information on segment results.
Service charges on deposits include account maintenance, cash and treasury management, wire transfers, ATM, overdraft and other deposit-related fees. The Company’s execution of the services related to these fees represents its performance obligations. Each of these performance obligations are either satisfied over time or at a point in time as the services are provided to the client. The Company is the principal when rendering these services. Payments for services provided are either withdrawn from client accounts as services are rendered or in the billing period following the completion of the service. The transaction price for each of these fees is based on the Company’s predetermined fee schedules. Service charges on deposits are recognized in the CB&W and C&CB operating segments.
Wealth management income includes trust and investment management income, retail investment and brokerage services, and investment advisory and other specialty wealth management fees. The Company’s execution of these services represents its related performance obligations. The Company generally recognizes trust and investment management and advisory revenue over time as services are rendered based on either a percentage of the market value of the assets under management or advisement, or fixed based on the services provided to the client. Fees are generally swept from the client’s account either in advance of or in arrears based on the prior period’s asset balances under management or advisement. The Company also offers selling and distribution services and earns commissions through the sale of annuity and mutual fund products, acting as agent in these transactions and recognizing revenue at a point in time when the client enters into an agreement with the product carrier. The Company may also receive trailing commissions and 12b-1 fees related to mutual fund and annuity products and recognizes this revenue in the period earned. Retail trade execution commissions are earned and recognized on the trade date with payment on the settlement date. Wealth management income is included in the CB&W operating segment.
Card and payment related fees include interchange fees from credit and debit cards, merchant acquirer revenue and other card related services. Interchange fees are earned by the Company each time a request for payment is initiated by a client at a merchant for which the Company transfers the funds on behalf of the client. Interchange rates are set by the payment network and are based on purchase volumes and other factors. Interchange fees are received daily and recognized at a point in time when the card transaction is processed, which represents the Company’s related performance obligation. The Company is considered an agent of the client and incurs costs with the payment network to facilitate the interchange with the merchant; therefore, the related payment network expense is recognized as a reduction of card fees. Truist also offers rewards and/or rebates to its client based on card usage. The costs associated with these programs are recognized as a reduction of card fees. Card and payment related fees are recognized in the CB&W and C&CB operating segments.
Investment banking and trading income includes securities underwriting fees, advisory fees, loan syndication fees, and trade execution services revenue. Underwriting fees are earned on the trade date when the Company, as a member of an underwriting syndicate, purchases the securities from the issuer and sells the securities to third party investors. Each member of the syndicate is responsible for selling its portion of the underwriting and is liable for the proportionate costs of the underwriting; therefore, the Company’s portion of underwriting revenue and expense is presented gross within noninterest income and noninterest expense. The transaction price is based on a percentage of the total transaction amount and payments are settled shortly after the trade date. Fees for merger and acquisition advisory services, including various activities such as business valuation, identification of potential targets or acquirers, and the issuance of fairness opinions, are generally earned and recognized by the Company when performance obligations are satisfied. The Company’s execution of the advisory services related to these fees represents its performance obligations. The Company is the principal when rendering these services. The transaction price is based on contractually specified terms agreed upon with the client for each advisory service. Loan syndication fees are typically recognized at the closing of a loan syndication transaction. Revenue related to corporate trade execution services is earned and recognized on the trade date with payment on the settlement date. Investment banking and trading income is included in the C&CB operating segment.
Truist Financial Corporation 105
Earnings Per Share
Basic EPS is computed by dividing net income available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during each period. Diluted EPS is computed by dividing net income available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during each period, plus common share equivalents calculated for stock options, warrants, and restricted stock outstanding using the treasury stock method. For additional information on the Company’s EPS, see "Note 20. Computation of EPS."
Related Party Transactions
The Company periodically enters into transactions with certain of its executive officers, directors, affiliates, trusts, and/or other related parties in its ordinary course of business. The Company is required to disclose material related party transactions, other than certain compensation and other arrangements entered into in the normal course of business. Information related to the Company’s relationships with VIEs and employee benefit plan arrangements is included in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K.
Subsequent Events
The Company evaluated events that occurred between December 31, 2020 and the date the accompanying financial statements were issued, and there were no material events, other than those already discussed, that would require recognition in the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements or disclosure in the accompanying Notes.
106 Truist Financial Corporation
Changes in Accounting Principles and Effects of New Accounting Pronouncements
Truist Financial Corporation 107
NOTE 2. Business Combinations
Effective December 6, 2019, the Company completed its Merger with SunTrust. The Merger was accounted for as a business combination. Accordingly, the assets acquired and liabilities assumed were recorded at their fair values as of the Merger date. The determination of fair value requires management to make estimates about discount rates, future expected cash flows, market conditions and other future events that are highly subjective in nature and subject to change. Fair value estimates related to the acquired assets and liabilities are subject to adjustment until all necessary information related to the valuation process has been received. Adjustments were finalized within one year of the closing date of the Merger. Immaterial amounts of the intangible assets recognized are deductible for income tax purposes.
The following table sets forth the allocation of Merger consideration to the fair value of the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed of SunTrust as of December 6, 2019:
The following is a description of the methods used to determine the fair values of significant assets and liabilities.
Cash and cash equivalents; Interest-bearing deposits with banks, and Federal Funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements: The carrying amount of these assets is a reasonable estimate of fair value based on the short-term nature of these assets.
108 Truist Financial Corporation
Trading assets and AFS Securities: Fair values for trading and AFS securities are based on quoted market prices, where available. If quoted market prices are not available, fair value estimates are based on observable inputs including quoted market prices for similar instruments, quoted market prices that are not in an active market or other inputs that are observable in the market. In the absence of observable inputs, fair value is estimated based on pricing models and/or discounted cash flow methodologies. The majority of AFS securities were priced by third party vendors whereas trading securities are priced internally. All securities are subject to IPV. Trading loans are valued primarily using quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active by a third party pricing service.
LHFS: The fair value is primarily based on quoted market prices for securities backed by similar types of loans, adjusted for servicing, interest rate risk and credit risk.
Loans and leases: Fair values for loans are based on a discounted cash flow methodology that considered credit loss expectations, market interest rates and other market factors such as liquidity from the perspective of a market participant. Loans are grouped together according to similar characteristics and are treated in the aggregate when applying various valuation techniques. The probability of default, loss given default and prepayment assumptions are the key factors driving credit losses which are embedded into the estimated cash flows. These assumptions are informed by internal data on loan characteristics, historical loss experience, and current and forecasted economic conditions. The interest and liquidity component of the estimate was determined by discounting interest and principal cash flows through the expected life of each loan. The discount rates used for loans are based on current market rates for new originations of comparable loans and include adjustments for liquidity. The discount rates do not include a factor for credit losses as that has been included as a reduction to the estimated cash flows. All of the merged loans were marked to fair value as of the Merger date and therefore, there was no allowance related to these loans.
CDI: This intangible asset represents the value of the relationships with certain deposit clients. The fair value was estimated based on a discounted cash flow methodology that gave appropriate consideration to expected client attrition rates, cost of the deposit base, reserve requirements, net maintenance cost attributable to client deposits and an estimate of the cost associated with alternative funding sources. The discount rates used for CDI assets are based on current market rates. The CDI is being amortized over 10 years based upon the estimated economic benefits received.
MSRs: Residential MSRs are valued using an OAS valuation model to project cash flows over multiple interest rate scenarios, which are discounted at risk-adjusted rates. Commercial MSRs are valued using a cash flow valuation model that calculates the present value of estimated future net servicing cash flows.
Deposits: The fair values used for the demand and savings deposits by definition equal the amount payable on demand at the Merger date. The fair values for time deposits are estimated using a discounted cash flow calculation that applies interest rates currently being offered to the contractual interest rates on such time deposits.
Short-term borrowings: The carrying amounts of short-term borrowings are reasonable estimates of fair value based on the short-term nature of these liabilities. The fair value of securities sold short is determined in the same manner as trading securities.
Long-term debt: The fair values of long-term debt instruments are estimated based on quoted market prices for the instrument if available, or for similar instruments if not available, or by using discounted cash flow analyses, based on current incremental borrowing rates for similar types of instruments.
Preferred stock: The fair values of preferred stock are estimated based on quoted market prices for the instruments.
Branch Divestitures
In July 2020, Truist completed the divestiture of 30 branches to First Horizon Bank, a wholly owned subsidiary of First Horizon National Corporation, to satisfy regulatory requirements in connection with the Merger. The branches were located in North Carolina, Virginia and Georgia. There were $425 million in loans and leases and $2.2 billion in deposits divested as part of this transaction.
Acquisitions
During 2020, Truist acquired several insurance companies, which resulted in $450 million of goodwill and $346 million of identifiable intangible assets in the IH segment. The intangible assets are being amortized over a weighted average term of 15.4 years based upon the estimated economic benefits received. Goodwill of $171 million and identifiable intangible assets of $160 million are deductible for tax purposes.
Truist Financial Corporation 109
NOTE 3. Securities Financing Activities
Securities purchased under resale agreements are primarily collateralized by U.S. government or agency securities and are carried at the amounts at which the securities will be subsequently sold, plus accrued interest. Securities borrowed are primarily collateralized by corporate securities. The Company borrows securities and purchases securities under agreements to resell as part of its securities financing activities. On the acquisition date of these securities, the Company and the related counterparty agree on the amount of collateral required to secure the principal amount loaned under these arrangements. The Company monitors collateral values daily and calls for additional collateral to be provided as warranted under the respective agreements. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the total market value of collateral held was $1.7 billion and $1.4 billion, of which $27 million and $135 million was repledged, respectively. The following table presents securities borrowed or purchased under resale agreements:
For securities sold under agreements to repurchase, the Company would be obligated to provide additional collateral in the event of a significant decline in fair value of the collateral pledged. This risk is managed by monitoring the liquidity and credit quality of the collateral, as well as the maturity profile of the transactions. Refer to "Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies" for additional information related to pledged securities. Securities sold under agreements to repurchase are accounted for as secured borrowings. The following table presents the Company’s related activity, by collateral type and remaining contractual maturity:
There were no securities financing transactions subject to legally enforceable master netting arrangements that were eligible for balance sheet netting for the periods presented.
110 Truist Financial Corporation
NOTE 4. Investment Securities
The following tables summarize the Company's AFS securities:
Certain securities issued by FNMA and FHLMC exceeded 10% of shareholders' equity at December 31, 2020. The FNMA investments had total amortized cost and fair value of $28.5 billion and $29.0 billion, respectively. The FHLMC investments had total amortized cost and fair value of $29.0 billion and $29.4 billion, respectively.
The amortized cost and estimated fair value of the securities portfolio by contractual maturity are shown in the following table. The expected life of MBS may differ from contractual maturities because borrowers may have the right to prepay their obligations with or without penalties.
Truist Financial Corporation 111
The following tables present the fair values and gross unrealized losses of investments based on the length of time that individual securities have been in a continuous unrealized loss position:
At December 31, 2020, no ACL was established for AFS securities. Substantially all of the unrealized losses on the securities portfolio were the result of changes in market interest rates compared to the date the securities were acquired rather than the credit quality of the issuers or underlying loans. The majority of the unrealized loss on states and political subdivisions securities was the result of fair value hedge basis adjustments that are a component of amortized cost.
The following table presents gross securities gains and losses recognized in earnings:
For 2020, the realized gains primarily relate to the sales of non-agency and agency MBS in the second and third quarter, respectively.
112 Truist Financial Corporation
NOTE 5. Loans and ACL
The following tables present loans and leases HFI by aging category. Government guaranteed loans are not placed on nonaccrual status regardless of delinquency because collection of principal and interest is reasonably assured. The past due status of loans that received a deferral under the CARES Act is generally frozen during the deferral period. In certain limited circumstances, accommodation programs result in the delinquency status being reset to current.
Truist Financial Corporation 113
The following table presents the amortized cost basis of loans by origination year and credit quality indicator:
(1)Includes certain deferred fees and costs, unapplied payments and other adjustments.
114 Truist Financial Corporation
The following table presents the carrying amount of loans by risk rating and performing status. Student loans are excluded as there is nominal risk of credit loss due to government guarantees or other credit enhancements. PCI loans were excluded because their related ALLL is determined by loan pool performance, and credit card loans were excluded as these loans are charged-off rather than reclassified as nonperforming:
ACL
The following tables present activity in the ACL:
Truist Financial Corporation 115
(1)Includes amounts assumed in the Merger.
(2)Balance is prior to the adoption of CECL.
(3)Includes the adoption of CECL, the ALLL for PCD acquisitions and other activity.
The adoption of CECL increased the ALLL $3.1 billion. The following discussion summarizes the changes in the factors that influenced Truist’s ACL estimate.
The commercial ALLL increased $2.1 billion for year ended December 31, 2020. The increase reflects the adoption of CECL and a more pessimistic outlook with respect to future economic conditions driven by the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase also reflects specific consideration of the risks associated with exposures to certain industries most impacted by COVID-19, including oil and gas, hospitality, and lending to small businesses.
The consumer ALLL increased $2.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase reflects the impact of CECL and the more pessimistic outlook described above, with the largest increases seen in the unsecured portfolios and the non-prime auto lending portfolio. These increases are partially offset by a decrease in outstanding loans in the residential mortgage and residential home equity and direct portfolios.
The ALLL for credit card increased $237 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase reflects the adoption of CECL and the more pessimistic outlook described above, which was partially offset by a reduction due to lower loan balances.
The RUFC increased $24 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase reflects the adoption of CECL and the more pessimistic outlook described above.
Truist’s ACL estimate represents management’s best estimate of expected credit losses related to the loan and lease portfolio, including unfunded commitments, at the balance sheet date. This estimate incorporates both quantitatively-derived output, as well as qualitative components that represent expected losses not otherwise captured by the models.
The quantitative models have been designed to estimate losses using macroeconomic forecast data over a reasonable and supportable forecast period, which management has determined to be two years, followed by a reversion to long-term historical loss conditions over a one-year period. These macroeconomic forecasts data include a number of key economic variables utilized in loss forecasting that include, but are not limited to, unemployment trends, US real GDP, corporate credit spreads, rental rates, property values, the primary 30-year mortgage rate, home price indices and used car prices.
The primary economic forecast incorporates a third-party baseline forecast that is adjusted to reflect Truist’s interest rate outlook. Management also considered multiple third party macroeconomic forecasts that reflected a range of possible outcomes in order to capture uncertainty in the economic environment. The economic forecast shaping the ACL estimate at December 31, 2020 included a GDP recovery to pre-pandemic levels by the end of 2021 with a stable unemployment rate through the middle of 2021 followed by continued improvement through the remainder of the reasonable and supportable period.
116 Truist Financial Corporation
Quantitative models have certain limitations with respect to estimating expected losses in times of rapidly changing macroeconomic forecasts. As a result, management believes that the qualitative component of the ACL, which incorporates management’s expert judgment related to expected future credit losses, will continue to be a prominent factor in establishing the ACL for the foreseeable future. The December 31, 2020 ACL estimate includes qualitative adjustments to address limitations in modeled results with respect to forecasted economic conditions that are well outside of historic economic ranges used to develop the models and to give consideration to other risks in the portfolio, including the impact of government relief programs, stimulus and client accommodations, that are not directly considered in the quantitative models.
PCD Loan Activity
For PCD loans, the initial estimate of expected credit losses is recognized in the ALLL on the date of acquisition using the same methodology as other loans held for investment. The following table provides a summary of purchased student loans with credit deterioration at acquisition:
Nonperforming and Impaired Loans
The following table provides a summary of nonperforming loans, excluding LHFS. Interest income recognized on nonperforming loans HFI was $32 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table includes certain information regarding impaired loans, excluding PCI and LHFS, that were individually evaluated for impairment. This table excludes guaranteed student loans and guaranteed residential mortgages for which there was nominal risk of principal loss due to the government guarantee or other credit enhancements.
Truist Financial Corporation 117
TDRs
The following table presents a summary of TDRs:
The primary reason loan modifications were classified as TDRs is summarized in the tables below. New TDR balances represent the recorded investment at the end of the quarter in which the modification was made. The prior quarter balance represents recorded investment at the beginning of the quarter in which the modification was made. Rate modifications consist of TDRs made with below market interest rates, including those that also have modifications of loan structures.
118 Truist Financial Corporation
Charge-offs and forgiveness of principal and interest for TDRs were immaterial for all periods presented.
The re-default balance for modifications that had been classified as TDRs during the previous 12 months that experienced a payment default was $93 million, $78 million and $76 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Payment default is defined as movement of the TDR to nonperforming status, foreclosure or charge-off, whichever occurs first.
NPAs
The following table presents a summary of nonperforming assets and residential mortgage loans in the process of foreclosure.
(1) Beginning January 1, 2020, nonperforming loans and leases include certain assets previously classified as PCI.
Unearned Income, Discounts and Net Deferred Loan Fees and Costs
The following table presents additional information about loans and leases:
Truist Financial Corporation 119
NOTE 6. Premises and Equipment
A summary of premises and equipment is presented in the accompanying table:
NOTE 7. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Truist performed a quantitative goodwill impairment test for its CB&W, C&CB and IH reporting units as of October 1, 2020. Based on the results of the impairment analyses, the Company concluded that the fair values of the reporting units exceed their respective carrying values; therefore, there was no goodwill impairment. However, for the C&CB reporting unit the fair value of the reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by less than 10%, indicating that the goodwill of this reporting unit may be at risk of impairment. The Company monitored events and circumstances during the fourth quarter of 2020, including the continuing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, concluding that it was not more-likely-than-not that the fair value of one or more of its reporting units is below its respective carrying amount as of December 31, 2020. See "Note 1. Basis of Presentation," for additional information regarding Truist’s goodwill accounting policy.
The changes in the carrying amount of goodwill attributable to operating segments are reflected in the table below. The adjustments for 2020 include measurement period adjustments to the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities and the reallocation of net assets to the underlying reporting units. The adjustments to CDI and other intangibles did not have a material impact to estimated amortization expense for the next five years. Adjustments to the reallocation of net assets to Truist's reporting units include updates to the estimated operating results and the finalization of corporate expense allocations. Refer to "Note 2. Business Combinations" for additional information on the Merger and IH acquisitions, and "Note 21. Operating Segments" for additional information on segments.
The following table, which excludes fully amortized intangibles, presents information for identifiable intangible assets:
The estimated amortization expense of identifiable intangibles for the next five years and thereafter is presented as follows:
120 Truist Financial Corporation
NOTE 8. Loan Servicing
The Company acquires servicing rights and retains servicing rights for certain of its sales or securitizations of residential mortgages and commercial loans. Servicing rights on residential and commercial mortgages are capitalized by the Company as MSRs on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Income earned by the Company on its residential MSRs is derived primarily from contractually specified mortgage servicing fees and late fees, net of curtailment costs. Income earned by the Company on its commercial mortgage servicing rights is derived primarily from contractually specified servicing fees and other ancillary fees.
Residential Mortgage Activities
The following tables summarize residential mortgage servicing activities:
The following table presents a roll forward of the carrying value of residential MSRs recorded at fair value:
The sensitivity of the fair value of the Company's residential MSRs to changes in key assumptions is presented in the following table:
Truist Financial Corporation 121
The sensitivity calculations above are hypothetical and should not be considered to be predictive of future performance. As indicated, changes in fair value based on adverse changes in assumptions generally cannot be extrapolated because the relationship of the change in assumption to the change in fair value may not be linear. Also, in the above table, the effect of an adverse variation in one assumption on the fair value of the MSRs is calculated without changing any other assumption; while in reality, changes in one factor may result in changes in another, which may magnify or counteract the effect of the change. See "Note 18. Fair Value Disclosures" for additional information on the valuation techniques used.
Commercial Mortgage Activities
The following table summarizes commercial mortgage servicing activities for the periods presented:
In the third quarter of 2020, the Company transferred certain servicing activities involving cancellable servicing rights to third parties, resulting in a decrease in the UPB of CRE mortgages serviced for others. This transfer did not materially impact commercial MSRs.
NOTE 9. Other Assets and Liabilities
Lessee Operating and Finance Leases
The Company leases certain assets, consisting primarily of real estate, and assesses at contract inception whether a contract is, or contains, a lease. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $32 million of operating leases that had not yet commenced. The following tables present additional information on leases, and excludes assets related to the lease financing businesses:
Lessor Operating Leases
The Company’s two primary lessor businesses are equipment financing and structured real estate with income recorded in Operating lease income on the Consolidated Statements of Income.
122 Truist Financial Corporation
The following table presents a summary of assets under operating leases and activity related to assets under operating leases. This table excludes subleases on assets included in premises and equipment.
(1) Includes certain land parcels subject to operating leases that have indefinite lives.
The residual value of assets no longer under operating leases was immaterial.
Bank-Owned Life Insurance
Bank-owned life insurance consists of life insurance policies held on certain teammates for which the Company is the beneficiary. These policies provide the Company an efficient form of funding for retirement and other employee benefits costs. The carrying value of bank-owned life insurance was $6.5 billion at December 31, 2020 and $6.4 billion December 31, 2019.
NOTE 10. Deposits
The composition of deposits is presented in the following table:
The following table presents time deposits maturities:
Truist Financial Corporation 123
NOTE 11. Borrowings
The following table presents a summary of short-term borrowings:
The following table presents a summary of long-term debt:
(1)Includes the impact of debt issuance costs and purchase accounting, and excludes hedge accounting impacts.
(2)Subordinated notes with a remaining maturity of one year or greater qualify under the risk-based capital guidelines as Tier 2 supplementary capital, subject to certain limitations.
(3)Consist of notes with various terms that include fixed or floating rate interest, or returns that are linked to an equity index.
(4)Includes finance leases, tax credit investments, and other.
(5)Includes debt associated with structured real estate leases.
The Company does not consolidate certain wholly-owned trusts which were formed for the sole purpose of issuing trust preferred securities. The proceeds from the trust preferred securities issuances were invested in capital notes of the Parent Company. The Parent Company’s obligations constitute a full and unconditional guarantee of the trust preferred securities.
During 2020, the Company issued and redeemed certain FHLB advances, which resulted in a loss on early extinguishment of long-term debt of $235 million.
The following table presents future debt maturities:
(1)Amounts include imputed interest of $5 million related to finance leases.
124 Truist Financial Corporation
NOTE 12. Shareholders' Equity
Common Stock
The following table presents the dividends declared per share of common stock:
Share Repurchase Activity
In December 2020, Truist announced the Board of Directors had authorized the repurchase of up to $2.0 billion of common stock beginning in the first quarter of 2021 to optimize Truist's capital position. During 2018, the Company repurchased $1.2 billion of common stock, which represented 23.2 million shares, through a combination of open market and accelerated share repurchases. Repurchased shares revert to the status of authorized and unissued shares upon repurchase.
Preferred Stock
Dividends on the preferred stock are non-cumulative and payable when declared by the Company's Board or a duly authorized committee of the Board. The Company issued depositary shares, each of which represents a fractional ownership interest in a share of the Company's preferred stock. The preferred stock has no stated maturity and redemption is solely at the option of the Company in whole or in part after the earliest redemption date at the liquidation preference plus declared and unpaid dividends. Prior to the redemption date, the Company has the option to redeem in whole, but not in part, upon the occurrence of a regulatory capital treatment event.
The following table presents a summary of the non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Converted security from previously issued SunTrust preferred stock.
(2)Dividend rate is the greater of 4.00% or 3-month LIBOR plus 0.530%.
(3)Dividend rate is the greater of 4.00% or 3-month LIBOR plus 0.645%.
(4)Fixed dividend rate will reset on June 15, 2022, then dividend rate will be 3-month LIBOR plus 3.102%.
(5)Fixed dividend rate will reset on December 15, 2027, then dividend rate will be 3-month LIBOR plus 2.786%.
(6)Fixed dividend rate will reset on September 1, 2024, and on each following fifth anniversary of the reset date to the five-year U.S. Treasury rate plus 3.003%.
(7)Fixed dividend rate will reset on December 1, 2025, and on each following fifth anniversary of the reset date to the five-year U.S. Treasury rate plus 4.605%.
(8)Fixed dividend rate will reset on September 1, 2030, and on each following tenth anniversary of the reset date to the ten-year U.S. Treasury rate plus 4.349%.
(9)Dividend payments become quarterly beginning on September 15, 2022.
(10)Dividend payments become quarterly after dividend rate reset.
Truist Financial Corporation 125
Issuances
During 2020, Truist issued a total of $3.5 billion in series O, series P, series Q and series R preferred stock to further strengthen its capital position. During 2019, the Company issued $1.7 billion of series N non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock.
Upon closing of the Merger, each outstanding share of SunTrust perpetual preferred stock was converted into the right to receive one share of an applicable newly issued series of Truist preferred stock having substantially the same terms as such share of SunTrust preferred stock. The Company issued series I, J, K, L and M non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock with a total par and fair value of $2.0 billion on the Merger closing date. Refer to the table below for additional details regarding the preferred shares and dividends and "Note 2. Business Combinations" for additional information related to the Merger.
Redemptions
During 2020, the Company redeemed all 5,000 outstanding shares of its perpetual preferred stock series K and the corresponding depositary shares representing fractional interests in such series for $500 million plus any unpaid dividends. The preferred stock redemption was in accordance with the terms of the Company’s Articles of Amendment to its Articles of Incorporation, effective as of December 6, 2019.
During 2019, the Company redeemed all 23,000 outstanding shares of series D and 46,000 outstanding shares of series E non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock and the corresponding depositary shares representing fractional interests in each such series for $1.7 billion. Regular dividends on the redeemed shares were paid during the third quarter of 2019. In connection with the redemptions, net income available to common shareholders was reduced by $46 million to recognize the difference in the redemption price and the carrying value.
Subsequent Event
Early in 2021, the Company announced the forthcoming redemption of all 18,000 outstanding shares of its perpetual preferred stock series F and the corresponding depositary shares representing fractional interests in such series for $450 million and all 20,000 outstanding shares of its perpetual preferred stock series G and the corresponding depositary shares representing fractional interests in such series for $500 million.
126 Truist Financial Corporation
NOTE 13. AOCI
AOCI includes the after-tax change in unrecognized net costs related to defined benefit pension and OPEB plans as well as unrealized gains and losses on cash flow hedges and AFS securities.
Truist Financial Corporation 127
NOTE 14. Income Taxes
The components of the income tax provision are as follows:
A reconciliation of the provision for income taxes at the statutory federal income tax rate to the Company’s actual provision for income taxes and actual effective tax rate is presented in the following table:
128 Truist Financial Corporation
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities result from differences between the timing of the recognition of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and for income tax purposes. DTAs and DTLs are measured using the enacted federal and state tax rates in the periods in which the DTAs or DTLs are expected to be realized. The net deferred income tax liability is recorded in Other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Significant DTAs and DTLs, net of the federal impact for state taxes, are presented in the following table.
The DTAs include Federal and state NOLs and other state carryforwards that will expire, if not utilized, in varying amounts from 2021 to 2040. The Company had a valuation allowance recorded against its state carryforwards and certain state DTAs of $123 million and $130 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table provides a rollforward of the Company's gross federal and state UTBs, excluding interest and penalties:
The amount of UTBs that would favorably affect the Company's effective tax rate, if recognized, was $100 million and $99 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Interest and penalties related to UTBs are recorded in the Provision for income taxes in the Consolidated Statement of Income. The Company had a gross liability of $12 million and $11 million for interest and penalties related to its UTBs at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The amount of gross expense related interest and penalties on UTBs was immaterial.
The Company files U.S. federal, state and local income tax returns. The Company's federal income tax returns are no longer subject to examination by the IRS for taxable years prior to 2017. With limited exceptions, the Company is no longer subject to examination by state and local taxing authorities for taxable years prior to 2013. It is reasonably possible that the liability for unrecognized tax benefits could decrease by as much as $15 million during the next 12 months due to completion of tax authority examinations and the expiration of statutes of limitations. It is uncertain how much, if any, of this potential decrease will impact the Company’s effective tax rate.
Truist Financial Corporation 129
NOTE 15. Benefit Plans
Defined Benefit Retirement Plans
Truist provides defined benefit retirement plans qualified under the IRC that cover most teammates. Benefits are based on years of service, age at retirement and the employee's compensation during the five highest consecutive years of earnings within the last ten years of employment.
In addition, supplemental retirement benefits are provided to certain key officers under supplemental defined benefit executive retirement plans, which are not qualified under the IRC. Although technically unfunded plans, Rabbi Trusts and insurance policies on the lives of certain of the covered employees are available to finance future benefits.
The Company's defined benefit plans obtained through the Merger were combined during 2020.
The following tables present a summary of the qualified and nonqualified defined benefit pension plans. On the Consolidated Balance Sheets, the qualified pension plan net asset is recorded as a component of Other assets and the nonqualified pension plans net liability is recorded as a component of Other liabilities. The data is calculated using an actuarial measurement date of December 31.
The weighted average expected long-term rate of return on plan assets represents the average rate of return expected to be earned on plan assets over the period the benefits included in the benefit obligation are to be paid. In developing the expected rate of return, Truist considers long-term compound annualized returns of historical market data for each asset category, as well as historical actual returns on the plan assets. Using this reference information, the Company develops forward-looking return expectations for each asset category and a weighted average expected long-term rate of return for the plan based on target asset allocations contained in the Company's Investment Policy Statement. For 2021, the expected rate of return on plan assets is 6.7%.
130 Truist Financial Corporation
Activity in the projected benefit obligation is presented in the following table:
(1)The assumed rate for qualified and nonqualified plans is 3.50% in 2021 and increases to 4.50% thereafter.
Activity in plan assets is presented in the following table:
The following are the pre-tax amounts recognized in AOCI:
The following table presents the amount expected to be amortized from AOCI into net periodic pension cost during 2021:
Truist makes contributions to the qualified pension plan in amounts between the minimum required for funding and the maximum amount deductible for federal income tax purposes. Truist made discretionary contributions of $387 million during the first quarter of 2021. Management may make additional contributions in 2021. For the nonqualified plans, the employer contributions are based on benefit payments.
Truist Financial Corporation 131
The following table reflects the estimated benefit payments for the periods presented:
The Company's primary total return objective is to achieve returns that, over the long term, will fund retirement liabilities and provide for the desired plan benefits in a manner that satisfies the fiduciary requirements of the ERISA. The plan assets have a long-term time horizon that runs concurrent with the average life expectancy of the participants. As such, the Plan can assume a time horizon that extends well beyond a full market cycle, and can assume an above-average level of risk, as measured by the standard deviation of annual return. The investments are broadly diversified among economic sector, industry, quality and size in order to reduce risk and to produce incremental return. Within approved guidelines and restrictions, investment managers have wide discretion over the timing and selection of individual investments.
Truist periodically reviews its asset allocation and investment policy and makes changes to its target asset allocation. Truist has established guidelines within each asset category to ensure the appropriate balance of risk and reward. The following table presents the fair values of the qualified pension plan assets by asset category:
(1)The plan may hold up to 10% of its assets in Truist common stock.
International equity securities include a common/commingled fund that consists of assets from several accounts, pooled together, to reduce management and administration costs. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, investments totaling $773 million and $341 million, respectively, have been excluded from the table above as valued based on net asset value as a practical expedient.
Defined Contribution Plans
Truist offers a 401(k) Savings Plan and other defined contribution plans that permit teammates to contribute up to 50% of cash compensation. For full-time teammates who are 21 years of age or older with one year or more of service, Truist makes matching contributions of up to 6% of the employee's compensation. The Company's contribution expense for the 401(k) Savings Plan and nonqualified defined contribution plans totaled $272 million, $152 million and $141 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Certain teammates of subsidiaries participate in the 401(k) Savings Plan with different matching formulas. The Company's defined contribution plan obtained through the Merger was combined during 2020.
Equity-Based Compensation Plans
At December 31, 2020, RSAs, RSUs and PSUs were outstanding from equity-based compensation plans that have been approved by shareholders and plans assumed from acquired entities. Those plans are intended to assist the Company in recruiting and retaining teammates, directors and independent contractors and to align the interests of eligible participants with those of Truist and its shareholders.
The majority of outstanding awards and awards available to be issued relate to plans that allow for accelerated vesting of awards for holders who retire and have met all retirement eligibility requirements or in connection with certain other events. Until vested, certain of these awards are subject to forfeiture under specified circumstances. The fair value of RSUs and PSUs is based on the common stock price on the grant date less the present value of expected dividends that will be foregone during the vesting period. Substantially all awards are granted in February of each year. Grants to non-executive teammates primarily consist of RSUs.
132 Truist Financial Corporation
The following table provides a summary of the equity-based compensation plans:
The following table presents a summary of selected data related to equity-based compensation costs:
The following table presents the activity related to awards of RSUs, PSUs and restricted shares:
Other Benefits
There are various other employment contracts, deferred compensation arrangements and non-compete covenants with selected members of management and certain retirees. These plans and their obligations are not material to the financial statements.
NOTE 16. Commitments and Contingencies
Truist utilizes a variety of financial instruments to meet the financing needs of clients and to mitigate exposure to risks. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit, letters of credit and financial guarantees and derivatives. Truist also has commitments to fund certain affordable housing investments and contingent liabilities related to certain sold loans.
Tax Credit and Certain Equity Investments
The Company invests in certain affordable housing projects throughout its market area as a means of supporting local communities. Truist receives tax credits related to these investments, for which the Company typically acts as a limited partner and therefore does not exert control over the operating or financial policies of the partnerships. Truist typically provides financing during the construction and development of the properties; however, permanent financing is generally obtained from independent third parties upon completion of a project. Tax credits are subject to recapture by taxing authorities based on compliance features required to be met at the project level. Truist's maximum potential exposure to losses relative to investments in VIEs is generally limited to the sum of the outstanding balance, future funding commitments and any related loans to the entity, exclusive of any potential tax recapture associated with the investments. Loans to these entities are underwritten in substantially the same manner as the Company's other loans and are generally secured.
Additionally, the Company invests in other community development entities as a limited partner and/or a lender. The Company receives tax credits for its limited partner investments. The Company has determined that the majority of the related partnerships are VIEs. The Company has concluded that it is not the primary beneficiary of these investments. Truist uses the equity method of accounting for these investments.
The Company also invests in entities that promote renewable energy sources as a limited partner. Tax credits received for these investments are recorded as a reduction to the carrying value of these investments. The Company has determined that these renewable energy tax credit partnerships are VIEs. The Company has concluded that it is not the primary beneficiary of these VIEs because it does not have the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the VIEs' financial performance and therefore, it is not required to consolidate these VIEs. The Company’s maximum exposure to loss related to these investments is limited to its equity investments in these partnerships and any additional unfunded equity commitments.
Truist Financial Corporation 133
Truist has investments in and future funding commitments related to private equity and certain other equity method investments. The risk exposure relating to such commitments is generally limited to the amount of investments and future funding commitments made.
The following table summarizes certain tax credit and certain equity investments:
The following table presents a summary of tax credits and amortization associated with the Company's tax credit investment activity:
Letters of Credit and Financial Guarantees
Commitments to extend, originate or purchase credit are primarily lines of credit to businesses and consumers and have specified rates and maturity dates. Many of these commitments also have adverse change clauses, which allow Truist to cancel the commitment due to deterioration in the borrowers' creditworthiness. The fair values of commitments are estimated using the fees charged to enter into similar agreements, taking into account the remaining terms of the agreements and the present creditworthiness of the counterparties. The fair values of guarantees and letters of credit are estimated based on the counterparties' creditworthiness and average default rates for loan products with similar risks. Consumer lending and revolving credit commitments have an immaterial fair value as Truist typically has the unconditional ability to cancel such commitments. Refer to "Note 18. Fair Value Disclosures" for additional disclosures on the RUFC.
Truist has sold certain mortgage-related loans that contain recourse provisions. These provisions generally require Truist to reimburse the investor for a share of any loss that is incurred after the disposal of the property. Truist also issues standard representations and warranties related to mortgage loan sales to GSEs. Refer to "Note 8. Loan Servicing" for additional disclosures related to these exposures.
Letters of credit and financial guarantees are unconditional commitments issued by Truist to guarantee the performance of a client to a third party. These guarantees are primarily issued to support borrowing arrangements, including commercial paper issuance, bond financing and similar transactions. The credit risk involved in the issuance of these guarantees is essentially the same as that involved in extending loans to clients and, as such, the instruments are collateralized when necessary.
The following is a summary of selected notional amounts of off-balance sheet financial instruments:
134 Truist Financial Corporation
Derivatives
Truist enters into derivative contracts to manage various financial risks. A derivative is a financial instrument that derives its cash flows, and therefore its value, by reference to an underlying instrument, index or referenced interest rate. Derivative contracts are carried at fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheets with the fair value representing the net present value of expected future cash receipts or payments based on market interest rates. For additional information on derivative instruments, see "Note 19. Derivative Financial Instruments."
Total Return Swaps
The Company facilitates matched book TRS transactions on behalf of clients, whereby a VIE purchases reference assets identified by a client and the Company enters into a TRS with the VIE, with a mirror-image TRS facing the client. The Company provides senior financing to the VIE in the form of demand notes to fund the purchase of the reference assets. The TRS contracts pass through interest and other cash flows on the reference assets to the third party clients, along with exposing those clients to decreases in value on the assets and providing them with the rights to appreciation on the assets. The terms of the TRS contracts require the third parties to post initial margin collateral, as well as ongoing margin as the fair values of the underlying reference assets change.
The Company concluded that the associated VIEs should be consolidated because the Company has (i) the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the economic performance of the VIE and (ii) the obligation to absorb losses, and the right to receive benefits, that could potentially be significant. At December 31, 2020, the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet reflected $1.3 billion of assets and $41 million of other liabilities of the VIEs. At December 31, 2019, the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet reflected $2.7 billion of assets and $116 million of other liabilities of the VIEs. Assets at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 include $1.3 billion and $2.6 billion in trading loans, respectively. The activities of the VIEs are restricted to buying and selling the reference assets and the risks/benefits of any such assets owned by the VIEs are passed to the third party clients via the TRS contracts. For additional information on TRS contracts and the related VIEs, see "Note 19. Derivative Financial Instruments."
Other Commitments
Truist holds public funds in certain states that do not require 100% collateralization on public fund bank deposits. In these states, should the failure of another public fund depository institution result in a loss for the public entity, the resulting uncollateralized deposit shortfall would have to be absorbed on a pro-rata basis (based upon the public deposits held by each bank within the respective state) by the remaining financial institutions holding public funds in that state. Truist monitors deposits levels relative to the total public deposits held by all depository institutions within these states. The likelihood that the Company would have to perform under this guarantee is dependent on whether any financial institutions holding public funds default, as well as the adequacy of collateral coverage.
In the ordinary course of business, Truist indemnifies its officers and directors to the fullest extent permitted by law against liabilities arising from pending litigation. Truist also issues standard representations and warranties in underwriting agreements, merger and acquisition agreements, loan sales, brokerage activities and other similar arrangements. Counterparties in many of these indemnification arrangements provide similar indemnifications to Truist. Although these agreements often do not specify limitations, Truist does not believe that any payments related to these guarantees would materially change the financial position or results of operations of Truist.
As a member of the FHLB, Truist is required to maintain a minimum investment in capital stock. The board of directors of the FHLB can increase the minimum investment requirements in the event it has concluded that additional capital is required to allow it to meet its own regulatory capital requirements. Any increase in the minimum investment requirements outside of specified ranges requires the approval of the Federal Housing Finance Agency. Because the extent of any obligation to increase Truist's investment in the FHLB depends entirely upon the occurrence of a future event, potential future investments in the FLHB stock are not determinable.
The Company utilizes the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation for trade comparisons, netting and settlement of fixed income securities. As a Government Securities Division netting member, the Company has a commitment to the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation to meet its financial obligations as a central counterparty clearing house in the event the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation has insufficient liquidity recourses through a potential committed liquidity resource repurchase transaction. Any commitment would be based on the Company’s share of its liquidity burden on the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation. Truist does not believe that any payments related to these guarantees would materially change the financial position or results of operations of Truist.
Truist Financial Corporation 135
Pledged Assets
Certain assets were pledged to secure municipal deposits, securities sold under agreements to repurchase, certain derivative agreements, and borrowings or borrowing capacity, as well as for other purposes as required or permitted by law. Assets pledged to the FHLB and FRB are subject to applicable asset discounts when determining borrowing capacity. The Company obtains secured financing and letters of credit from the FRB and FHLB. The Company’s letters of credit from the FHLB can be used to secure various client deposits, including public fund relationships. Excluding assets related to employee benefit plans, the majority of the agreements governing the pledged assets do not permit the other party to sell or repledge the collateral. Additional assets were pledged to the FRB of Richmond in the first quarter of 2020 following the Merger. The following table provides the total carrying amount of pledged assets by asset type.
Litigation and Regulatory Matters
Truist and/or its subsidiaries are routinely parties to numerous legal proceedings, including private, civil litigation and regulatory investigations, arising from the ordinary conduct of its regular business activities. The matters range from individual actions involving a single plaintiff to class action lawsuits with multiple class members and can involve claims for substantial amounts. Investigations involve both formal and informal proceedings, by both governmental agencies and self-regulatory organizations. These legal proceedings are at varying stages of adjudication, arbitration or investigation and may consist of a variety of claims, including common law tort and contract claims and statutory antitrust, securities and consumer protection claims, and the ultimate resolution of any proceeding is uncertain and inherently difficult to predict. It is possible that the ultimate resolution of these matters, if unfavorable, may be material to the consolidated financial position, consolidated results of operations, or consolidated cash flows of Truist.
In accordance with the provisions of U.S. GAAP for contingencies, Truist establishes accruals for legal matters when potential losses associated with the actions become probable and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. There is no assurance that the ultimate resolution of these matters will not significantly exceed the amounts that Truist has accrued. Accruals for legal matter are based on management’s best judgment after consultation with counsel and others, as warranted.
The Company’s estimate of reasonably possible losses, in excess of amounts accrued, ranges from zero to approximately $200 million as of December 31, 2020. This estimated range is based upon currently available information and involves considerable judgment, given that claims often include significant legal uncertainties, damages alleged by plaintiffs are often unspecified or overstated, discovery may not have started or may not be complete, and material facts may be disputed or unsubstantiated, among other factors. In addition, the matters underlying this estimated range will change from time to time, and actual losses may vary significantly from this estimate. As a result, the Company does not believe that an estimate of reasonably possible losses can be made for certain matters. Such matters are not reflected in the range provided here.
The following is a description of certain legal proceedings in which Truist is involved:
Bickerstaff v. SunTrust Bank
This class action case was filed in the Fulton County State Court on July 12, 2010, and an amended complaint was filed on August 9, 2010. Plaintiff asserts that all overdraft fees charged to his account which related to debit card and ATM transactions are actually interest charges and therefore subject to the usury laws of Georgia. Plaintiff has brought claims for violations of civil and criminal usury laws, conversion, and money had and received. On October 6, 2017, the trial court granted plaintiff's motion for class certification and defined the class as "Every Georgia citizen who had or has one or more accounts with SunTrust Bank and who, from July 12, 2006, to October 6, 2017 (i) had at least one overdraft of $500.00 or less resulting from an ATM or debit card transaction (the "Transaction"); (ii) paid any Overdraft Fees as a result of the Transaction; and (iii) did not receive a refund of those Fees" and the granting of a certified class was affirmed on appeal. On April 8, 2020, the Company filed a motion seeking to narrow the scope of this class and on May 29, 2020, it filed a renewed motion to compel arbitration of the claims of some of the class members. On February 9, 2021, the trial court denied both motions as premature but held that the issues could be raised again after the conclusion of discovery, which is currently underway. The Company believes that the claims are without merit.
136 Truist Financial Corporation
NOTE 17. Regulatory Requirements and Other Restrictions
Truist Bank is subject to laws and regulations that limit the amount of dividends it can pay. In addition, both Truist and Truist Bank are subject to various regulatory restrictions relating to the payment of dividends, including requirements to maintain capital at or above regulatory minimums, and to remain "well-capitalized" under the prompt corrective action regulations.
Truist is subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the Federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a material effect on the financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, the Company must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of assets, liabilities and certain off-balance-sheet items calculated pursuant to regulatory directives. Truist's capital amounts and classification also are subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings and other factors. Truist is in full compliance with these requirements. Banking regulations also identify five capital categories for IDIs: well-capitalized, adequately capitalized, undercapitalized, significantly undercapitalized and critically undercapitalized. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, Truist and Truist Bank were classified as "well-capitalized," and management believes that no events or changes have occurred subsequent to year end that would change this designation.
Quantitative measures established by regulation to ensure capital adequacy require Truist to maintain minimum ratios of CET1 ratio of 4.5%, Tier 1 capital ratio of 6.0%, Total capital to risk-weighted assets ratio of 8.0%, Tier 1 capital to average tangible assets (leverage ratio) of 4.0% and supplementary leverage ratio of 3.0%. Truist is subject to a 2.7% SCB that became applicable on October 1, 2020. Truist Bank is subject to a 2.5% capital conservation buffer. The SCB and capital conservation buffer are amounts above the minimum levels designed to ensure that banks remain well-capitalized, even in adverse economic scenarios.
Risk-based capital ratios, which include CET1, Tier 1 capital and Total capital, are calculated based on regulatory guidance related to the measurement of capital and risk-weighted assets.
(1)The leverage ratio is calculated using end of period Tier 1 capital and quarterly average tangible assets. The timing of the Merger impacted the 4Q19 result.
(2)Truist became subject to the supplementary leverage ratio as of January 1, 2020.
As an approved seller/servicer, Truist Bank is required to maintain minimum levels of capital, as specified by various agencies, including the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, GNMA, FHLMC and FNMA. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, Truist Bank's capital was above all required levels.
Truist Financial Corporation 137
NOTE 18. Fair Value Disclosures
Recurring Fair Value Measurements
Accounting standards define fair value as the price that would be received on the measurement date to sell an asset or the price paid to transfer a liability in the principal or most advantageous market available to the entity in an orderly transaction between market participants, with a three level measurement hierarchy:
•Level 1: Quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets
•Level 2: Quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and model-derived valuations in which all significant inputs are observable in active markets
•Level 3: Valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs are unobservable
The following tables present fair value information for assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis:
138 Truist Financial Corporation
(1)Refer to "Note 19. Derivative Financial Instruments" for additional discussion on netting adjustments.
At December 31, 2020, investments totaling $314 million have been excluded from the table above as valued based on net asset value as a practical expedient.
The following discussion focuses on the valuation techniques and significant inputs for Level 2 and Level 3 assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis.
Available for Sale and Trading Securities: Securities accounted for at fair value include both the available-for-sale and trading portfolios. The Company uses prices obtained from pricing services, dealer quotes or recent trades to estimate the fair value of securities. The majority of AFS securities were priced by third party vendors whereas trading securities are priced internally. The AFS securities and trading securities are subject to IPV. Management independently evaluates the fair values of AFS Securities and trading securities through comparisons to external pricing sources, review of additional information provided by the pricing service and other third party sources for selected securities and back-testing to compare the price realized on any security sales to the pricing information received from the pricing service. Fair value measurements for trading securities are derived from observable market-based information including, but not limited to, overall market conditions, recent trades, comparable securities, broker quotes and FINRA’s Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine data when determining the value of a position. Security prices are also validated through actual cash settlement upon the sale of a security.
As described by security type below, additional inputs may be used, or some inputs may not be applicable.
Truist Financial Corporation 139
Trading loans: The Company has elected to measure trading loans at fair value. Trading loans are valued primarily using quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active by a third party pricing service. Trading loans include:
•loans held in connection with the Company's trading business primarily consisting of commercial and corporate leveraged loans;
•SBA loans guaranteed by the U.S. government; and
•loans made or acquired in connection with the Company’s TRS business.
U.S. Treasury securities: Treasury securities are valued using quoted prices in active over-the-counter markets.
GSE securities and agency MBS: GSE securities consist of debt obligations issued by HUD, the FHLB, and other agencies, as well as securities collateralized by loans that are guaranteed by the SBA, and thus, are backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government. Agency MBS includes pass-through securities and CMO issued by GSEs and U.S. government agencies, such as FNMA, FHLMC, and GNMA. Each security contains a guarantee by the issuing GSE or agency. GSE pass-through securities are valued using market-based pricing matrices that reference observable inputs including benchmark TBA security pricing and yield curves that were estimated based on U.S. Treasury yields and certain floating rate indices. The pricing matrices for these securities may also give consideration to pool-specific data supplied directly by the GSE. GSE CMOs are valued using market-based pricing matrices that are based on observable inputs including offers, bids, reported trades, dealer quotes and market research reports, the characteristics of a specific tranche, market convention prepayment speeds and benchmark yield curves as described above.
States and political subdivisions: The Company’s investments in U.S. states and political subdivisions include obligations of county and municipal authorities and agency bonds, which are general obligations of the municipality or are supported by a specified revenue source. Holdings are geographically dispersed, with no significant concentrations in any one state or municipality. Additionally, all municipal obligations are highly rated or are otherwise collateralized by securities backed by the full faith and credit of the federal government. These securities are valued using market-based pricing matrices that reference observable inputs including MSRB reported trades, issuer spreads, material event notices and benchmark yield curves.
Non-agency MBS: No non-agency MBS were held as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2019, Non-agency MBS in the trading portfolio included purchased interests in third party securitizations that have a high investment grade rating, and the pricing matrices for these securities were based on observable inputs including offers, bids, reported trades, dealer quotes and market research reports, the characteristics of a specific tranche, market convention prepayment speeds and benchmark yield curves as described above; as such, these securities were classified as level 2. Non-agency MBS in the AFS securities portfolio included investments in Re-REMIC trusts that primarily hold U.S. Treasury securities and non-agency MBS, which were valued based on broker pricing models that use baseline securities yields and tranche-level yield adjustments to discount cash flows using market convention prepayment speed and default assumptions. These investments were classified as level 3.
Corporate and other debt securities: These securities consist primarily of corporate bonds and commercial paper. Corporate bonds are senior and subordinated debt obligations of domestic corporations. The Company acquires commercial paper that is generally short-term in nature and highly rated. These securities are valued based on a review of quoted market prices for similar assets as well as through the various other inputs discussed previously.
LHFS: Certain mortgage loans that are originated to be sold to investors are carried at fair value. The fair value is primarily based on quoted market prices for securities backed by similar types of loans, adjusted for servicing, interest rate risk, and credit risk. The changes in fair value of these assets are largely driven by changes in interest rates subsequent to loan funding and changes in the fair value of servicing associated with the mortgage LHFS.
MSRs: Residential MSRs are valued using an OAS valuation model to project cash flows over multiple interest rate scenarios and then are discounted at risk-adjusted rates. The model considers portfolio characteristics, contractually specified servicing fees, prepayment assumptions, delinquency rates, late charges, other ancillary revenue, costs to service and other economic factors. Fair value estimates and assumptions are compared to industry surveys, recent market activity, actual portfolio experience and, when available, other observable market data. Commercial MSRs are valued using a cash flow valuation model that calculates the present value of estimated future net servicing cash flows. The Company considers actual and expected loan prepayment rates, discount rates, servicing costs and other economic factors that are determined based on current market conditions. Refer to "Note 8. Loan Servicing" for additional discussion.
140 Truist Financial Corporation
Derivative assets and liabilities: The Company holds derivative instruments for both trading and risk management purposes. These include exchange-traded futures or option contracts, OTC swaps, options, forwards and interest rate lock commitments. The fair values of derivatives are determined based on quoted market prices and internal pricing models that use market observable assumptions for interest rates, foreign exchange, equity and credit. The fair values of interest rate lock commitments, which are related to mortgage loan commitments and are categorized as Level 3, are based on quoted market prices adjusted for commitments that are not expected to fund and include the value attributable to the net servicing fees. Funding rates are based on the Company’s historical data. The fair value attributable to servicing is based on discounted cash flows, and is impacted by prepayment assumptions, discount rates, delinquency rates, contractually-specified servicing fees, servicing costs and underlying portfolio characteristics.
Equity securities: Equity securities primarily consist of exchange-traded securities and are valued using quoted prices in active markets.
Private equity investments: In many cases there are no observable market values for these investments and therefore management must estimate the fair value based on a comparison of the operating performance of the investee to multiples in the marketplace for similar entities. This analysis requires significant judgment, and actual values in a sale could differ materially from those estimated.
Securities sold short: Securities sold short represent debt securities sold short that are entered into as a hedging strategy for the purposes of supporting institutional and retail client trading activities. The fair value of securities sold short is determined in the same manner as trading securities.
Activity for Level 3 assets and liabilities is summarized below:
Truist Financial Corporation 141
During 2020, Truist sold non-agency MBS previously categorized as Level 3 that represented ownership interests in various tranches of Re-REMIC trusts. The Re-REMIC tranches did not have an active market and therefore were categorized as Level 3.
During 2020, as a result of a change in control of the funds’ manager, the Company deconsolidated certain SBIC funds for which it had previously concluded that it was the primary beneficiary. Following the deconsolidation, the investments in SBIC funds are valued based on net asset value per unit, as provided by the fund manager as a practical expedient, which approximates the fair value, and have not been classified in the fair value hierarchy. The SBIC funds in which the Company invests primarily focus on equity and subordinated debt investments in privately-held middle market companies. The majority of these VIE investments are not redeemable and distributions are received as the underlying assets of the funds liquidate. The timing of distributions, which are expected to occur on various dates over the next 10 years, is uncertain and dependent on various events such as recapitalizations, refinance transactions and ownership changes among others. As of December 31, 2020, restrictions on the ability to sell the investments include, but are not limited to, consent of a majority of members or general partner approval for transfer of ownership. These investments are spread over numerous privately-held middle market companies, and thus the sensitivity to a change in fair value for any single investment is limited.
Refer to "Note 8. Loan Servicing" for additional information on valuation techniques and inputs for MSRs.
Fair Value Option
The following table details the fair value and UPB of LHFS that were elected to be measured at fair value. Trading loans, included in other trading assets, were also elected to be measured at fair value.
Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements
The following table provides information about certain assets measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis. The carrying values represent end of period values, which approximate the fair value measurements that occurred on the various measurement dates throughout the period. The valuation adjustments represent the amounts recorded during the period regardless of whether the asset is still held at period end. These assets are considered to be Level 3 assets (2019 excludes PCI).
LHFS with valuation adjustments in the table above consisted primarily of residential mortgages and commercial loans that were valued using market prices and measured at the lower of cost or market. LHFS as of December 31, 2020 includes the small ticket loan and lease portfolio. The table above excludes $125 million of LHFS carried at cost at December 31, 2020 that did not require a valuation adjustment during the period. The remainder of LHFS is carried at fair value. Excluding government guaranteed loans, the Company held $5 million in nonperforming LHFS at December 31, 2020 and $107 million of nonperforming LHFS at December 31, 2019. LHFS that were 90 days or more past due and still accruing interest were not material at December 31, 2020. Loans and leases are primarily collateral dependent and may be subject to liquidity adjustments. Refer to "Note 1. Basis of Presentation" for additional discussion of individually evaluated loans and leases. Other includes foreclosed real estate, other foreclosed property, ROU assets, premises and equipment and OREO, and consists primarily of residential homes, commercial properties, vacant lots and automobiles. ROU assets are measured based on the fair value of the assets, which considers the potential for future sublease income. The remaining assets are measured at the lower of cost or fair value less costs to sell.
142 Truist Financial Corporation
Financial Instruments Not Recorded at Fair Value
For financial instruments not recorded at fair value, estimates of fair value are based on relevant market data and information about the instruments. Values obtained relate to trading without regard to any premium or discount that may result from concentrations of ownership, possible tax ramifications, estimated transaction costs that may result from bulk sales or the relationship between various instruments.
An active market does not exist for certain financial instruments. Fair value estimates for these instruments are based on current economic conditions and interest rate risk characteristics, loss experience and other factors. Many of these estimates involve uncertainties and matters of significant judgment and cannot be determined with precision. Therefore, the fair value estimates in many instances cannot be substantiated by comparison to independent markets. In addition, changes in assumptions could significantly affect these fair value estimates. Financial assets and liabilities not recorded at fair value are summarized below:
The carrying value of the RUFC, which approximates the fair value of unfunded commitments, was $364 million and $373 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Prior to the adoption of CECL, the carrying value includes deferred fees.
Truist Financial Corporation 143
NOTE 19. Derivative Financial Instruments
Impact of Derivatives on the Consolidated Balance Sheets
The following table presents the gross notional amounts and estimated fair value of derivative instruments employed by the Company. Truist held no cash flow hedges as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
144 Truist Financial Corporation
The following table presents the offsetting of derivative instruments including financial instrument collateral related to legally enforceable master netting agreements and amounts held or pledged as collateral. U.S. GAAP does not permit netting of non-cash collateral balances in the consolidated balance sheet:
The following table presents the carrying value of hedged items in fair value hedging relationships:
Truist Financial Corporation 145
Impact of Derivatives on the Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income
Derivatives Designated as Hedging Instruments under GAAP
No portion of the change in fair value of derivatives designated as hedges has been excluded from effectiveness testing.
The following table summarizes amounts related to cash flow hedges, which consist of interest rate contracts.
The following table summarizes the impact on net interest income related to fair value hedges:
The following table presents information about the Company's cash flow and fair value hedges:
Derivatives Not Designated as Hedging Instruments under GAAP
The Company also enters into derivatives that are not designated as accounting hedges under GAAP to economically hedge certain risks as well as in a trading capacity with its clients.
146 Truist Financial Corporation
The following table presents pre-tax gain (loss) recognized in income for derivative instruments not designated as hedges:
Credit Derivative Instruments
As part of the Company’s corporate investment banking business, the Company enters into contracts that are, in form or substance, written guarantees; specifically, credit default swaps, risk participations and TRS. The Company accounts for these contracts as derivatives.
The Company has entered into TRS contracts on loans. To mitigate its credit risk, the Company typically receives initial margin from the counterparty upon entering into the TRS and variation margin if the fair value of the underlying reference assets deteriorates. For additional information on the Company’s TRS contracts, see "Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies."
Truist has entered into risk participation agreements to share the credit exposure with other financial institutions on client-related interest rate derivative contracts. Under these agreements, the Company has guaranteed payment to a dealer counterparty in the event the counterparty experiences a loss on the derivative due to a failure to pay by the counterparty’s client. The Company manages its payment risk on its risk participations by monitoring the creditworthiness of the underlying client through the normal credit review process that the Company would have performed had it entered into a derivative directly with the obligors. At December 31, 2020, the remaining terms on these risk participations ranged from less than one year to 10 years. The potential future exposure represents the Company’s maximum estimated exposure to written risk participations, as measured by projecting a maximum value of the guaranteed derivative instruments based on scenario simulations and assuming 100% default by all obligors on the maximum value.
The following table presents additional information related to interest rate derivative risk participation agreements and total return swaps:
Truist Financial Corporation 147
The following table summarizes collateral positions with counterparties:
NOTE 20. Computation of EPS
Basic and diluted EPS calculations are presented in the following table:
NOTE 21. Operating Segments
Truist operates and measures business activity across three segments: Consumer Banking and Wealth, Corporate and Commercial Banking, and Insurance Holdings, with functional activities included in Other, Treasury, and Corporate. The Company's business segment structure is based on the manner in which financial information is evaluated by management as well as the products and services provided or the type of client served.
Consumer Banking and Wealth
The CB&W segment is made up of five primary businesses:
•Retail Community Banking provides banking, borrowing, investing and protection services, and advice through Premier Banking, to individuals and small business clients through an extensive network of branches and ATMs, digital channels and contact centers. Financial products and services offered include deposits and payments, credit cards, loans, mortgages, brokerage and investment advisory services and insurance solutions. Consumer Banking also serves as an entry point for clients and services for other businesses.
•NCF&P provides a comprehensive set of technology-enabled lending solutions to individuals and small businesses through several national channels including LightStream, Sheffield and certain point-of-sale lending partnerships. NCF&P also provides merchant services and payment processing solutions to business clients in the community bank.
•Wealth provides a full array of wealth management and banking products and professional services to individuals and institutional clients, including trust, brokerage, professional investment advisory, loans and deposits services to clients seeking active management of their financial resources. Institutional clients are served by the Institutional Investment Management Group. Full service and online/discount brokerage products are offered to individual clients; additionally, investment advisory products and services are offered to clients through an SEC registered investment advisor. Wealth also includes GenSpring Family Office Advisory Services, LLC, which provides family office solutions to clients and their families to help them manage and sustain wealth across multiple generations, including family meeting facilitation, consolidated reporting, expense management, specialty asset management and business transition advice, as well as other wealth management disciplines.
148 Truist Financial Corporation
•Mortgage Banking offers residential mortgage products nationally through its retail and correspondent channels, the internet and by telephone. These products are either sold in the secondary market, typically with servicing rights retained, or held in the Company’s loan portfolio. Mortgage Banking also services loans held in the Company’s loan portfolio as well as those held by third party investors. Mortgage also includes Mortgage Warehouse Lending, which provides short-term lending solutions to finance first-lien residential mortgage LHFS by independent mortgage companies.
•Dealer Retail Services originates loans to individuals on a prime and nonprime basis for the purchase of automobiles. Such loans are originated on an indirect basis through approved franchised and independent automobile dealers throughout the Truist market area and nationally through Regional Acceptance Corporation. Additionally, Dealer Retail Services originates loans for the purchase of boats and other recreational vehicles through dealers in Truist’s market area.
Corporate and Commercial Banking
The C&CB segment is made up of four primary businesses and the Treasury Solutions product group:
•Corporate and Investment Banking delivers a comprehensive range of strategic advisory, capital raising, risk management, financing, liquidity and investment solutions, with the goal of serving the needs of both public and private companies in the C&CB segment. Investment Banking and Corporate Banking teams within CIB serve clients across the nation, offering a full suite of traditional banking and investment banking products and services. Investment Banking serves select industry segments including consumer and healthcare, energy, technology, financial services, industrials, and media and communications. Corporate Banking serves clients across diversified industry sectors based on size, complexity, and frequency of capital markets issuance.
•Commercial Community Banking offers an array of traditional banking products, including lending, deposits, cash management and investment banking solutions via CIB to commercial clients (generally clients with revenues between $5 million and $500 million), including not-for-profit organizations, governmental entities, healthcare and aging services and auto dealer financing (floor plan inventory financing). Local teams deliver these solutions along with the Company’s industry expertise to commercial clients to help them achieve their goals.
•Commercial Real Estate provides a range of credit and deposit services as well as fee-based product offerings to developers, operators, and investors in commercial real estate properties through its National Banking Division. Additionally, Commercial Real Estate offers tailored financing and equity investment solutions for community development and affordable housing projects, with particular expertise in Low Income Housing Tax Credits and New Market Tax Credits. Real Estate Corporate and Investment Banking targets relationships with publicly-traded and privately owned REITs.
•Grandbridge Real Estate Capital, LLC is a fully integrated commercial mortgage investment banking company that originates commercial and multi-family real estate loans, services loan portfolios and provides asset and portfolio management as well as real estate brokerage services. Additionally, the Investor Services Group offers loan administration, special servicing, valuation and advisory services to third party clients.
•Treasury Solutions provides business clients in the C&CB and CB&W segments with services required to manage their payments and receipts, combined with the ability to manage and optimize their deposits across all aspects of their business. Treasury Solutions operates all electronic and paper payment types, including card, wire transfer, ACH, check and cash. It also provides clients the means to manage their accounts electronically online, both domestically and internationally.
Insurance Holdings
Truist’s IH segment is one of the largest insurance agency / brokerage networks, providing property and casualty, employee benefits and life insurance to businesses and individuals. It also provides small business and corporate services, such as workers compensation and professional liability, as well as surety coverage and title insurance. IH also includes Prime Rate Premium Finance Corporation, which includes AFCO Credit Corporation and CAFO Holding Company, insurance premium finance subsidiaries that provide funding to businesses in the United States and Canada.
Other, Treasury & Corporate
OT&C includes management of the Company’s investment securities portfolio, long-term debt, derivative instruments used for balance sheet hedging, short-term liquidity and funding activities, balance sheet risk management and most real estate assets, as well as the Company's functional activities such as marketing, finance, enterprise risk, legal, enterprise technology and executive leadership, among others. Additionally, OT&C houses intercompany eliminations, including intersegment net referral fees and residual interest rate risk after segment allocations have taken place.
Truist Financial Corporation 149
Truist emphasizes revenue growth by focusing on client service, sales effectiveness and relationship management along with an organizational focus on referring clients between businesses. The objective is to provide Truist’s entire suite of products to its clients with the end goal of providing clients the best financial experience in the marketplace. To promote revenue growth, revenues of certain products and services are reflected in the results of the segment providing those products and services and are also allocated to CB&W and C&CB. These allocated revenues between segments are reflected as net referral fees in noninterest income and eliminated in OT&C.
The segment results are presented based on internal management methodologies that were designed to support these strategic objectives. Unlike financial accounting, there is no comprehensive authoritative body of guidance for management accounting equivalent to GAAP. The performance of the segments is not comparable with Truist’s consolidated results or with similar information presented by any other financial institution. Additionally, because of the interrelationships between the various segments, the information presented is not indicative of how the segments would perform if they operated as independent entities.
Because business segment results are presented based on management accounting practices, the transition to the consolidated results prepared under U.S. GAAP creates certain differences, which are reflected as residuals in OT&C. Business segment reporting conventions include, but are not limited to, the items as detailed below.
Segment net interest income reflects matched maturity funds transfer pricing, which ascribes credits or charges based on the economic value or cost created by assets and liabilities of each segment. Residual differences between these credits and charges are captured in OT&C.
Noninterest income includes inter-segment referral fees, as well as federal and state tax credits that are grossed up on a pre-tax equivalent basis, related primarily to certain community development investments. Recoveries for these allocations are reported in OT&C.
Corporate expense allocations, including overhead or functional expenses that are not directly charged to the segments, are allocated to segments based on various drivers (number of FTEs, number of accounts, loan balances, net revenue, etc.). Recoveries for these allocations are reported in OT&C.
Provision for credit losses represents net charge-offs by segment combined with an allocation to the segments for the provision attributable to each segment’s quarterly change in the ALLL. Provision for income taxes is calculated using a blended income tax rate for each segment and includes reversals of the noninterest income tax adjustments described above. The difference between the calculated provision for income taxes at the segment level and the consolidated provision for income taxes is reported in OT&C.
The application and development of management reporting methodologies is an active process and undergoes periodic enhancements. The implementation of these enhancements to the internal management reporting methodology may materially affect the results disclosed for each segment, with no impact on consolidated results. If significant changes to management reporting methodologies take place, the impact of these changes is quantified and prior period information is revised, when practicable.
150 Truist Financial Corporation
The following table presents results by segment:
(1)Includes financial data from business units below the quantitative and qualitative thresholds requiring disclosure.
Truist Financial Corporation 151
NOTE 22. Parent Company Financial Information
152 Truist Financial Corporation
The transfer of funds in the form of dividends, loans or advances from bank subsidiaries to the Parent Company is restricted. Federal law requires loans to the Parent Company or its affiliates to be secured and at market terms and generally limits loans to the Parent Company or an individual affiliate to 10% of Truist Bank's unimpaired capital and surplus. In the aggregate, loans to the Parent Company and all affiliates cannot exceed 20% of the bank's unimpaired capital and surplus.
Dividend payments to the Parent Company by Truist Bank are subject to regulatory review and statutory limitations and, in some instances, regulatory approval. In general, dividends from Truist Bank to the Parent Company are limited by rules which compare dividends to net income for regulatory-defined periods. Furthermore, dividends are restricted by regulatory minimum capital constraints.
Truist Financial Corporation 153
ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Management's Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting and Evaluation of
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Management of Truist is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) of the Exchange Act. The Company's internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with GAAP. Truist's internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records, that in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and disposition of the Company's assets; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit the preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP and that receipts and expenditures of the Company are being made only in accordance with the authorizations of Truist's management and directors; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the Company's assets that could have a material impact on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate due to changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Under the supervision and with the participation of management, including the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer, the Company conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in Internal Control-Integrated Framework (2013) promulgated by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, commonly referred to as the "COSO" criteria. Based on this evaluation under the COSO criteria, management concluded that the internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2020.
The effectiveness of the Company's internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020 has been audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their accompanying report, which expresses an unqualified opinion on the effectiveness of the Company's internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020.
Disclosure Controls and Procedures and Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
As of the end of the period covered by this report, the management of the Company, under the supervision and with the participation of the Company's Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, carried out an evaluation of the Company's disclosure controls and procedures as defined in Rule 13a-15(e) of the Exchange Act. Based on that evaluation, the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer concluded that the Company's disclosure controls and procedures were effective.
There was no change in the Company's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the fourth quarter of 2020 that has materially affected, or is likely to materially affect, the Company's internal control over financial reporting.
154 Truist Financial Corporation
ITEM 15. EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES
Truist Financial Corporation 155
156 Truist Financial Corporation
Truist Financial Corporation 157
158 Truist Financial Corporation
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, as of February 24, 2021:
Truist Financial Corporation
(Registrant)
/s/ Kelly S. King
Kelly S. King
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated:
/s/ Kelly S. King Chairman and Chief Executive Officer February 24, 2021
Kelly S. King
/s/ William H. Rogers, Jr. President and Chief Operating Officer February 24, 2021
William H. Rogers, Jr.
/s/ Daryl N. Bible Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer February 24, 2021
Daryl N. Bible (Principal Financial Officer)
/s/ Cynthia B. Powell Executive Vice President and Corporate Controller February 24, 2021
Cynthia B. Powell (Principal Accounting Officer)
/s/ Jennifer S. Banner Director February 24, 2021
Jennifer S. Banner
/s/ K. David Boyer, Jr. Director February 24, 2021
K. David Boyer, Jr.
/s/ Agnes Bundy Scanlan Director February 24, 2021
Agnes Bundy Scanlan
/s/ Anna R. Cablik Director February 24, 2021
Anna R. Cablik
/s/ Dallas S. Clement Director February 24, 2021
Dallas S. Clement
/s/ Paul D. Donahue Director February 24, 2021
Paul D. Donahue
/s/ Paul R. Garcia Director February 24, 2021
Paul R. Garcia
/s/ Patrick C. Graney III Director February 24, 2021
Patrick C. Graney III
/s/ Linnie M. Haynesworth Director February 24, 2021
Linnie M. Haynesworth
/s/ Easter A. Maynard Director February 24, 2021
Easter A. Maynard
/s/ Donna S. Morea Director February 24, 2021
Donna S. Morea
/s/ Charles A. Patton Director February 24, 2021
Charles A. Patton
/s/ Nido R. Qubein Director February 24, 2021
Nido R. Qubein
/s/ David M. Ratcliffe Director February 24, 2021
David M. Ratcliffe
/s/ Frank P. Scruggs, Jr. Director February 24, 2021
Frank P. Scruggs, Jr.
/s/ Christine Sears Director February 24, 2021
Christine Sears
Truist Financial Corporation 159
/s/ Thomas E. Skains Director February 24, 2021
Thomas E. Skains
/s/ Bruce L. Tanner Director February 24, 2021
Bruce L. Tanner
/s/ Thomas N. Thompson Director February 24, 2021
Thomas N. Thompson
/s/ Steven C. Voorhees Director February 24, 2021
Steven C. Voorhees
160 Truist Financial Corporation