Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
General
We were formed as a Delaware corporation on January 24, 2018 for the purpose of developing and commercializing innovative drug products based on our patented Thin Film Freezing, or TFF, technology platform”. Since our formation, we have focused on the development of our initial drug candidates, the establishment of strategic relationships with established pharmaceutical companies for the licensing of our TFF technology platform and the pursuit of additional working capital. We have not commenced revenue-producing operations.
Since our organization in 2018, we have engaged in the following financing transactions:
Series A Preferred Stock Placements. In March 2018, we conducted a private placement of 5,662,000 shares of our Series A preferred stock, at an offering price of $2.50 per share, for the gross proceeds of approximately $14.2 million, and in May 2019 we conducted a private placement of 3,268,000 shares of our Series A preferred stock, at an offering price of $2.50 per share, for the gross proceeds of approximately $8.2 million. The shares of our Series A preferred stock accumulated dividends at the rate of 6% per annum. The shares of Series A preferred stock, including all accrued but unpaid dividends on the Series A preferred stock, which totaled $1,603,709, automatically converted into 9,571,692 shares of our common stock concurrent with the completion of our initial public offering at the conversion price of $2.50.
Initial Public Offering. On October 25, 2019, we conducted an initial public offering of 4,400,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $5.00 per share. After the payment of underwriter discounts and offering expenses, and after giving effect to the underwriters’ exercise of its overallotment option on November 20, 2019 to purchase an additional 479,300 shares of our common stock at the offering price of $5.00 per share, we received net proceeds of approximately $21.8 million.
August 2020 Private Placement. On August 13, 2020, we conducted a private placement of 3,048,654 shares of common stock, at a purchase price per share of $8.50, for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $25,914,000, before deducting selling commissions and other offering expenses. After deducting the placement agent and other offering expenses, we received net proceeds of approximately $24,280,000.
Results of Operations
We were formed in January 2018 and have not commenced revenue-producing operations. To date, our operations have consisted of the development and early-stage testing of our initial product candidates. In connection with our organization on January 24, 2018, we entered into a Contribution and Subscription Agreement with Lung Therapeutics, Inc., or LTI, our former parent, pursuant to which we agreed to acquire from LTI certain of LTI’s non-core intellectual property rights and other assets, or the Acquired Assets, all of which relate to our Thin Film Freezing technology. We closed on the acquisition of the Acquired Assets concurrent with the close of the initial Series A preferred stock financing in March 2018.
In December 2019, the Company established a wholly-owned Australian subsidiary, TFF Pharmaceuticals Australia Pty Ltd. in order to conduct clinical research.
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared a novel strain of coronavirus disease (“COVID-19”) a global pandemic. We had expected to commence Phase I clinical trials our TFF formulation of Tacrolimus in Australia in the first quarter of 2020, and on March 13, 2020 we had received the approval of the Australian Human Research Ethics Committee to commence Phase I trials, however later in March 2020 our contract research organization in Australia informed us that because of the spread of the COVID-19 virus in Australia, there would be a delay in initiating the trial. During the second quarter of 2020, we were able to begin dosing in the Phase I Tacrolimus trial in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. However, due to the resurgence of COVID-19 in the Melbourne area, in July 2020 the Phase I trials were delayed. With the flaring of COVID-19 in the Melbourne area and in order to remain dynamic, we opened a second clinical trial site in Brisbane, Queensland, Australia and dosing in the Phase 1 clinical trial resumed in Australia during the third quarter 2020. We expect that dosing in this trial will be completed early in the second quarter of 2021. Any financial impact cannot be reasonably estimated at this time, but may materially affect our business and financial condition. The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and the actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, among others.
During the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred $10.7 million and $8.8 million of research and development expenses and $8.0 million and $3.2 million of general and administrative expenses, respectively. The increase in research and development expenses during 2020 was due to the ramp-up of research and development activities following the completion of our IPO in October 2019. The ramp up includes our preliminary analysis and testing of dry powder formulations of certain drugs and vaccines we believe have the potential to become product candidates. We expect our spending on research and development activities to continue to increase in upcoming quarters. The increase in general and administrative expenses in 2020 from the prior year was mainly a result of public-company related increases in expenses of approximately $1,250,000, increased expenses related to consulting and business development activities of approximately $1,274,000, payroll and related expense increases of approximately $827,000 and an increase in stock-based compensation of approximately $1,457,000. While we expect our general and administrative expenses to continue to increase over the next few years, we anticipate the rate of increase will be less than the increase from 2019 to 2020. We incurred a net loss applicable to common stockholders of $18.6 million and $36.7 million for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in net loss applicable to common stockholders was due to a deemed dividend of $24.0 million upon the conversion of our Series A preferred stock in October 2019.
Financial Condition
As of December 31, 2020, we had total assets of approximately $38.7 million and working capital of approximately $36.2 million. As of December 31, 2020, our liquidity included approximately $35.3 million of cash and cash equivalents. We believe that our cash on-hand as of the date of this report is sufficient to fund our proposed operating plan for, at least, the 12 months following the date of this report. However, as of the date of this report, we believe that we will need additional capital to fund our operations through to the marketing approval for TFF VIP and TFF TIP, assuming such approval can be obtained at all, and to engage in the substantial development of any other of our drug candidates, such as formulation, early stage animal testing and formal toxicology studies. If we encounter unforeseen delays or expenses, we have the ability to curtail our presently planned level of operations. We intend to seek additional funds through various financing sources, including the sale of our equity and debt securities, licensing fees for our technology and co-development and joint ventures with industry partners, with a preference towards licensing fees for our technology and co-development and joint ventures with industry partners. In addition, we will consider alternatives to our current business plan that may enable to us to achieve revenue producing operations and meaningful commercial success with a smaller amount of capital. However, there can be no guarantees that such funds will be available on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. If such financing is not available on satisfactory terms, we may be unable to further pursue our business plan and we may be unable to continue operations, in which case you may lose your entire investment.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The increase in cash used in operating activities is primarily a result of higher operating losses in 2020 due to our business expansion, including additional personnel and increased product candidate development activity. The financing activity primarily consists of the October 2019 initial public offering, or IPO, and the August 2020 private placement.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included herein, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
We compute stock-based compensation in accordance with authoritative guidance. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model to determine the fair value of its stock options. The Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model includes various assumptions, including the fair market value of our common stock, expected life of stock options, the expected volatility and the expected risk-free interest rate, among others. These assumptions reflect our best estimates, but they involve inherent uncertainties based on market conditions generally outside our control.
As a result, if other assumptions had been used, stock-based compensation cost, as determined in accordance with authoritative guidance, could have been materially impacted. Furthermore, if we use different assumptions on future grants, stock-based compensation cost could be materially affected in future periods.
For grants prior to the IPO, the fair value of the common stock was determined by the board of directors based on a variety of factors, including valuations prepared by third parties, our financial position, the status of our development efforts, the current climate in the marketplace and the prospects of a liquidity event, among others. For grants after the IPO, we use the closing stock price on the date of grant as the fair value of the common stock.
Research and Development Expenses
In accordance with authoritative guidance, we charge research and development costs to operations as incurred. Research and development expenses consist of personnel costs for the design, development, testing and enhancement of our technology, and certain other allocated costs, such as depreciation and other facilities related expenditures.
Common Stock Warrants
We classify as equity any warrants that (i) require physical settlement or net-share settlement or (ii) provides us with a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in its own shares (physical settlement or net-share settlement). We classify as assets or liabilities any contracts that (i) require net-cash settlement (including a requirement to net cash settle the contract if an event occurs and if that event is outside our control), (ii) gives the counterparty a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in shares (physical settlement or net-share settlement) or (iii) that contain reset provisions that do not qualify for the scope exception. We assess classification of its common stock warrants and other freestanding derivatives at each reporting date to determine whether a change in classification between assets and liabilities is required. Our freestanding derivatives consist of warrants to purchase common stock that were issued in connection with services provided to us. We evaluated these warrants to assess their proper classification and determined that the common stock warrants meet the criteria for equity classification in the consolidated balance sheet. Such warrants are measured at fair value, which we determine using the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model.
Beneficial Conversion Feature
On the date of the IPO, the outstanding Series A preferred stock, and related accrued and unpaid dividends, automatically converted into shares of our common stock. The conversion share calculation was based on the $2.50 initial issuance price for the Series A preferred stock plus any accrued but unpaid dividends and converted to common stock using a stated divisor conversion price equal to 50% of the IPO price to the public, which was $5.00 per share. In accordance with relevant accounting literature, since the stated terms of the conversion option did not permit us to compute the additional number of shares that it would need to issue upon conversion of the Series A preferred stock when the contingent event occurred, we recorded the beneficial conversion amount as a deemed dividend at the date of the IPO.
Off Balance Sheet Transactions
We do not have any off-balance sheet transactions.