ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
We are a global provider of medical technology products focused on enhancing clinical benefits, improving patient and provider safety and reducing total procedural costs. We primarily design, develop, manufacture and supply medical devices used by hospitals and healthcare providers for common diagnostic and therapeutic procedures in critical care and surgical applications. Approximately 95% of our net revenues come from single-use medical devices. We market and sell our products worldwide through a combination of our direct sales force and distributors. Because our products are used in numerous markets and for a variety of procedures, we are not dependent upon any one end-market or procedure. We are focused on achieving consistent, sustainable and profitable growth by increasing our market share and improving our operating efficiencies.
We evaluate our portfolio of products and businesses on an ongoing basis to ensure alignment with our overall objectives. Based on our evaluation, we may identify opportunities to expand our margins through strategic divestitures of existing businesses and product lines that do not meet our objectives. In addition, we may seek to optimize utilization of our facilities through restructuring initiatives designed to further reduce our cost base and enhance our competitive position. Finally, we may continue to explore opportunities to expand the size of our business and improve our margins through a combination of acquisitions and distributor to direct sales conversions, which generally involve our elimination of a distributor from the sales channel, either by acquiring the distributor or terminating the distributor relationship (in some instances, particularly in Asia, the conversions involve our acquisition or termination of a master distributor and the continued sale of our products through sub-distributors). Our distributor to direct sales conversions are designed to facilitate improved product pricing and more direct access to the end users of our products within the sales channel.
On February 18, 2020, we acquired IWG High Performance Conductors, Inc. (HPC), a privately-held original equipment manufacturer of minimally invasive medical products and high performance conductors, for an initial cash purchase price of $260.0 million. The acquisition, which complements our OEM product portfolio, was financed using borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
On December 28, 2020, we acquired Z-Medica, LLC ("Z-Medica"), a privately held medical device company that manufactures and sells hemostatic (hemorrhage control) products, marketed under the QuikClot, Combat Gauze and QuickClot Control+ brand names. The acquisition included an initial cash purchase price of $500.0 million with the potential to make an additional payment of up to $25 million upon the achievement of certain commercial milestones. The Z-Medica acquisition, which complements our anesthesia product portfolio, was financed using borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
COVID-19 pandemic and related economic factors
We continue to experience the effects of the global pandemic caused by the COVID-19 novel strain of coronavirus. Among other things, the response to the COVID-19 pandemic has had the effect of reducing the number of elective procedures being carried out, which has impacted and continues to impact some of our product categories, including our interventional urology, surgical, interventional, anesthesia and OEM products, which have experienced and continue to experience decreased demand. We have also experienced and continue to experience increased demand for products used in the treatment of patients with COVID-19, which are mostly concentrated in our respiratory and vascular access product categories. For the year ended December 31, 2020, each of our segments were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic due to the reduction in elective procedures and, to a lesser extent, as a result of government-mandated and self-imposed shut-downs in several countries, which were implemented to protect individuals and control the spread of COVID-19. The COVID-19 pandemic is impacting other elements of our operations, as well as our employees, contractors, suppliers, customers, freight transport providers and other business partners. To date, we have not experienced significant disruptions in the global supply chain for our products that are in high demand, but, in some cases, delivery times have lengthened, resulting in backorders for some of our products.
In addition, there have been and continues to be impacts on our cost structure resulting from measures that we and other businesses are taking or will take, in accordance with governmental requirements and otherwise, to protect our employees and business partners. We continue to assess the impact on our business (including our employees, customers and suppliers) of travel restrictions, border closures and quarantines as they affect our various sites, including our 35 global manufacturing sites. In most jurisdictions, our manufacturing and distribution sites remain open because we are considered an essential business. However, we have experienced temporary or partial work stoppages in some manufacturing sites in North America and Asia. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we experienced, and we continue to experience, inefficiencies in our manufacturing operations due to government-mandated and self-imposed restrictions placed on and safety measures implemented at our facilities globally. From an operating expense perspective, we have experienced and continue to experience net decreases in selling, general and administrative expenses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic due to cost mitigation efforts implemented to control discretionary spending including selling, marketing and travel and entertainment related costs and lower performance related employee-benefit costs.
We have yet to return to the revenue growth levels that we achieved prior to the onset of the pandemic. In addition, the degree of improvement has varied by product category and by region. It is uncertain whether this trend will continue or if we will again experience a decrease in the number of elective procedures performed as the COVID-19 pandemic evolves, particularly if the virus becomes more prevalent as we progress through the winter season in the Northern Hemisphere or if new strains of the virus continue to emerge. Overall, we believe that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to negatively affect our revenues and operations, at least over the near-term. Because of the dynamic nature of the crisis, such as recent regional COVID-19 outbreaks that are impacting the recovery, we cannot accurately predict the extent or duration of the impacts of the pandemic.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also had an adverse impact on macroeconomic conditions across the countries and regions in which we operate. As a result, various forms of policy interventions from local governments have been enacted to attempt to initiate an economic recovery. While there generally has been some improvement in economic conditions in the later part of 2020, the degree of improvement has been uneven among our regional markets, and the uncertain economic trends after the COVID-19 pandemic, constricted credit, public sector austerity measures in response to public budget deficits could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and our liquidity.
In addition to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, we continue to monitor trade and tariff activity, inflation, and exchange rate volatility that could impact our financial position, results of operations or liquidity. In regards to tariff activity, we have been subject to an ongoing investigation by the Chinese authorities related to a technical error regarding our country of origin designation for certain products we imported into China. The error would have resulted in increased tariff payments in late 2018 through 2020. We have accrued the estimated increase in tariffs as well as related interest expense for the periods in question. In addition to the tariffs and related interest, the Chinese authorities may impose a penalty for the unpaid tariffs. We believe the range of penalties is between 30% and 200% of the related unpaid tariff or between $3.0 million and $20.3 million. We do not have a best estimate of the penalties that may be assessed at this time. Accordingly, as prescribed by GAAP, we have recorded $3.0 million as low end of the range described above.
Government investigation
In June 2020, we began producing documents and information in response to a Civil Investigative Demand (a “CID”) received in March 2020 by one of our subsidiaries, NeoTract, from the U.S. Department of Justice through the United States Attorney’s Office for the Northern District of Georgia (collectively, the “DOJ”). The CID relates to the DOJ’s investigation of a single NeoTract customer, requires the production of documents and information pertaining to communications with, and certain rebate programs offered to, that customer and pertains to communications and activities occurring both prior to our acquisition of NeoTract in October 2017 and thereafter. In July 2020, the DOJ advised us that it had opened an investigation under the civil False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. §3729, with respect to NeoTract’s operations broadly in addition to the customer investigation.
We maintain policies and procedures to promote compliance with the Anti-Kickback Statute, False Claims Acts and other applicable laws and regulations and intend to provide information sought by the government. We cannot at this time reasonably predict, however, the ultimate scope or outcome of this matter, including whether an investigation may raise other compliance issues of interest, including those beyond the scope described above or how any such issues might be resolved. We also cannot at this time reasonably estimate any potential liabilities or penalty, if any, that may arise from this matter, which could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
Results of Operations
As used in this discussion, "new products" are products for which commercial sales have commenced within the past 36 months, and “existing products” are products for which commercial sales commenced more than 36 months ago. Discussion of results of operations items that reference the effect of one or more acquired businesses (except as noted below with respect to acquired distributors) generally reflects the impact of the acquisitions within the first 12 months following the date of the acquisition. In addition to increases and decreases in the per unit selling prices of our products to our customers, our discussion of the impact of product price increases and decreases also reflects the impact on the pricing of our products resulting from any elimination of distributors, either through acquisition or termination of the distributor, from the sales channel. All dollar amounts in tables are presented in millions unless otherwise noted.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, intangible asset amortization expense of $84.4 million is included within costs of good sold. For the year ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, we reclassified intangible asset amortization expense of $82.6 million and $81.6 million, respectively, from selling, general and administrative expenses to cost of goods sold for comparability. Certain financial information is presented on a rounded basis, which may cause minor differences.
For a discussion of our results of operations comparison for 2019 and 2018, refer to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 filed on February 21, 2020.
Comparison of 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $58.2 million,or 2.2%,compared to the prior year, which was primarily attributable to a $108.2 million net decrease in sales volumes of existing products, largely caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by net revenues of $27.1 million generated by the HPC acquisition and to a lesser extent an increase in sales of new products.
Gross profit
For the year ended December 31, 2020, gross margin decreased 210 basis points, or 3.9%, compared to the prior year period primarily due to lower sales volumes and higher manufacturing costs, both caused largely by the COVID-19 pandemic, and unfavorable fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
Selling, general and administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $108.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily attributable to a $92.1 million benefit from reductions in the estimated fair value of our contingent consideration liabilities, which largely related to revenue-based milestone payments, due to adverse financial projections resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease was also attributable to lower selling and marketing expenses and performance related employee-benefit costs resulting from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Research and development
Research and development expenses increased $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, which was primarily attributable to European Union Medical Device Regulation ("EU MDR") related costs, partially offset by lower project spend within certain of our product portfolios.
Restructuring and impairment charges
2020 Workforce reduction plan
During the second quarter of 2020, we committed to a workforce reduction (the "2020 Workforce reduction plan") designed to improve profitability and reduce cost primarily by streamlining certain sales and marketing functions in our EMEA segment and certain manufacturing operations in our OEM segment. The workforce reduction was initiated to further align the business with our high growth strategic objectives. The plan was substantially completed by the end of 2020 and we expect future restructuring charges associated with the program, if any, to be nominal. We will achieve annual pre-tax savings of $12 million as a result of this program.
Anticipated charges and pre-tax savings related to restructuring programs and other similar cost savings initiatives
We have ongoing restructuring programs primarily related to the consolidation of our manufacturing operations (referred to as our 2019, 2018 and 2014 Footprint realignment plans). We also have similar ongoing activities to relocate certain manufacturing operations within our OEM segment (the "OEM initiative") that do not meet the criteria for a restructuring program under applicable accounting guidance; nevertheless, the activities should result in cost savings (we expect only minimal costs to be incurred in connection with the OEM initiative). With respect to our currently ongoing restructuring programs and the OEM initiative, the table below summarizes charges incurred or estimated to be incurred and estimated annual pre-tax savings to be realized as follows: (1) with respect to charges (a) the estimated total charges that will have been incurred once the restructuring programs and OEM initiative are completed; (b) the charges incurred through December 31, 2020; and (c) the estimated charges to be incurred from January 1, 2021 through the last anticipated completion date of the restructuring programs and OEM initiative, and (2) with respect to estimated annual pre-tax savings (a) the estimated total annual pre-tax savings to be realized once the restructuring programs and OEM initiative are completed; (b) the estimated annual pre-tax savings realized based on the progress of the restructuring programs and OEM initiative through December 31, 2020; and (c) the estimated additional annual pre-tax savings to be realized from January 1, 2021 through the last anticipated completion date of the restructuring programs and the OEM initiative.
Estimated charges and pre-tax savings are subject to change based on, among other things, the nature and timing of restructuring activities and similar activities, changes in the scope of restructuring programs and the OEM initiative, unanticipated expenditures and other developments, the effect of additional acquisitions or dispositions and other factors that were not reflected in the assumptions made by management in previously estimating restructuring and restructuring related charges and estimated pre-tax savings. Moreover, estimated pre-tax savings constituting efficiencies with respect to increased costs that otherwise would have resulted from business acquisitions involve, among other things, assumptions regarding the cost structure and integration of businesses that previously were not administered by our management, which are subject to a particularly high degree of risk and uncertainty. It is likely that estimates of charges and pre-tax savings will change from time to time, and the table below may reflect changes from amounts previously estimated. In addition, the table below reflects the estimated charges and pre-tax savings related to our ongoing programs in addition to our 2020 workforce reduction plan. Additional details, including estimated charges expected to be incurred in connection with our restructuring programs and the anticipated completion dates, are described in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Pre-tax savings may be realized during, and subsequent to, the completion of the restructuring programs. Pre-tax savings can also be affected by increases or decreases in sales volumes generated by the businesses impacted by the consolidation of manufacturing operations; such variations in revenues can increase or decrease pre-tax savings generated by the consolidation of manufacturing operations. For example, an increase in sales volumes generated by the impacted businesses, although likely to increase manufacturing costs, may generate additional savings with respect to costs that otherwise would have been incurred if the manufacturing operations were not consolidated.
(1)Represents charges that are directly related to restructuring programs and principally constitute costs to transfer manufacturing operations to existing lower-cost locations, project management costs and accelerated depreciation, as well as a charge that is expected to be imposed by a taxing authority as a result of our exit from facilities in the authority's jurisdiction. Most of these charges (other than the tax charge) are expected to be recognized as cost of goods sold.
(2)We expect the OEM initiative will be completed by the end of 2027.
(3)Most of the pre-tax savings are expected to result in reductions to selling, general and administrative expenses.
(4)Substantially all of the pre-tax savings are expected to result in reductions to cost of goods sold.
The following discussion provides additional details with respect to our ongoing significant restructuring programs:
2019 Footprint realignment plan
In February 2019, we initiated a restructuring plan primarily involving the relocation of certain manufacturing operations to existing lower-cost locations and related workforce reductions (the “2019 Footprint realignment plan"). These actions are expected to be substantially completed by the end of 2022.
In 2020, we refined the estimated ranges for the restructuring and restructuring related charges in consideration of the progress made to date as well as the actions remaining. The refinements resulted in a decrease to the high end of our estimated ranges compared to our prior estimates and we now estimate that we will incur charges totaling $56 million to $63 million under the plan, of which we estimate that $50 million to $57 million of these charges will result in future cash outlays. We also expect a decrease in the total capital expenditures compared to
prior estimates and we now expect to incur $28 million to $33 million in total capital expenditures under the plan, most of which we expect to be incurred by the end of 2021.
In 2020, we identified additional cost reduction measures and accelerated certain components of the plan that led to an increase in our estimated annual plan related savings as well as the recognition of savings related to the plan during the year. We now expect to achieve annual pre-tax savings of $15 million to $17 million once the plan is fully implemented.
2018 Footprint realignment plan
In May 2018, we initiated a restructuring plan involving the relocation of certain European manufacturing operations to existing lower-cost locations, the outsourcing of certain European distribution operations and related workforce reductions. During the second quarter 2020 we took advantage of an opportunity to accelerate certain components of this plan and we now expect to be substantially completed by the end of 2022.
We estimate that we will incur total charges in connection with the 2018 Footprint realignment plan of $103 million to $133 million, of which, we estimate that $99 million to $127 million of these charges will result in future cash outlays. Additionally, we expect to incur $19 million to $23 million in total capital expenditures under the plan.
We began realizing plan-related savings in 2018 and expect to achieve annual pre-tax savings of $25 million to $30 million once the plan is fully implemented.
2014 Footprint realignment plan
In April 2014, we initiated a restructuring plan (the "2014 Footprint realignment plan") involving the consolidation of operations and a related reduction in workforce at certain facilities, and the relocation of manufacturing operations from certain higher-cost locations to existing lower-cost locations.
During 2020, we extended our timeline of certain development and qualification activities which resulted in a one year delay in the anticipated period of substantial completion, so we now expect the plan will be substantially completed by the end of 2022. The shift in timing, along with other changes to the plan, also resulted in an increase in the estimated total charges, primarily restructuring related charges, and related cash outlays in addition to a decrease in the estimated total capital expenditures compared to prior estimates. We adjusted the corresponding ranges in consideration of these changes in estimates and we now estimate that we will incur total charges of $52 million to $55 million, which we expect will result in cash outlays of $42 million to $46 million, and total capital expenditures of $26 million to $27 million under the plan.
In 2020, we also identified additional cost reduction measures as the plan progressed and, as a result, we increased our estimate of annual plan-related savings. We now estimate that we will achieve annual pre-tax savings of $28 million to $31 million once the plan is fully implemented.
The following table provides information regarding restructuring charges we have incurred with respect to each of our restructuring programs, as well as impairment charges, for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. The restructuring charges listed in the table primarily consist of termination benefits.
(1)Impairment charges recognized in 2020 related primarily to our decision to abandon intellectual property and other assets related to the Percuvance percutaneous surgical system product line. Impairment charges recognized in 2019 and 2018 related to our decision to abandon certain intellectual property and other assets associated with products that were eliminated from our interventional product portfolio.
Interest expense
The decrease in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year was primarily due to a lower average interest rate resulting from decreases in interest rates associated with our variable interest rate debt instruments partially offset by increases in average debt outstanding.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
On November 15, 2019, we prepaid the $250 million aggregate outstanding principal amount under our 2024 Notes. In addition to our prepayment of principal, we paid to the holders of the 2024 Notes a $6.5 million prepayment make-whole amount plus accrued and unpaid interest. We recorded the prepayment make-whole amount and a $2.3 million write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs as a loss on extinguishment of debt.
Gain on sale of assets
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a gain related to the sale of two buildings and our vein catheter reprocessing business.
Taxes on income from continuing operations
We generate substantial earnings from our non-U.S. operations. A number of the non-U.S. jurisdictions in which we file tax returns historically have had tax rates that are lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate; as a result, our consolidated effective income tax rate for 2020 and earlier years has been substantially below the U.S. statutory tax rate. The principal non-U.S. jurisdictions in which the tax rate in 2020 and earlier years was lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate and from which we derive substantial earnings included Ireland, Bermuda, and Singapore.
The effective income tax rate for 2020 was 6.1% compared to (35.9)% for 2019. Taxes on income from continuing operations in 2020 reflects non-taxable contingent consideration adjustments, recognized in connection with a decrease in the fair value of our contingent consideration liabilities. The effective income tax rate for 2019 reflects a tax benefit of $129 million resulting from a non-U.S. legal entity restructuring that eliminated the requirement to provide for withholding taxes on the future repatriation of certain non-permanently reinvested earnings. Additionally the effective tax rates for both 2020 and 2019 reflect a net excess tax benefit related to share-based compensation and a tax benefit relating to the revaluation of state deferred tax assets and liabilities due to business integrations and other changes. See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Segment Results
Segment Net Revenues
Segment Operating Profit
(1)See Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a reconciliation of segment operating profit to our consolidated income from continuing operations before interest, loss on extinguishment of debt and taxes.
Americas
Americas net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $27.3 million, or 1.8%, compared to the prior year, which was primarily attributable to a $33.7 net decrease in sales volumes of existing products, largely caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a $7.7 million increase in sales of new products.
Americas operating profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $81.5 million, or 25.5%, compared to the prior year, which was primarily attributable to a benefit from a reduction in the estimated fair value of our contingent consideration liabilities, which largely relate to revenue-based milestone payments, due to adverse financial projections resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in operating profit was partially offset by a decrease in gross profit resulting from lower sales caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
EMEA
EMEA net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $3.2 million, or 0.5%, compared to the prior year, which was primarily attributable to a $10.3 million net decrease in sales volumes of existing products caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by favorable fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates of $6.3 million.
EMEA operating profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $13.1 million, or 13.8%, compared to the prior year, which was primarily attributable to a decrease in gross profit resulting from lower sales and higher manufacturing costs, both caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, and an increase in research and development expenses. The decreases in operating profit were partially offset by lower selling, general and administrative expenses.
Asia
Asia net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $27.3 million, or 9.3%, compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily attributable to a $36.3 million net decrease in sales volumes of existing products, caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an increase in sales of new products.
Asia operating profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $21.9 million, or 29.9%, compared to the prior year, which was primarily attributable to a decrease in gross profit resulting from lower sales caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and unfavorable fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, partially offset by lower selling, general and administrative expenses.
OEM
OEM net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $0.4 million, or 0.2% compared to the prior year which was primarily attributable to a $27.8 million net decrease in sales volumes of existing products caused by the COVID-19 pandemic largely offset by net revenues of $27.1 million generated by the HPC acquisition.
OEM operating profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $13.1 million, or 22.7%, compared to the prior year, which was primarily attributable to a decrease in gross profit resulting from lower sales caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and higher manufacturing costs, partially offset by gross profit generated by the HPC acquisition.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We assess our liquidity in terms of our ability to generate cash to fund our operating, investing and financing activities. Our principal source of liquidity is our cash flows provided by operating activities. Our cash flows provided by operating activities are reduced by cash used to, among other things, fulfill contractual obligations for minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases, which often extend beyond one year; the weighted average remaining lease term of our operating lease portfolio is 6.7 years years. Our cash flows provided by operating activities are also reduced by cash used for unconditional legally binding commitments to purchase goods or services (i.e. purchase obligations), which primarily related to inventory expected to be purchased within one year. Our net cash provided by operating activities was significantly in excess of amounts paid pursuant to these contractual obligations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
In addition to operating cash flows, other significant factors that affect our overall management of liquidity include contractual obligations such as scheduled principal and interest payments with respect to outstanding indebtedness, tax on deemed repatriation of non-U.S. earnings, which will be paid annually over the next 5 years, and annual pension funding. We may also be obligated to make payments for contingent consideration due to past acquisitions, the timing and amount of which may be uncertain, and the magnitude of which can vary from year to year. Other significant factors that affect our liquidity include certain actions controlled by management such as capital expenditures, acquisitions, dividends and incremental pension and post-retirement benefit payments. See Note 12, Note 15 and Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 were as follows:
(1)Interest payments on floating rate debt are based on the interest rate in effect on December 31, 2020.
(2)Purchase and other obligations are defined as unconditional commitments to purchase goods or services that are legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including: quantities to be purchased; price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. The amounts include commitments for inventory purchases and capital expenditures (which, at the time we entered into the commitments, did not exceed our projected requirements in the normal course of business) and penalties due upon cancellation of cancellable agreements; the amounts exclude operating lease obligations, which are addressed elsewhere in the table.
(3)As permitted by the TCJA, we have elected to pay the tax in annual installments over eight years.
We believe our cash flow from operations, available cash and cash equivalents and borrowings under our revolving credit facility (which is provided for under the Credit Agreement) and accounts receivable securitization facility will enable us to fund our operating requirements, capital expenditures and debt obligations for the next 12 months and the foreseeable future.
Of our $375.9 million of cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020, $310.4 million was held at non-U.S. subsidiaries. We manage our worldwide cash requirements by monitoring the funds available among our subsidiaries and determining the extent to which we can access those funds on a cost effective basis.
We have entered into cross-currency swap agreements with different financial institution counterparties to hedge against the effect of variability in the U.S. dollar to euro exchange rate. Under the terms of the cross-currency swap agreements, we notionally exchanged in the aggregate $750 million for €653.1 million. The swap agreements, which begin to expire in October 2023, are designated as net investment hedges and require an exchange of the notional amounts upon expiration or the earlier termination of the agreements. We and the counterparties have agreed to effect the exchange through a net settlement. As a result, we may be required to pay (or be entitled to receive) an amount equal to the difference, on the expiration or earlier termination dates, between the U.S. dollar
equivalent of the €653.1 million notional amount and the $750 million notional amount. If, at the expiration or earlier termination of the swap agreements, the U.S. dollar to euro exchange rate has increased or declined by 10% from the rate in effect at the inception of these agreements, we would receive from or be required to pay to the counterparties an aggregate of approximately $75.0 million in respect of the notional settlement. As of December 31, 2020, we had $20.1 in current assets and $34.1 million in long term liabilities related to the fair value of our cross-currency swap agreements. The swap agreements entail risk that the counterparties will not fulfill their obligations under the agreements. However, we believe the risk is reduced because we have entered into separate agreements with different counterparties, all of which are large, well-established financial institutions.
We may at any time, from time to time, repurchase our outstanding debt securities in open market purchases, via tender offers or in privately negotiated transactions, exchange transactions or otherwise, at such price or prices as we deem appropriate. Such purchases or exchanges, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors and may be commenced or suspended at any time.
Summarized Financial Information - Obligor Group
The 2026 Notes and 2027 Notes (collectively, the "Senior Notes") are issued by Teleflex Incorporated (the “Parent Company”), and payment of the Parent Company's obligations under the Senior Notes is guaranteed, jointly and severally, by an enumerated group of the Parent Company’s subsidiaries (each, a “Guarantor Subsidiary” and collectively, the “Guarantor Subsidiaries”). The guarantees are full and unconditional, subject to certain customary release provisions. Each Guarantor Subsidiary is directly or indirectly 100% owned by the Parent Company. Summarized financial information for the Parent and Guarantor Subsidiaries (collectively, the “Obligor Group”) as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 as follows:
The same accounting policies as described in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 are used by the Parent Company and each of its subsidiaries in connection with the summarized financial information presented above. The Intercompany column in the table above represents transactions between and among the Obligor Group and non-guarantor subsidiaries (i.e. those subsidiaries of the Parent Company that have not guaranteed payment of the Senior Notes). Obligor investments in non-guarantor subsidiaries and any related activity are excluded from the financial information presented above. The summarized financial information presented above for the Obligor Group as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 gives effect to the 2028 Notes issued in a private offering in May 2020.
See "Financing Arrangements" below as well as Note 10 and Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information related to our borrowings and financial instruments.
Cash Flows
The following table provides a summary of our cash flows for the periods presented:
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations was $437.1 million during 2020 and 2019. In 2020, the cash flows from operations reflect an increase in contingent consideration payments and tax payments that were partially offset by favorable changes in other working capital. The favorable changes in working capital were driven mainly by higher accounts receivable collections.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations was $837.8 million during 2020, which included $767.8 million in net payments for acquired businesses, primarily Z-Medica and HPC, capital expenditures of $90.7 million and net interest proceeds on swaps designated as net investment hedges of $19.3 million.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities from continuing operations was $455.2 million during 2020, which reflected a net increase in borrowings of $575.0 million primarily resulting from the issuance of $500 million of 4.25% Senior Notes due 2028 (the "2028 Notes") and additional borrowings totaling $75.0 million under our revolving credit facility and securitization program. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 also reflects contingent consideration payments of $67.2 million and dividend payments of $63.2 million.
For a discussion of our cash flow comparison for 2019 and 2018, refer to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Free Cash Flow
Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure and is calculated by subtracting capital expenditures from cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations. This financial measure is used in addition to and in conjunction with results presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S., or GAAP, and should not be considered a substitute for net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations, the most comparable GAAP financial measure. Management believes that free cash flow is a useful measure to investors because it facilitates an assessment of funds available to satisfy current and future obligations, pay dividends and fund acquisitions. We also use this financial measure for internal managerial purposes and to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. Free cash flow is not a measure of cash available for discretionary expenditures since we have certain non-discretionary obligations, such as debt service, that are not deducted from the measure. We strongly encourage investors to review our financial statements and publicly-filed reports in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure. The following is a reconciliation of free cash flow to the most comparable GAAP measure.
Financing Arrangements
The following table provides our net debt to total capital ratio:
Fixed rate debt comprised 56.0% and 46.8% of total debt at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in fixed rate borrowings as a percentage of total borrowings as of December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year was driven by the issuance of the 2028 Notes.
Senior credit facility
On April 5, 2019, we entered into a second amended and restated credit agreement (the "Credit Agreement"), which provides for a $1.0 billion revolving credit facility and a $700 million term loan facility, each of which matures on April 5, 2024. The Credit Agreement replaces a previous credit agreement under which we were provided a $1.0 billion credit facility and a $750 million term loan facility, due 2022 (the “prior term loan”). The $700 million term loan facility under the Credit Agreement principally was applied against the remaining $675 million principal balance of the prior term loan.
At our option, loans under the Credit Agreement will bear interest at a rate equal to adjusted LIBOR plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.25% to 2.00% or at an alternate base rate, which is defined as the highest of (i) the “Prime Rate” in the U.S. last quoted by The Wall Street Journal, (ii) 0.50% above the greater of the federal funds rate and the rate comprised of both overnight federal funds and overnight eurodollar borrowings and (iii) 1.00% above adjusted LIBOR for a one month interest period, plus in each case an applicable margin ranging from 0.125% to 1.00%, in each case subject to adjustments based on our consolidated total net leverage ratio (generally, Consolidated Total Funded Indebtedness (which is net of “Qualified Cash”), as defined in the Credit Agreement, on the date of determination to Consolidated EBITDA, as defined in the Credit Agreement, for the four most recent fiscal quarters ending on or preceding the date of determination). Overdue loans will bear interest at the rate otherwise applicable to such loans plus 2.00%.
At December 31, 2020, we had $350.0 million in borrowings outstanding and $1.9 million in outstanding standby letters of credit under our $1.0 billion revolving credit facility.
The Credit Agreement contains covenants that, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, place limitations on our ability, and the ability of our subsidiaries, to incur additional indebtedness; create additional liens; enter into a merger, consolidation or amalgamation or other defined "fundamental changes," dispose of certain assets, make certain investments or acquisitions, pay dividends, or make other restricted payments, enter into swap agreements or enter into transactions with our affiliates. Additionally, the Credit Agreement contains financial covenants that, subject to specified exceptions, require us to maintain a consolidated total net leverage ratio of not more than 4.50 to 1.00 and a consolidated interest coverage ratio (generally, Consolidated EBITDA for the four most recent fiscal quarters ending on or preceding the date of determination to Consolidated Interest Expense, as defined in the Credit Agreement, paid in cash for such period) of not less than 3.50 to 1.00. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants in the Credit Agreement.
See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the Credit Agreement.
2026, 2027 and 2028 Senior Notes
As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding principal amount of our 2026 Notes, 2027 Notes and 2028 Notes was $400 million, $500 million and $500 million, respectively. The indenture governing the 2026 Notes contain covenants that, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, limit or restrict our ability, and the ability of our subsidiaries, to incur additional debt or issue preferred stock or other disqualified stock, create liens, merge, consolidate, or dispose of certain assets pay dividends, make investments or make other restricted payments, or enter into transactions with our affiliates. The indenture governing the 2027 Notes contains covenants that, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, limit or restrict our ability, and the ability of our subsidiaries, to create liens; consolidate, merge or dispose of certain assets; and enter into sale leaseback transactions. The 2028 Notes contain covenants that, among other things, will restrict our ability and the ability of our subsidiaries to create certain liens, enter into sale lease back transactions, and merge, consolidate, sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our assets.The obligations under the Senior Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally, by each of our existing and future 100% owned domestic subsidiaries that are a guarantor or other obligor under the Credit Agreement and by certain of our other 100% owned domestic subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all of the terms of our Senior Notes.
Accounts receivable securitization
We have an accounts receivable securitization facility under which we sell an undivided interest in domestic accounts receivable for consideration of up to a maximum amount of commercial paper conduit. In March 2020, we amended our accounts receivable securitization facility to increase the maximum available capacity from $50 million to $75 million. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019 we borrowed the maximum amount available at the time of $75.0 million and $50 million, respectively, under this facility. This facility is utilized to provide increased flexibility in funding short term working capital requirements. The agreement governing the accounts receivable securitization facility contains certain covenants and termination events. An occurrence of an event of default or a termination event under this facility may give rise to the right of our counterparty to terminate this facility. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants and none of the termination events had occurred.
For additional information regarding our indebtedness, see Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ materially from the amounts derived from those estimates and assumptions.
We have identified the following as critical accounting estimates, which are defined as those that are reflective of significant judgments and uncertainties, are the most pervasive and important to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and could potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. The following discussion should be considered in conjunction with the description of our accounting policies in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Allowance for Credit Losses
In the ordinary course of business, we grant non-interest bearing trade credit to our customers on normal credit terms. In an effort to reduce our credit risk, we (i) establish credit limits for all of our customer relationships, (ii) perform ongoing credit evaluations of our customers’ financial condition, (iii) monitor the payment history and aging of our customers’ receivables, and (iv) monitor open orders against an individual customer’s outstanding receivable balance.
An allowance for credit losses is maintained for trade accounts receivable based on the expected collectability of accounts receivable, after considering our historical collection experience, the length of time an account is outstanding, the financial position of the customer, information provided by credit rating services in addition to new requirements under the accounting guidance, effective January 1, 2020, that includes the consideration of events or circumstances indicating historic collection rates may not be indicative of future collectability, for example, potential customer liquidity concerns resulting from COVID-19, that may impact the collectability of our receivables as well as our estimate of credit losses expected to be incurred over the life of our receivables. Our allowance for credit losses
was $12.9 million and $9.1 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which constituted 3.0% and 2.1% of gross trade accounts receivable at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The current portion of the allowance for credit losses, which was $8.1 million and $5.3 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, was recognized as a reduction of accounts receivable, net.
Although we maintain allowance for credit losses to cover the estimated losses which may occur when customers cannot make their required payments, we cannot be assured that the allowances will be sufficient to cover future losses given the volatility in the worldwide economy and the possibility that other, unanticipated events may adversely affect collectability of the accounts. If our allowance for credit losses is insufficient to address receivables we ultimately determine are uncollectible, we would be required to incur additional charges, which could materially adversely affect our results of operations. Moreover, our inability to collect outstanding receivables could adversely affect our financial condition and cash flow from operations.
Distributor Rebates
We offer rebates to certain distributors and record a reserve with respect to the estimated amount of the rebates as a reduction of revenues at the time of sale. In estimating rebates, we consider the lag time between the point of sale and the payment of the distributor’s rebate claim, distributor-specific trend analyses, contractual commitments, including stated rebate rates, historical experience and other relevant information. When necessary, we adjust the reserves, with a corresponding adjustment to revenue, to reflect differences between estimated and actual experience. Historical adjustments to recorded reserves have not been significant and we do not expect significant revisions to the estimated rebates in the future. The reserve for estimated rebates was $28.5 million and $21.6 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect to pay amounts subject to the reserve as of December 31, 2020 within 90 days subsequent to year-end.
Inventory Utilization
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Factors utilized in the determination of estimated net realizable value and whether a reserve is required include (i) current sales data and historical return rates, (ii) estimates of future demand, (iii) competitive pricing pressures, (iv) new product introductions, (v) product expiration dates, and (vi) component and packaging obsolescence.
We review the net realizable value of inventory each reporting period and adjusted as necessary. We regularly compare inventory quantities on hand against historical usage or forecasts related to specific items in order to evaluate obsolescence and excessive quantities. In assessing historical usage, we also qualitatively assess business trends to evaluate the reasonableness of using historical information in estimating future usage.
Long-Lived Assets
We assess the remaining useful life and recoverability of long-lived assets whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. For example, such an assessment may be initiated if, as a result of a change in expectations, we believe it is more likely than not that the asset will be sold or disposed of significantly before the end of its useful life or if an adverse change occurs in the business employing the asset. Significant judgments in this area involve determining whether such events or circumstances have occurred and determining the appropriate asset group requiring evaluation. The recoverability evaluation is based on various analyses, including undiscounted cash flow projections, which involve significant management judgment. Any impairment loss, if indicated, equals the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the estimated fair value of the asset.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Intangible assets include indefinite-lived assets (such as goodwill, certain trade names and in-process research and development ("IPR&D")), as well as finite-lived intangibles (such as trade names that do not have indefinite lives, customer relationships, intellectual property, distribution rights and non-competition agreements) and are, generally, obtained through acquisition. Intangible assets acquired in a business combination are measured at fair value and we allocate any excess purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired in a business combination to goodwill. Considerable management judgment is necessary in making the assumptions used in the estimated fair value of intangible assets acquired in a business combination.
The costs of finite-lived intangibles are amortized to expense over their estimated useful life. Determining the useful life of an intangible asset requires considerable judgment as different types of intangible assets typically will
have different useful lives. Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized; we test these assets annually for impairment during the fourth quarter, using the first day of the quarter as the measurement date, or earlier upon the occurrence of certain events or substantive changes in circumstances that indicate an impairment may have occurred. Such conditions may include an economic downturn in a geographic market or a change in the assessment of future operations.
Goodwill
Goodwill impairment assessments are performed at a reporting unit level. For purposes of this assessment, a reporting unit is an operating segment, or a business one level below that operating segment. No impairment was recorded as a result of the annual goodwill impairment testing performed during the fourth quarter of 2020.
In applying the goodwill impairment test, we may assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Qualitative factors may include, but are not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry conditions, the competitive environment, changes in the market for our products and services, regulatory and political developments, and entity specific factors such as strategies and financial performance. If, after completing the qualitative assessment, we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we proceed to a two-step quantitative impairment test, described below test, described below. Alternatively, we may test goodwill for impairment through the two-step quantitative impairment test without conducting the qualitative analysis.
The first step of the two-step impairment test is to compare the fair value of a reporting unit to the carrying value. In performing the first step, we calculate the fair value of the reporting unit using equal weighting of two methods; one which estimates the discounted cash flows of the reporting unit based on projected earnings in the future (the Income Approach) and one which is based on sales of similar businesses to those of the reporting unit in actual transactions (the Market Approach). If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value, there is no impairment. If the reporting unit carrying value exceeds the fair value, we recognize an impairment loss based on the amount by which the carrying value of goodwill exceeds its implied fair value, which we determine in the second step of the two-step test. The implied fair value of goodwill is determined by deducting the fair value of a reporting unit's identifiable assets and liabilities from the fair value of the reporting unit as a whole, as if that reporting unit had just been acquired and the fair value of the individual assets acquired and liabilities assumed were being determined initially.
The more significant judgments and assumptions in determining fair value using in the Income Approach include (1) the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, which are based primarily on our estimates of future sales, operating income, industry trends and the regulatory environment of the individual reporting units, (2) the expected long-term growth rates for each of our reporting units, which approximate the expected long-term growth rate of the global economy and of the medical device industry, and (3) discount rates that are used to discount future cash flows to their present values, which are based on an assessment of the risk inherent in the future cash flows of the respective reporting units along with various market based inputs. The more significant judgments and assumptions used in the Market Approach include (1) determination of appropriate revenue and EBITDA multiples used to estimate a reporting unit’s fair value and (2) the selection of appropriate comparable companies to be used for purposes of determining those multiples. There were no changes to the underlying methods used in 2020 as compared to the valuations of our reporting units in the past several years.
Our expected future growth rates estimated for purposes of the goodwill impairment test are based on our estimates of future sales, operating income and cash flow and are consistent with our internal budgets and business plans, which reflect a modest amount of core revenue growth coupled with the successful launch of new products each year; the effect of these growth indicators more than offset volume losses from products that are expected to reach the end of their life cycle. Changes in assumptions underlying the Income Approach could cause a reporting unit's carrying value to exceed its fair value. While we believe our assumed growth rates of sales and cash flows are reasonable, the possibility remains that the revenue growth of a reporting unit may not be as high as expected, and, as a result, the estimated fair value of that reporting unit may decline. In this regard, if our strategy and new products are not successful and we do not achieve anticipated core revenue growth in the future with respect to a reporting unit, the goodwill in the reporting unit may become impaired and, in such case, we may incur material impairment charges. Moreover, changes in revenue and EBITDA multiples in actual transactions from those historically present could result in an assessment that a reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, in which case we also may incur material impairment charges.
Other Intangible Assets
Intangible assets are assets acquired that lack physical substance and that meet the specified criteria for recognition apart from goodwill. Management tests indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually, and more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that an impairment may have occurred. Similar to the goodwill impairment test process, we may assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying value. If, after completing the qualitative assessment, we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset is greater than its carrying amount, the asset is not impaired. If we conclude it is more likely than not that the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than the carrying value, we then proceed to a quantitative impairment test, which consists of a comparison of the fair value of the intangible asset to its carrying amount. Alternatively, we may elect to forgo the qualitative analysis and test the indefinite-lived intangible asset for impairment through the quantitative impairment test.
In connection with intangible assets acquired in a business combination and quantitative impairment tests, we determine the estimated fair value using various methods under the Income Approach. The more significant judgements and assumptions used in the valuation of intangible assets may include revenue growth rates, royalty rate, discount rate, attrition rate, and EBITDA margin. Each of these factors and assumptions can significantly impact the value of the intangible asset.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 we recognized impairment charges of $21.4 million related primarily to our decision to abandon intellectual property and other assets related to the Percuvance percutaneous surgical system product line. See "Restructuring and impairment charges" within "Result of Operations" above as well as Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on these charges.
Share-based Compensation
We estimate the fair value of share-based awards on the date of grant and recognize as expense the value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest over the requisite service periods. Share-based compensation expense related to stock options is measured using a Black-Scholes option pricing model that takes into account subjective and complex assumptions with respect to expected life of options, volatility, risk-free interest rate and expected dividend yield. The expected life of options granted represents the period of time that options are expected to be outstanding, which is derived from the vesting period of the award, as well as historical exercise behavior. Expected volatility is based on a blend of historical volatility and implied volatility derived from publicly traded options to purchase our common stock, which we believe is more reflective of market conditions and a better indicator of expected volatility than solely using historical volatility. The risk-free interest rate is the implied yield currently available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equal to the expected life of the option. Share-based compensation expense related to non-vested restricted stock units is measured based on the market price of the underlying stock on the grant date discounted for the risk free interest rate and the present value of expected dividends over the vesting period. Share based compensation expense for 2020 and 2019 was $20.7 million and $26.9 million, respectively.
Contingent Consideration Liabilities
In connection with an acquisition, we may be required to pay future consideration that is contingent upon the achievement of specified objectives, such as receipt of regulatory approval, commercialization of a product or achievement of sales targets. As of the acquisition date, we record a contingent liability representing the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration we expect to pay. We determined the fair value of the contingent consideration liabilities using a Monte Carlo valuation approach, which simulates future revenues during the earn out-period using management's best estimates and other probability-weighted discounted cash flow analysis. Significant judgment is required in determining the assumptions used to calculate the fair value of the contingent consideration. Increases in projected revenues and probabilities of payment may result in significantly higher fair value measurements; decreases in these items may have the opposite effect. Increases in discount rates in the periods prior to payment may result in significantly lower fair value measurements; decreases may have the opposite effect. See Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
We remeasure our contingent consideration liabilities each reporting period and recognize the change in the liabilities' fair value within selling, general and administrative expenses in our consolidated statement of income. As
of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we accrued $36.6 million and $219.9 million of contingent consideration, respectively.
Income Taxes
Our annual provision for income taxes and determination of the deferred tax assets and liabilities require management to assess uncertainties, make judgments regarding outcomes and utilize estimates. The difficulties inherent in such assessments, judgments and estimates are particularly challenging because we conduct a broad range of operations around the world, subjecting us to complex tax regulations in numerous international jurisdictions. As a result, we are at times subject to tax audits, disputes with tax authorities and potential litigation, the outcome of which is uncertain. In connection with its estimates of our tax assets and liabilities, management must, among other things, make judgments about the outcome of these uncertain matters.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured and recorded using currently enacted tax rates that are expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their tax bases are recovered or settled. The likelihood of a material change in our expected realization of these assets is dependent on future taxable income, our ability to use foreign tax credit carryforwards and carrybacks, final U.S. and non-U.S. tax settlements, changes in tax law, and the effectiveness of our tax planning strategies in the various relevant jurisdictions. While management believes that its judgments and interpretations regarding income taxes are appropriate, significant differences in actual experience may require future adjustments to our tax assets and liabilities, which could be material.
In assessing the realizability of our deferred tax assets, we evaluate positive and negative evidence and use judgments regarding past and future events, including results of operations and available tax planning strategies that could be implemented to realize the deferred tax assets. Based on this assessment, we determine when it is more likely than not that all or some portion of our deferred tax assets may not be realized, in which case we apply a valuation allowance to offset the amount of such deferred tax assets. To the extent facts and circumstances change in the future, adjustments to the valuation allowances may be required. The valuation allowance for deferred tax assets of $155.0 million and $119.2 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, relates principally to the uncertainty of the utilization of tax loss and credit carryforwards in various jurisdictions.
Significant judgment is required in determining income tax provisions and in evaluating tax positions. We establish additional provisions for income taxes when, despite the belief that tax positions are supportable, there remain certain positions that do not meet the minimum probability threshold, which is a tax position that is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the applicable taxing authority. In the normal course of business, we are examined by various federal, state and non-U.S. tax authorities. We regularly assess the potential outcomes of these examinations and any future examinations for the current or prior years in determining the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. We adjust the income tax provision, the current tax liability and deferred taxes in any period in which we become aware of facts that necessitate an adjustment. We are currently under examination in Ireland and Germany. The ultimate outcome of this examination could result in increases or decreases to our recorded tax liabilities, which would affect our financial results. See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding our uncertain tax positions.
New Accounting Standards
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recently issued accounting standards, including estimated effects, if any, of the adoption of those standards on our consolidated financial statements.