Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-looking and Cautionary Statements
Some of the information contained in this Form 10-K may constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. When using the words “believe,” “estimate,” “anticipate,” “expect,” “project,” “plan,” “likely,” “may” and similar expressions, Tredegar does so to identify forward-looking statements. Such statements are based on Tredegar’s then current expectations and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those addressed in the forward-looking statements. It is possible that Tredegar’s actual results and financial condition may differ, possibly materially, from the anticipated results and financial condition indicated in or implied by these forward-looking statements. In addition, the Company's current projections for its businesses could be materially affected by the highly uncertain impact of COVID-19. As a consequence, the Company's results could differ significantly from its projections, depending on, among other things, the duration of "shelter in place" orders and the ultimate impact of the pandemic on employees, supply chains, customers and the U.S. and world economies. Accordingly, you should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. For risks and important factors that could cause actual results to differ from expectations, refer to the reports that Tredegar files with or furnishes the SEC from time-to-time, including the risks and important factors set forth in Item 1A. Readers are urged to review and consider carefully the disclosures Tredegar makes in the reports Tredegar files with or furnishes to the SEC. Tredegar does not undertake, and expressly disclaims any duty, to update any forward-looking statement to reflect any change in management’s expectations or any change in conditions, assumptions or circumstances on which such statements are based, except as required by applicable law.
Executive Summary
General
Tredegar Corporation is an industrial manufacturer with three primary businesses: custom aluminum extrusions for the North American building & construction, automotive and specialty end-use markets through its Aluminum Extrusions segment; surface protection films for high-technology applications in the global electronics industry through its PE Films segment; and specialized polyester films primarily for the Latin American flexible packaging market through its Flexible Packaging Films segment. With approximately 2,400 employees, the Company operates manufacturing facilities in North America, South America, and Asia.
On October 30, 2020, the Company completed the sale of its personal care films business (“Personal Care Films”). The transaction excluded the packaging film lines and related operations located at the Pottsville, Pennsylvania manufacturing site (“Pottsville Packaging”), which are now being reported within the Surface Protection component of PE Films. Commencing in the third quarter of 2020, all historical results for Personal Care Films have been presented as discontinued operations. For more information on these transactions, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15.
Sales were $755.3 million in 2020 compared to $826.3 million in 2019. Net loss from continuing operations was $16.8 million ($0.51 per diluted share) in 2020, compared with net income from continuing operations of $58.5 million ($1.76 per diluted share) in 2019.
The 2020 results include:
•An after-tax loss on the Company’s investment in kaléo of $47.6 million ($1.42 per diluted share), which is accounted for under the fair value method (see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 for more details); and
•An impairment of the total goodwill balance of Aluminum Extrusions' reporting unit acquired in the AACOA acquisition in 2012 was recorded in the after-tax amount of $10.5 million ($0.32 per diluted share).
The 2019 results include:
•An after-tax dividend received from kaléo of $14.8 million ($0.45 per diluted share); and
•An unrealized after-tax gain on the Company’s investment in kaléo of $8.5 million ($0.26 per diluted share).
The 2018 results include:
•An unrealized after-tax gain on the Company’s investment in kaléo of $23.9 million ($0.72 per diluted share).
Other losses related to asset impairments and costs associated with exit and disposal activities for continuing operations were not material for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Losses associated with plant shutdowns, asset impairments, restructurings and other items are described in Results of Operations. Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) from ongoing operations is the measure of profit and loss used by Tredegar’s chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) for purposes of assessing financial performance. The Company uses sales less
freight (“net sales”) from continuing operations as its measure of revenues from external customers at the segment level. This measure is separately included in the financial information regularly provided to the CODM.
EBIT (earnings before interest and taxes) from ongoing operations is a non-GAAP financial measure included in the reconciliation of segment financial information to consolidated results for the Company. It is not intended to represent the stand-alone results for Tredegar’s ongoing operations under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to net income as defined by GAAP. EBIT is a widely understood and utilized metric that is meaningful to certain investors. We believe that including this financial metric in the reconciliation of management’s performance metric, EBITDA from ongoing operations, provides useful information to those investors that primarily utilize EBIT to analyze the Company’s core operations.
THE IMPACT OF COVID-19
Essential Business and Employee Considerations
The Company’s priorities during the COVID-19 pandemic continue to be to protect the health and safety of employees while keeping its manufacturing sites open due to the essential nature of many of its products. Within the limitations imposed by the health and safety procedures described below, the Company has continued to manufacture the full range of products at its facilities.
The Company’s protocols to protect the health and well-being of its employees from COVID-19 continue to develop as COVID-19 informed work practices evolve and the Company responds to recommended and mandated actions of government and health authorities. In addition, to facilitate a return to fully functional operations, the Company has undertaken an education campaign to provide employees with the most accurate and up-to-date information available, particularly from the Centers for Disease Control (“CDC”), the Office of the Surgeon General and state and local health departments. The Company believes that these efforts will encourage employees to receive a vaccine when they are eligible.
The Company has educated employees about COVID-19, including how the virus is spread, COVID-19 symptoms and mitigation efforts to keep employees safe. Even in those facilities not bound by the Families First Coronavirus Response Act, the Company has adopted COVID-19 related pay and sick leave policies and remote work policies that require employees to stay home if they feel ill or have been exposed to others with the illness, until they are cleared to return to work by our Human Resources team, who applies CDC and other state health department guidance to each case. The Company’s policies include: mandating employees self-monitor for symptoms; taking an employee’s temperature before entering production facilities; answering self-screening questions related to potential exposure and COVID-19 symptoms; mandating frequent handwashing; requiring social distancing; requiring face coverings on production floors at all times and in common areas and office settings where social distancing is difficult; streamlining onsite personnel to only those required for production and distribution; strongly encouraging and, where mandated, requiring remote work for all those who can work from home; limiting travel to essential business purposes; and regularly cleaning and disinfecting facilities. In the U.S., the Company has educated employees on COVID-19-related government benefits and has provided such benefits even in those facilities where the government benefits are not mandated.
Bonnell Aluminum is experiencing higher than normal absenteeism and hiring difficulties, which it attributes to COVID-19-related factors. Bonnell Aluminum attempts to match its direct labor with demand and is facing difficulty maintaining sufficient labor to meet desired shipment levels.
Financial Considerations
The 2020 annual plan for Bonnell Aluminum (pre-COVID-19) included sales volume of 201 million pounds and EBITDA from ongoing operations of $65 million, versus 2019 sales volume of 208 million pounds and EBITDA from ongoing operations of $65.7 million. Actual 2020 sales volume was 186 million pounds and EBITDA from ongoing operations was $55.1 million. Approximately 62% of Bonnell Aluminum’s sales volume in 2020 was related to building and construction (“B&C”) markets (non-residential B&C of 55% and residential B&C of 7%). Much of the 2020 sales volume associated with the B&C market was related to contracts that existed at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. With the completion of many of these contracts, Bonnell began experiencing weakness in the B&C market during the fourth quarter of 2020. Overall, the Company believes that volume results for Bonnell Aluminum in 2020 have outperformed the industry, and performance to date during the COVID-19 environment has exceeded the Company's expectations, with current bookings and backlog at high levels. No significant issues have arisen to date on the collection of accounts receivable at Bonnell Aluminum.
Demand has remained strong under COVID-19 conditions for the Company’s flexible food packaging films produced by Terphane. The Surface Protection component of PE Films had record performance for EBITDA from ongoing operations in the second quarter and first half of 2020, but it experienced a slowdown in the third quarter, with a portion of the decline in volume related to a previously disclosed customer product transition and customer inventory corrections. The Company believes that while Surface Protection’s customer inventory corrections were largely resolved during the third quarter of 2020, it will experience a significant decline in volume and profitability in the first quarter of 2021 as a result of the customer product
transition. See the PE Films section below for further discussion. No significant issues have arisen to date on the collection of accounts receivable at Terphane or Surface Protection.
Tredegar owns approximately 20% of kaleo, Inc. (“kaléo”), which makes and sells an epinephrine delivery device under the name AUVI-Q®. The Company accounts for its investment in kaléo on a fair value basis. The Company’s estimate of the fair value of its interest in kaléo at December 31, 2020 was $34.6 million ($29.7 million after taxes), which represents an increase of $0.1 million ($0.1 million after taxes) and a decrease of $60.9 million ($47.6 million after taxes) since September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The decline in estimated fair value in 2020 was primarily due to: (i) current projections that assume ongoing pricing pressures, (ii) expected changes in market access as well as continued lower market demand for epinephrine delivery devices resulting from COVID-19-driven delays in in-person back-to-school schedules and social distancing guidelines, and (iii) a higher private company liquidity discount. kaléo’s stock is not publicly traded. The ultimate value of Tredegar’s ownership interest in kaléo could be materially different from the $34.6 million estimated fair value reflected in the Company’s financial statements at December 31, 2020.
Total debt was $134 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $42 million at December 31, 2019. Net debt (debt in excess of cash and cash equivalents), a non-GAAP financial measure, was $122.2 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $10.6 million at December 31, 2019. In December 2020, the Company paid a special dividend of $5.97 per share or $200 million, as a result of strong cash generation and overall net cash proceeds of approximately $46 million relating to the sale of Personal Care Films. The overall net cash proceeds resulted from net proceeds of $53 million received in the fourth quarter of 2020 less $7 million of expected expenditures during 2021, primarily related to information technology transition services and severance. The Company’s revolving credit agreement allows borrowings of up to $375 million and matures in June 2024. The Company believes that its most restrictive covenant (computed quarterly) is the leverage ratio, which permits maximum borrowings of up to 4x EBITDA, as defined under the revolving credit agreement for the trailing four quarters (“Credit EBITDA”). The Company had Credit EBITDA and a leverage ratio (calculated in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below) of $93.4 million and 1.43x, respectively, at December 31, 2020. The Company’s current stress testing under a COVID-19-driven recession indicates a low probability that a future leverage ratio will exceed 4.0x. See the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for a reconciliation of net debt, a non-GAAP financial measure, to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
OPERATIONS REVIEW
Segment Analysis. A summary of results for 2020 versus 2019 for each of the Company’s reporting segments is shown below.
Aluminum Extrusions
A summary of results for Aluminum Extrusions is provided below:
Net sales in 2020 decreased by 14.0% versus 2019 primarily due to lower sales volume and the pass-through of lower metal costs, partially offset by an increase in average selling prices to cover higher operating costs. Sales volume in 2020 decreased by 10.5% versus 2019 with declines in all key markets, which the Company believes was mainly a result of COVID-19-related lower demand.
EBITDA from ongoing operations in 2020 decreased by $10.5 million in comparison to 2019 due to lower volume ($16.1 million) and higher labor and employee-related costs ($4.3 million), partially offset by higher pricing ($8.1 million), lower freight ($0.8 million) and lower travel and entertainment expenses as a result of COVID-19 ($0.9 million).
Projected Capital Expenditures and Depreciation & Amortization
Capital expenditures are projected to be $21 million in 2021, including $3 million for infrastructure upgrades at the Carthage, Tennessee and Newnan, Georgia facilities, $3 million for a roof replacement at the Elkhart, Indiana site and $4 million for strategic projects. In addition, approximately $11 million will be required to support continuity of current operations. Depreciation expense is projected to be $14 million in 2021. Amortization expense is projected to be $3 million in 2021.
PE Films
A summary of results for PE Films is provided below:
Net sales increased by 4.1% in 2020 versus 2019 primarily due to higher sales of products in Surface Protection unrelated to customer product transitions ($12.0 million), partially offset by lower sales associated with the customer product transitions this year ($6.8 million).
EBITDA from ongoing operations in 2020 increased by $4.0 million versus 2019 primarily due to:
•A $3.2 million increase from Surface Protection, primarily due to sales of products unrelated to the customer product transitions ($8.3 million), partially offset by lower sales associated with the customer product transitions ($4.5 million); and
•A $0.8 million increase from Pottsville Packaging primarily related to higher sales volume and favorable raw materials pricing.
Customer Product Transitions in Surface Protection
The Surface Protection component of PE Films supports manufacturers of optical and other specialty substrates used in flat panel display products. These films are primarily used by customers to protect components of displays in the manufacturing and transportation processes and then discarded.
The Company previously reported the risk that a portion of its film products used in surface protection applications will be made obsolete by possible future customer product transitions to less costly alternative processes or materials. These transitions principally relate to one customer. The Company believes that previously reported delays in this customer's transitions were recently resolved by the customer and much of the remaining transitions could occur by the end of 2021. Under this scenario, the Company estimates that the contribution to EBITDA from ongoing operations for PE Films could decline due to the remaining customer product transitions by $18 million in 2021 versus 2020 and $4 million in 2022 versus 2021. To offset the expected adverse impact, the Company is aggressively pursuing and making progress in generating contribution from sales from new surface protection products, applications and customers and implementing cost savings measures. Annual contribution to EBITDA from ongoing operations for PE Films on surface protection products unrelated to the customer product transitions has increased since 2018 by approximately $12 million.
Projected Capital Expenditures and Depreciation & Amortization
Capital expenditures are projected to be $5 million in 2021, including: $2 million for productivity projects and $3 million for capital expenditures required to support continuity of current operations. Depreciation expense is projected to be $6 million in 2021. There is no amortization expense for PE Films.
Flexible Packaging Films
A summary of results for Flexible Packaging Films is provided below:
Net sales in 2020 increased 0.5% versus 2019 while volume increased 7.4% versus 2019 primarily due to lower selling prices from lower raw material costs and changes in product mix.
Terphane’s EBITDA from ongoing operations in 2020 increased by $15.9 million versus 2019 due to:
•Lower raw material costs, net of lower selling prices ($8.9 million), higher sales volume ($3.3 million), favorable product mix ($2.2 million) and lower fixed costs ($1.0 million), partially offset by higher variable costs ($1.1 million) and higher selling and general administration expenses ($0.4 million);
•Net favorable foreign currency translation of Real-denominated costs ($1.5 million);
•Foreign currency transaction losses of $0.5 million in 2020 versus gains of $0.2 million in 2019; and
•A benefit of $1.2 million in 2020 resulting from the favorable settlement of a dispute related to value-added taxes.
Projected Capital Expenditures and Depreciation & Amortization
Capital expenditures are projected to be $9 million in 2021, including $5 million for new capacity for value-added products and productivity projects and $4 million for capital expenditures required to support continuity of current operations. Depreciation expense is projected to be $2 million in 2021. Amortization expense is projected to be $0.4 million in 2021.
Corporate Expenses, Interest and Income Taxes
Pension expense was $14.6 million in 2020, an unfavorable change of $5.1 million from 2019. The impact on earnings from pension expense is reflected in “Corporate expenses, net” in the net sales and operating profit by segment table in Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15. Pension expense is projected to be $14.0 million in 2021, which is determined at the beginning of the year based on the funded status of the Company’s defined benefit pension plan and actuarial assumptions at that time. In addition to the higher pension expense in 2020 compared to 2019, corporate expenses, net, increased primarily due to higher professional fees ($3.4 million) related to business development activities and higher stock compensation expense ($1.0 million), partially offset by lower environmental expenses ($0.6 million) and lower other employee-related compensation ($1.3 million).
Interest expense decreased to $2.6 million in 2020 from $4.1 million in 2019, primarily due to lower average debt levels.
The effective tax rate used to compute income taxes for continuing operations in 2020 was 32.8% compared to 18.8% in 2019. The differences between the U.S. federal statutory rate and the effective tax rate for 2020 and 2019 are shown in Note 16 in the Notes to the Financial Statements.
Net capitalization and other credit measures are provided in Liquidity and Capital Resources, below.
Critical Accounting Policies
In the ordinary course of business, the Company makes a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of results of operations and financial position in the preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions. The Company believes the following discussion addresses its critical accounting policies. These policies require management to exercise judgments that are often difficult, subjective and complex due to the necessity of estimating the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Impairment of Long-lived Identifiable Assets and Goodwill
The Company assesses its long-lived identifiable assets for impairment when events or circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable from future cash flows. Any necessary impairment charges are recorded when the Company does not believe the carrying value of the long-lived asset(s) will be recoverable. Tredegar also reassesses the useful lives of its long-lived assets based on changes in the business and technologies.
The Company assesses goodwill for impairment when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable, or, at a minimum, on an annual basis (December 1st of each year). When assessing goodwill for impairment, accounting guidance allows the Company to first perform a qualitative assessment about the likelihood of the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeding its fair value, referred to as the Step 0 assessment. The Step 0 assessment requires the evaluation of certain qualitative factors, including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors and overall financial performance, as well as company and reporting unit factors. If the Company's Step 0 analysis indicates that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, then the Company would perform a quantitative impairment test.
As of December 1, 2020, the Company applied the Step 0 assessment to its PE Films’ Surface Protection reporting unit and its Aluminum Extrusions’ Futura reporting unit, which was created as a result of an acquisition in 2017. Each reporting unit had a fair value significantly in excess of its carrying amount when last tested using the quantitative impairment test. The Company's Step 0 analysis in 2020 of these reporting units concluded that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of each reporting unit was less than its carrying amount.
Goodwill for Surface Protection and Futura totaled $57.3 million and $10.4 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020.
In assessing the recoverability of goodwill and long-lived identifiable assets, the Company primarily estimates fair value using discounted cash flow analyses and comparative enterprise value-to-EBITDA multiples. These calculations require management to make assumptions regarding estimated future cash flows, discount rates and other factors to determine if an impairment exists. If these estimates or their related assumptions change in the future, the Company may be required to record additional impairment charges.
During the first three months of 2020, the Company performed goodwill impairment tests for the Aluminum Extrusions’ AACOA reporting unit, which was created as a result of an acquisition in 2011, and the Futura reporting unit using a combination of income and market approaches and determined that the fair value of the Futura reporting unit exceeded its carrying value. However, the fair value of the AAOCA reporting unit did not exceed its carrying value. As a result, the Company recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $13.7 million ($10.5 million after taxes), which represented the entire amount of goodwill associated with the AACOA reporting unit. The operations of the AACOA reporting unit, which includes the Niles, Michigan and Elkhart, Indiana facilities, was expected to be severely impacted by COVID-19 at that time, with over 80% of the aluminum extrusions manufactured at these facilities sold to customers that make consumer durable products, such as recreational boating and power sports vehicles, and to customers serving the building and construction and automotive markets.
Investment Accounted for Under the Fair Value Method
In August 2007 and December 2008, Tredegar made an aggregate investment of $7.5 million in kaléo (formerly Intelliject, Inc.), a privately held specialty pharmaceutical company. This investment is accounted for under the fair value method. At the time of the initial investment, the Company elected the fair value option of accounting since its investment objectives were similar to those of venture capitalists, which typically do not have controlling financial interests (venture capital funds generally use the fair value option to account for their investment portfolios). At December 31, 2020, Tredegar’s ownership interest was approximately 20% on a fully diluted basis.
The Company considers its investment in kaléo to be a Level 3 investment under the fair value hierarchy described in GAAP. The Company discloses the level of its investments within the fair value hierarchy in which fair value measurements in their entirety fall, segregating fair value measurements using quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1), significant other observable inputs (Level 2), and significant unobservable inputs (Level 3). The Company believes that its fair value estimates will continue to be based upon Level 3 inputs since there is no secondary market for Tredegar’s ownership. See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 for more information on valuation methods used. Adjustments to the estimated fair value of this investment will be made in the period in which such changes can be quantified.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the fair value of the Company’s investment in kaléo (also the carrying value, which is separately stated in the consolidated balance sheets) was estimated at $34.6 million and $95.5 million, respectively. The weighted average cost of capital used in the fair market valuation of the Company’s interest in kaléo was 35% and 29% as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. The ultimate value of the Company’s ownership interest in kaléo will be determined and realized only if and when a liquidity event occurs, and the ultimate value could be materially different from the $34.6 million estimated fair value reflected in the Company’s financial statements at December 31, 2020. The fair market valuation of Tredegar’s interest in kaléo is sensitive to changes in the weighted average cost of capital used to discount cash flow projections for the high degree of risk and wide range of possible outcomes. At December 31, 2020, the effect of a 500 basis point decrease in the weighted average cost of capital assumption would have further increased the fair value of the Company’s interest in kaléo by approximately $5 million, and a 500 basis point increase in the weighted average cost of capital assumption would have decreased the fair value of the Company’s interest by approximately $6 million.
Pension Benefits
Tredegar sponsors noncontributory defined benefit (pension) plans that have resulted in varying amounts of net pension income or expense, as developed from actuarial valuations. Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions including discount rates, expected return on plan assets and rate of future compensation increases. The Company is required to consider current market conditions, including changes in interest rates and plan asset investment returns, in determining these assumptions. Actuarial assumptions may differ materially from actual results due to changing market and economic conditions, higher or lower withdrawal rates or longer or shorter life spans of participants. These differences may result in a significant impact to the amount of net pension income or expense recorded in future periods.
The discount rate is used to determine the present value of future payments. The discount rate is the single rate that, when applied to expected benefit payments, provides a present value equal to the present value of expected benefit payments determined by using the AA-rated bond yield curve. In general, the pension liability increases as the discount rate decreases and vice versa. The weighted average discount rate utilized was 2.57%, 3.27% and 4.40% at the end of 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, with changes between periods due to changes in market interest rates. Pay for active participants of the plan was frozen as of December 31, 2007. As of January 31, 2018, the plan no longer accrued benefits associated with crediting employees for service, thereby freezing all future benefits under the plan.
A lower expected return on plan assets increases the amount of expense and vice versa. Decreases in the level of actual plan assets will also serve to increase the amount of pension expense. The total return on plan assets (net of fees and plan expenses), which is primarily affected by the change in fair value of plan assets, current year contributions and current year payments to participants, was approximately 10.9% in 2020, 11.8% in 2019 and negative 5.4% in 2018. The expected long-term return on plan assets, which is estimated by asset class and generally based on inflation-adjusted historical returns, volatilities, risk premiums and managed asset premiums, was 5.00%, 6.00% and 6.50% in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The Company anticipates that its expected long-term return on plan assets will be 5.00% for 2021. See Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 for more information on expected long-term return on plan assets and asset mix.
See the Executive Summary section above for further discussion regarding the financial impact of the Company’s pension plans.
Income Taxes
On a quarterly basis, Tredegar reviews its judgments regarding uncertain tax positions and the likelihood that the benefits of a deferred income tax asset will be realized. As circumstances change, the Company reflects in earnings any adjustments to unrecognized benefits for uncertain tax positions and valuation allowances for deferred income tax assets.
For financial reporting purposes, unrecognized tax benefits on uncertain tax positions were $0.6 million and $0.9 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Tax payments resulting from the successful challenge by the taxing authority on uncertain tax positions taken by Tredegar would possibly result in the payment of interest and penalties. Accordingly, the Company also accrues for possible interest and penalties on uncertain tax positions. The balance of accrued interest and penalties on deductions taken relating to uncertain tax positions was $0.1 million, $0.1 million and $0.2 million at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively ($0.1 million, $0.1 million and $0.2 million, respectively, net of corresponding U.S. federal and state income tax benefits). Accruals for possible interest and penalties on uncertain tax positions are reflected in income tax expense for financial reporting purposes.
Tredegar, or one of its subsidiaries, files income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction, various states and jurisdictions outside the U.S. With few exceptions, Tredegar is no longer subject to U.S. federal, state or non-U.S. income tax examinations by tax authorities for years before 2017.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, valuation allowances relating to deferred income tax assets were $17.5 million and $3.8 million, respectively. For more information on deferred income tax assets and liabilities, see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15.
Results of Operations
2020 versus 2019
Revenues. Sales in 2020 decreased by 8.6% compared with 2019 primarily due to lower sales in Aluminum Extrusions partially offset by higher sales in PE Films. Net sales decreased 14.0% in Aluminum Extrusions primarily due to lower sales volume and the pass-through of lower metal costs, partially offset by an increase in average selling prices to cover higher operating costs. Net sales increased 4.1% in PE Films primarily due to higher sales of products in Surface Protection unrelated to customer product transitions, partially offset by lower sales associated with the customer product transitions. Net sales increased in Flexible Packaging Films by 0.5% primarily due to increased volume and changes in product mix. For more information on changes in net sales and volume, see the Executive Summary section above.
Operating Costs and Expenses. Consolidated gross profit margin (sales minus cost of goods sold and freight as a percentage of sales) was 22.6% in 2020 versus 18.9% in 2019. The gross profit margin in Flexible Packaging Films increased due to higher sales volume, lower raw material costs and favorable product mix. The gross profit margin in PE Films and Aluminum Extrusions was flat compared to 2019.
For more information on changes in operating costs and expenses, see the Executive Summary section above.
Selling, General and Administrative. As a percentage of sales, selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) and R&D expenses were 12.3% in 2020, which increased from 10.2% in 2019. SG&A and R&D expenses were up year-over-year, while net sales decreased. Increased SG&A expense was primarily due to higher professional fees related to business development activities, higher stock-based compensation expense, and corporate costs incurred during 2020 associated with the sale of Personal Care Films.
Plant shutdowns, asset impairments, restructurings and other. Pre-tax losses associated with plant shutdowns, asset impairments, restructurings and other items for continuing operations in 2020 detailed below are shown in the statements of net sales and EBITDA from ongoing operations by segment table in Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 and are included in “Asset impairments and costs associated with exit and disposal activities, net of adjustments” in the consolidated statements of income, unless otherwise noted. A discussion of unrealized gains and losses on investments can also be found in Note 4 to the Financial Statements in Item 15 and additional information on restructuring costs can be found in Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15.
Interest Expense. Interest expense, which is net of amounts capitalized and included in property, plant and equipment ($0.1 million and $0.3 million capitalized in 2020 and 2019, respectively), was $2.6 million in 2020, compared to $4.1 million for 2019. Average debt outstanding and interest rates were as follows:
2019 versus 2018
Revenues. Sales in 2019 decreased by 3.0% compared with 2018 due to lower sales in Aluminum Extrusions partially offset by higher sales in PE Films and Flexible Packaging Films. Net sales decreased 7.6% in Aluminum Extrusions primarily due to lower sales volume and the pass-through of lower metal costs, partially offset by an increase in average selling prices to cover higher operating costs. Net sales increased 4.8% in PE Films primarily due to higher sales volume and increased selling prices. Net sales increased in Flexible Packaging Films by 8.2% primarily due to higher sales volume and increased selling prices. For more information on changes in net sales and volume, see the Segment Analysis below.
Operating Costs and Expenses. Consolidated gross profit (sales minus cost of goods sold and freight) as a percentage of sales (gross profit margin) was 18.9% in 2019 versus 17.0% in 2018. The gross profit margin in Aluminum Extrusions increased primarily as a result of higher selling prices. The gross profit margin in PE Films increased primarily due to higher profits in Surface Protection as a result of higher sales volume and increased selling prices. The gross profit margin in Flexible Packaging Films was essentially unchanged from 2018 to 2019. For more information on changes in operating costs and expenses, see the Segment Analysis below.
Selling, General and Administrative. As a percentage of sales, SG&A and R&D expenses were 10.2% in 2019, which increased from 8.8% in 2018. The increase in SG&A and R&D expenses as a percentage of sales can be primarily attributed to lower sales for Aluminum Extrusions. Increased spending was due to higher stock-based compensation and consulting fees for remediation activities and other costs relating to the Company’s material weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting, business development activities and implementation of new accounting guidance.
Plant shutdowns, asset impairments, restructurings and other. Pre-tax losses associated with plant shutdowns, asset impairments, restructurings and other items for continuing operations in 2019 and 2018 detailed below are shown in the statements of net sales and EBITDA from ongoing operations by segment table in Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 and are included in “Asset impairments and costs associated with exit and disposal activities, net of adjustments” in the consolidated statements of income, unless otherwise noted. A discussion of unrealized gains and losses on investments can also be found in Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 and additional information on restructuring costs can be found in Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15.
Interest Expense. Interest expense, which is net of amounts capitalized and included in property, plant and equipment ($0.3 million and $0.1 million capitalized in 2019 and 2018, respectively), was $4.1 million in 2019, compared to $5.7 million for 2018. Average debt outstanding and interest rates were as follows:
Segment Analysis. A summary of operating results for 2019 versus 2018 for each of the Company’s reporting segments is shown below.
Aluminum Extrusions
A summary of results for Aluminum Extrusions is provided below:
Net sales in 2019 decreased versus 2018 primarily due to lower sales volume and the pass-through of lower metal costs, partially offset by an increase in average selling prices to cover higher operating costs.
EBITDA from ongoing operations in 2019 increased slightly in comparison to 2018. Excluding the adverse impact of the accounting for inventories under the last in, first out method in the fourth quarter of 2019 versus 2018 ($1.5 million), EBITDA from ongoing operations increased $1.7 million despite a 7% decline in sales volume. The increase was primarily due to higher pricing ($22.8 million) and fabrication profits ($1.0 million), partially offset by lower sales volume ($8.7 million), increased labor and employee-related expenses ($7.4 million), higher supplies, maintenance, utilities and other operating costs ($2.0 million), increased freight costs ($2.0 million) and increased general and administrative expenses ($1.9 million).
PE Films
A summary of results for PE Films is provided below:
Net sales in 2019 increased by $6.1 million versus 2018 primarily due to higher sales in Surface Protection. Surface Protection’s sales increased $5.8 million due to higher sales volume and increased selling prices, partially offset by unfavorable product mix.
EBITDA from ongoing operations in 2019 increased by $8.7 million versus 2018 primarily due to:
•A $6.8 million increase from Surface Protection, primarily due to higher selling prices ($6.0 million), quality claims in 2018 that did not recur in 2019 ($1.2 million), production efficiencies ($1.4 million) and favorable raw material costs ($1.9 million), partially offset by unfavorable mix (net impact of $2.0 million) and higher fixed manufacturing and general and administrative costs ($1.5 million); and
•A $1.6 million increase from Pottsville Packaging primarily related to higher sales volume ($1.5 million), increased productivity ($0.5 million) and increased selling prices ($0.2 million), partially offset by unfavorable product mix ($1.0 million).
Flexible Packaging Films
A summary of results for Flexible Packaging Films is provided below:
Net sales in 2019 increased versus 2018 primarily due to higher sales volume and increased selling prices.
Terphane’s EBITDA from ongoing operations in 2019 increased by $3.6 million versus 2018 due to:
•Higher volume ($2.6 million) and higher selling prices ($1.6 million), partially offset by higher fixed and variable costs, including costs related to a restarted line ($2.0 million);
•Net favorable foreign currency translation of Real-denominated operating costs of $0.4 million; and
•Foreign currency transaction gains of $1.0 million in 2019 versus losses of $0.8 million in 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company continuously focuses on working capital management. Measures such as days sales outstanding (“DSO”), days inventory outstanding (“DIO”) and days payables outstanding (“DPO”) are used to evaluate changes in working capital. Changes in operating assets and liabilities from continuing operations from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 are summarized below. Cash flows for discontinued operations have not been separately disclosed in the consolidated statements of cash flows.
•Accounts and other receivables decreased $2.8 million (3.1%).
◦Accounts and other receivables in Aluminum Extrusions decreased by $3.3 million primarily due to lower sales volume and lower sales prices from the pass-through of lower metal costs, partially offset by an increase in average selling prices. DSO (computed using trailing 12 months net sales and a rolling 12-month average of accounts and other receivables balances) was approximately 47.5 days in 2020 and 48.5 days in 2019.
◦Accounts and other receivables in PE Films decreased by $0.3 million as the removal of assets related to Bright View was partially offset by increased accounts receivables in Surface Protection due to higher sales. DSO was approximately 30.2 days in 2020 and 34.7 days in 2019.
◦Accounts and other receivables in Flexible Packaging Films remained consistent compared to the prior year. DSO was approximately 41.0 days in 2020 and 37.7 days in 2019.
•Inventories increased $2.2 million (3.5%).
◦Inventories in Aluminum Extrusions increased by $3.2 million primarily due to higher average aluminum prices and COVID-19-related operational and production inefficiencies. DIO (computed using trailing 12 months costs of goods sold calculated on a first in, first out basis and a rolling 12-month average of inventory balances calculated on the first-in, first-out basis) was approximately 39.3 days in 2020 and 38.6 days in 2019.
◦Inventories in PE Films increased by $0.7 million primarily due to higher raw material levels in Surface Protection partially offset by the removal of assets related to Bright View. DIO was approximately 59.2 days in 2020 and 51.3 days in 2019.
◦Inventories in Flexible Packaging Films decreased by $1.6 million primarily due to increased sales volume and lower resin costs partially offset by higher raw material levels. DIO was approximately 89.4 days in 2020 and 94.3 days in 2019.
•Net property, plant and equipment decreased by $7.0 million (4.0%) primarily due to depreciation expenses of $23.4 million, a reduction from the effect of changes in foreign exchange rates of $3.3 million and the removal of assets related to Bright View of $2.3 million, partially offset by capital expenditures of $21.4 million.
•Identifiable intangible assets, net decreased by $3.8 million (16.9%) primarily due to amortization expense of $3.0 million and the removal of assets related to Bright View of $0.6 million.
•Accounts payable increased by $2.4 million (2.8%).
◦Accounts payable in Aluminum Extrusions increased by $3.3 million, primarily due to increased inventory levels as a result of COVID-19-related lower demand. DPO (computed using trailing 12 months costs of goods sold calculated on a first in, first out basis and a rolling 12-month average of accounts payable balances) was approximately 53.1 days in 2020 and 49.9 days in 2019.
◦Accounts payable in PE Films decreased by $3.2 million primarily due to effective working capital management and the normal volatility associated with the timing of payments. DPO was approximately 36.8 days in 2020 and 37.1 days in 2019.
◦Accounts payable in Flexible Packaging Films increased by $0.5 million, primarily due the negotiation of longer payment terms partially offset by reduced resin costs. DPO was approximately 61.7 days in 2020 and 55.2 days in 2019.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $74.4 million in 2020 compared to $115.9 million in 2019. The decrease is primarily due to significant net working capital efficiencies in 2019 versus 2020 ($28.5 million), a dividend received from kaléo in 2019 ($17.6 million), and higher pension and postretirement benefit plan contributions ($4.1 million), partially offset by higher EBITDA from ongoing operations for business segments of $9.3 million in 2020 versus the prior period.
Cash provided by investing activities was $32.9 million in 2020 compared to cash used in investing activities of $39.9 million in 2019. Cash provided by investing activities in 2020 includes the net cash proceeds received for the sale of Personal Care Films ($55.1 million) and Bright View ($1.1 million), partially offset by capital expenditures of $23.4 million. Cash used in investing activities in 2019 includes capital expenditures of $50.9 million, which was partially offset by $10.9 million of cash proceeds received for the sale of the PE Films’ Shanghai manufacturing facility.
Net cash used in financing activities of $125.6 million in 2020 compared to $77.3 million in 2019. The increase is primarily due to higher net borrowings of $151.5 million under the Credit Agreement (as defined below) and higher dividend payments to shareholders of $200.7 million primarily due to the $200 million Special Dividend (partially funded from borrowings under the Credit Agreement, as defined below), partially offset by lower debt financing costs of $1.1 million.
On December 1, 2020, Tredegar entered into an amendment (“Amendment No. 1”) to its five-year secured revolving credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”), which matures in June 2024. The material changes from Amendment No. 1 are as follows:
•Aggregate borrowings available under the facility were reduced from $500 million to $375 million.
•The definition of Credit EBITDA was amended to permit certain adjustments for prepayment of pension obligations on a pro forma basis.
•Amendments were made to certain of the negative covenants, including, among other amendments, the following: (i) the restricted payments covenant was amended to permit a one-time special dividend payment of up to $200 million and allow for an aggregate amount of dividend payments up to $75 million subsequent to Amendment No. 1 through the maturity date of the Credit Agreement; (ii) the asset disposition covenant was amended to reduce the general basket to 20% of consolidated total assets over the life of the facility and was reset as of December 1, 2020; and (iii) the indebtedness covenant was amended to reduce several baskets to $25 million each.
Net capitalization and indebtedness as defined under the Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
The credit spread and commitment fees charged on the unused amount under the Credit Agreement at various indebtedness-to-Credit EBITDA levels are as follows:
At December 31, 2020, the interest rate on debt under the Credit Agreement existing at that date was priced at one-month LIBOR plus the applicable credit spread of 162.5 basis points. Under the Credit Agreement, borrowings are permitted up to $375 million, and approximately $241 million was available to borrow at December 31, 2020, based upon the most restrictive covenant within the Credit Agreement.
The computations of Credit EBITDA, the leverage ratio and interest coverage ratio as defined in the Credit Agreement are presented below along with the related most restrictive covenants. Credit EBITDA as defined in the Credit Agreement is not intended to represent net income or cash flow from operations as defined by GAAP and should not be considered as either an alternative to net income or to cash flow.
Tredegar was in compliance with all of its debt covenants as of December 31, 2020. Noncompliance with any of the debt covenants may have a material adverse effect on its financial condition or liquidity, in the event such noncompliance cannot be cured or should the Company be unable to obtain a waiver from the lenders. Renegotiation of the covenant through an amendment to the Credit Agreement may effectively cure the noncompliance, but may have an effect on its financial condition or liquidity depending upon how the covenant is renegotiated.
The Company believes that existing borrowing availability, current cash balances and cash flow from operations will be sufficient to satisfy working capital, capital expenditure and dividend requirements for at least the next twelve months.
At December 31, 2020, Tredegar had cash and cash equivalents of $11.8 million, including funds held in locations outside the U.S. of $9.4 million.
Contractual Obligations, Contingent Liabilities and Commitments
Following is a table which summarizes the continuing operations contractual obligations of Tredegar as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Estimated minimum required contributions for defined benefit plans and benefit payments for other postretirement plans are based on actuarial estimates using current assumptions for discount rates, long-term rate of return on plan assets, rate of compensation increases and health care cost trends. The expected defined benefit plan contribution estimates for 2021 through 2030 were determined under provisions of the Pension Protection Act of 2006 using the preliminary assumptions chosen by Tredegar for the 2021 plan year. Tredegar has determined that it is not practicable to present defined benefit contributions and other postretirement benefit payments beyond 2030.
(2) Contractual lease payments for 2021 include $0.5 million of short term lease payments and $0.3 million of variable lease costs.
(3) Amounts for which reasonable estimates about the timing of payments cannot be made are included in the remainder column.
(4) Includes contractual severance and other miscellaneous contractual arrangements.
From time to time, the Company enters into transactions with third parties in connection with the sale of assets or businesses in which it agrees to indemnify the buyers or third parties involved in the transaction, or the sellers or third parties involved in the transaction agree to indemnify Tredegar, for certain liabilities or risks related to the assets or business. Also, in the ordinary course of business, the Company may enter into agreements with third parties for the sale of goods or services that may contain indemnification provisions. In the event that an indemnification claim is asserted, liability for indemnification would be subject to an assessment of the underlying facts and circumstances under the terms of the applicable agreement. Further, any indemnification payments may be limited or barred by a monetary cap, a time limitation, or a deductible or basket. For these reasons, the Company is unable to estimate the maximum potential amount of the potential future liability under the indemnity provisions of these agreements. Tredegar does, however, accrue for losses for any known contingent liability, including those that may arise from indemnification provisions, when future payment is probable and the amount is reasonably estimable. The Company discloses contingent liabilities if the probability of loss is reasonably possible and material.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
Tredegar has exposure to the volatility of interest rates, polyethylene and polypropylene resin prices, Terephthalic Acid (“PTA”) and Monoethylene Glycol (“MEG”) prices, aluminum ingot and scrap prices, energy prices, foreign currencies and emerging markets. See Liquidity and Capital Resources regarding interest rate exposures related to borrowings under the Credit Agreement.
Profit margins in Aluminum Extrusions are sensitive to fluctuations in aluminum ingot and scrap prices as well as natural gas prices (natural gas is the principal energy source used to operate its casting furnaces). Changes in polyethylene resin prices and the timing of those changes could have a significant impact on profit margins in PE Films. Changes in polyester resin, PTA and MEG prices, and the timing of those changes, could have a significant impact on profit margins in Flexible Packaging Films. There is no assurance of the Company’s ability to pass through higher raw material and energy costs to its customers.
In the normal course of business, Aluminum Extrusions enters into fixed-price forward sales contracts with certain customers for the sale of fixed quantities of aluminum extrusions at scheduled intervals. In order to hedge its exposure to aluminum price volatility (see the chart below) under these fixed-price arrangements, which generally have a duration of not more than 12 months, the Company enters into a combination of forward purchase commitments and futures contracts to acquire or hedge aluminum, based on the scheduled deliveries. See Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 for additional information.
The volatility of quarterly average aluminum prices is shown in the chart below.
Source: Quarterly averages computed by the Company using daily Midwest average prices provided by Platts.
The volatility of quarterly average natural gas prices is shown in the chart below.
Source: Quarterly averages computed by Tredegar using monthly NYMEX settlement prices.
The volatility of average quarterly prices of polyethylene resin in the U.S. (a primary raw material for PE Films products) is shown in the chart below:
Source: Quarterly averages computed by Tredegar using monthly data provided by IHS, Inc. In February 2020, IHS reflected a 32 cents per pound non-market adjustment based on their estimate of the growth of discounts in prior periods. The 4th quarter 2019 average rate of $0.51 per pound is shown on a pro forma basis as if the non-market adjustment was made in the fourth quarter of 2019.
The price of resin is driven by several factors, including supply and demand and the price of oil, ethylene and natural gas. Selling prices to customers are set considering numerous factors, including the expected volatility of resin prices. In certain situations, PE Films has index-based pass-through raw material cost arrangements with customers. However, under certain agreements, changes in resin prices are not passed through for a period of 90 days or more. Pricing on the remainder of the business is based upon raw material costs and supply/demand dynamics within the markets that the Company competes.
Polyester resins, MEG and PTA used in flexible packaging films produced in Brazil are primarily purchased domestically, with other sources available mostly from Asia and the U.S. Given the nature of these products as commodities, pricing is derived from Asian pricing indexes. The volatility of the average quarterly prices for polyester fibers in Asia, which is representative of polyester resin (a primary raw material for Flexible Packaging Films) pricing trends, is shown in the chart below:
Source: Quarterly averages computed by Tredegar using monthly data from CMAI Global Index data.
The volatility of average quarterly prices of PTA and MEG in Asia (raw materials used in the production of polyester resins produced by Flexible Packaging Films) is shown in the chart below:
Source: Quarterly averages computed by Tredegar using monthly data from CMAI Global Index data.
The Company sells to customers in foreign markets through its foreign operations and through exports from U.S. plants. The percentage of sales and total assets for manufacturing operations related to foreign markets for 2020, 2019 and 2018 are as follows:
* The percentages for foreign markets are relative to Tredegar’s consolidated net sales and total assets .
Tredegar attempts to match the pricing and cost of its products in the same currency and generally views the volatility of foreign currencies and the corresponding impact on earnings and cash flow as part of the overall risk of operating in a global environment (for additional information, see trends for the Brazilian Real and Chinese Yuan in the charts on the following page). Exports from the U.S. are generally denominated in U.S. Dollars. The Company’s foreign currency exposure on income from continuing foreign operations relates to the Chinese Yuan and the Brazilian Real.
PE Films is generally able to match the currency of its sales and costs for its product lines. For flexible packaging films produced in Brazil, selling prices and key raw material costs are principally determined in U.S. Dollars and are impacted by local economic conditions and local and global competitive dynamics. Flexible Packaging Films is exposed to foreign exchange translation risk (its functional currency is the Brazilian Real) because almost 90% of the sales of Flexible Packaging Films business unit in Brazil (“Terphane Ltda.”) and substantially all of its related raw material costs are quoted or priced in U.S. Dollars while its variable conversion, fixed conversion and sales, general and administrative costs before depreciation & amortization (collectively “Terphane Ltda. Operating Costs”) are quoted or priced in Brazilian Real. This mismatch, together
with a variety of economic variables impacting currency exchange rates, causes volatility that could negatively or positively impact EBITDA from ongoing operations for Flexible Packaging Films.
The Company estimates annual net costs of R$119 million for the net mismatch translation exposure between Terphane Ltda.’s U.S. Dollar quoted or priced sales and raw material costs and underlying Brazilian Real quoted or priced Terphane Ltda. Operating Costs. Terphane Ltda. has outstanding foreign exchange average forward rate contracts to purchase Brazilian Real and sell U.S. Dollars to hedge its exposure. See Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 for more information on outstanding hedging contracts and this hedging program.
Tredegar estimates that the change in the value of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. Dollar on PE Films had an unfavorable impact on EBITDA from ongoing operations in PE Films of $0.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019 and an unfavorable impact on EBITDA from ongoing operations of $0.5 million in 2019 compared with 2018.
Trends for the Brazilian Real and Chinese Yuan are shown in the chart below:
Source: Quarterly averages computed by Tredegar using daily closing data provided by Bloomberg.