ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion provides information which management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. The discussion should be read along with our audited consolidated financial statements and notes for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The following discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Our actual results may differ significantly from the results, expectations and plans discussed in these forward-looking statements. We use words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Note Concerning Forward-Looking Statements.” You also should specifically consider the various risk factors identified in this Annual Report on Form 10-K that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are engaged in media and digital technology, primarily in sports entertainment and related technologies that bring fans closer to athletes and celebrities.
Current Structure of the Company
We have the following subsidiaries:
In addition to the subsidiaries listed above, Suzhou Aishuo Network Information Co., Ltd (“Suzhou Aishuo”) is a limited liability company, organized in China and controlled by us via various contractual arrangements. Suzhou Aishuo is treated as one of our subsidiaries, with limited operations, for financial reporting purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”).
Summary Description of Core Business
Touchpoint Group (“TG”) is a software developer which supplies a robust fan engagement platform designed to enhance the fan experience and drive commercial aspects of the sport and entertainment business.
TG brings users closer to the action by enabling them to engage with clubs, favorite players, peers and relevant brands through features available through its APP and platform, that include live streaming, access to limited edition merchandise, gamification (chance to win unique one-off life experiences), user rewards, third party branded offers, credit cards and associated benefits.
TG’s APP and platform are available to a broad audience as a white label product. The platform provides in-depth analytics that enable marketing teams to ensure that they deliver aligned, strategic messages and campaigns to the right audience at the right time.
We are based in the United States of America and the United Kingdom.
Disposal of Discontinued Operations
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we determined to sell our interests in Browning and its interest in Love Media House Inc. (“Love Media”). In connection with this determination, we concluded the intangible assets related to these subsidiaries were impaired. Accordingly, we recorded an impairment charge of $2,440,000 which is included in the loss from discontinued operations.
In February 2020, we concluded the sale of our majority interest in Browning for the following consideration;
● The return of 89,334 shares in the Company held by William J. Browning for cancellation; and
● The repayment to us of the advances made to Browning totaling $210,000 over a 24-month period ending January 31, 2022. To encourage early repayment by Browning, we agreed to give additional debt reduction on the basis of $1.00 credit for every $1.00 paid during the first six months of the repayment term.
● During the year ended December 31, 2020, we only received $3,000 from William J. Browning and therefore the balance of $204,000 remains outstanding and we will commence legal action to attempt to try and recover the outstanding balance. A provision against the outstanding balance has been provided for.
.
COVID-19 Effects
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) emerged in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China. While initially the outbreak was largely concentrated in China and caused significant disruptions to its economy, it has now spread to several other countries and infections have been reported globally.
Many countries, provincial state and local governmental authorities have issued stay-at-home orders, proclamations and/or directives aimed at minimizing the spread of COVID-19. Additional, more restrictive proclamations and/or directives may be issued in the future. As a result, we have seen delays in commencement of operations by certain licensees of the Touchpoint App and platform which leads to subsequent delays in subscriptions being processed. All of the Company employees and management can operate from home whilst the stay-at-home orders remain in place.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations is unknown and will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the COVID-19 outbreak, new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, and any additional preventative and protective actions that governments, or the Company, may direct, which may result in an extended period of continued business disruption, reduced customer traffic and reduced operations. Any resulting financial impact cannot be reasonably estimated at this time but is anticipated to have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
The measures taken to date will impact our business for the fiscal first, second and third quarters and potentially beyond. Management expects that all of its business segments, across all of its geographies, will be impacted to some degree, but the significance of the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our business and the duration for which it may have an impact cannot be determined at this time.
For the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our continuing operations generated revenues of $174,000 and $170,000, respectively; and reported net losses of $3,545,000 and $3,298,000, respectively, and negative cash flow from continuing operating activities of $767,000 and $1,431,000, respectively. As noted in our consolidated financial statements, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $64.9 million and recurring losses from operations as of December 31, 2020. We anticipate that we will continue to report losses and negative cash flow. Our auditors have raised substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern as a result of our historical recurring losses and negative cash flows from operations. See “Risk Factors-We have a history of operating losses and our auditors have indicated that unless there is additional equity or debt funding in 2021, there is a substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.”
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth information from our statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands) excluding discontinued items.
Revenue: Our revenue for continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $174,000 as compared to approximately $170,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately $4,000 or 2.3%.
Cost of Revenue: Cost of revenue is primarily the amortization of intangible assets relating to subsidiaries acquired together with our intellectual property.
Gross Deficit: Gross deficit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $381,000 as compared to $387,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Expenses: Operating expenses including general and administrative expenses, consultancy expenses, depreciation and impairment charges were approximately $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to approximately $3.3 million, for 2019, a decrease of approximately $1.0 million or 30.6%. The decrease in expenses primarily arose due to decreases in consulting costs, employee costs, travel costs etc.
Impairment charge: As a result of the current pandemic and its impact on our ability to conduct customer marketing efforts and the inherent uncertainties in the entertainment and software industries within the United Kingdom and the United States, the Company has updated its short-term projections. As a result of this re-evaluation, during the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an impairment loss of approximately $0.5 million. While the Company believes its estimates and assumptions are reasonable, variations from those estimates could produce materially different results.
Other Income (Expense): Net other income/(expense) totaled approximately $(0.3) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to approximately $0.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of approximately $0.7 million. The decrease in net other income is due primarily to a decrease in interest expense charges and other income recognized from the planned disposition of Banana Whale and Browning.
Net Loss: Net loss from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $3.5 million as compared to a net loss from continuing operations of $3.3 million for the same period in 2019. Going forward, management believes the Company will continue to grow the business and increase profitability through organic growth and acquisitions.
Foreign Currency Translation Adjustment: Our reporting currency is the U.S. dollar. Our local currencies, and British pounds, are our functional currencies. Results of operations and cash flow are translated at average exchange rates during the period, and assets and liabilities are translated at the unified exchange rate at the end of the period. Translation adjustments resulting from this process are included in accumulated other comprehensive income in the statement of shareholders’ equity. Transaction gains and losses that arise from exchange rate fluctuations on transactions denominated in a currency other than the functional currency are included in the results of operations as incurred.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth a summary of our approximate cash flows for the periods indicated:
Net cash used by operating activities from continuing operations was approximately $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to approximately $1.4 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease in cash used in operating activities from continuing operations is largely due to the decrease in cash expenditures in 2020 as compared to 2019 related to management activities.
Net cash used by investing activities from continuing operations was approximately $0.02 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to net cash raised of approximately $1.6 million for the previous year. Net cash provided in 2019 by investing activities was primarily the disposal of the interest in Banana Whale Studios PTE LTD.
Net cash provided by financing activities from continuing operations amounted to approximately $0.6 million for 2020 and $0.3 million for 2019. Cash provided by financing activities in 2020 and 2019 was primarily from the funds received from convertible loans raised.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. Our significant accounting policies are described in notes accompanying the consolidated financial statements. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires our management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Estimates are based on information available as of the date of the financial statements, and accordingly, actual results in future periods could differ from these estimates. Significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements apply critical accounting policies described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
We consider our recognition of revenues, accounting for the consolidation of operations, accounting for intangible assets and related impairment analyses, the allowance for doubtful accounts and accounting for equity transactions, and determination of going concern considerations to be most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Together with our critical accounting policies set forth below, our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 of our audited financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue for the sale of the software license is recognized when the customer has use of the services and has access to use the software. Revenue from maintenance services are recognized as the services are provided and charged. The Company also generates revenue through the development and deployment of customized customer apps based on its existing technologies. Based on the terms of the Operator Agreements, the Company recognizes revenue upon approval of the app and related design documents by the customer. Included within deferred revenue is amounts billed and/or collected from customer prior to achieving customer approval. The Company also recognizes revenue through hosting and maintenance fees billed to customers under the Operator Agreements and is eligible to receive a portion of revenues generated through the customer app, as defined. Revenues were generated through the revenue sharing arrangement in 2021.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. This ASU is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. This update permits the use of either the modified retrospective or fully retrospective method of transition. The Company is currently evaluating the impact this ASU will have on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.