ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
We are an innovative media company serving the greater good of our communities. Our business includes 64 television stations and two radio stations in 51 U.S. markets, we are the largest owner of top four network affiliates in the top 25 markets among independent station groups, reaching approximately 39% of U.S. television households. We also own leading multicast networks True Crime Network and Quest. Each television station also has a robust digital presence across online, mobile and social platforms, reaching consumers on all devices and platforms they use to consume news content. We have been consistently honored with the industry’s top awards, including Edward R. Murrow, Alfred I. DuPont and Emmy Awards. Through TEGNA Marketing Solutions (TMS), our integrated sales and back-end fulfillment operations, we deliver results for advertisers across television, digital, and Over the Top (OTT) platforms, including Premion, our OTT advertising network.
We have one operating and reportable segment. The primary sources of our revenues are: 1) subscription revenues, reflecting fees paid by satellite, cable, OTT (companies that deliver video content to consumers over the Internet) and telecommunications providers to carry our television signals on their systems; 2) advertising & marketing services (AMS) revenues, which include local and national non-political television advertising, digital marketing services (including Premion), and advertising on the stations’ websites and tablet and mobile products; 3) political advertising revenues, which are driven by even year election cycles at the local and national level (e.g., 2020, 2018) and particularly in the second half of those years; and 4) other services, such as production of programming and advertising material.
COVID-19 pandemic: During fiscal year 2020 and continuing into 2021, the world has been, and continues to be, impacted by the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has brought unprecedented challenges and widespread economic and social change throughout the United States. In an effort to contain the virus the federal and state governments in the United States responded by instituting a wide variety of mitigating control measures, including, mandatory quarantines, closures of non-essential businesses and all other places of social interaction, while implementing “shelter in place” orders and travel restrictions in an effort to slow the spread of the virus. Such mitigating measures began negatively impacting our AMS revenue stream in mid-March 2020 as demand for non-political advertising softened. While some of these measures have been lifted or relaxed in certain state and local governments, other jurisdictions have seen increases in new COVID-19 cases resulting in restrictions being reinstated, or new restrictions imposed. Overall, advertising demand improved as steps toward economic re-opening were implemented and as federal government stimulus programs were enacted. Our AMS revenues have shown quarterly sequential improvement since the height of the pandemic in the second quarter of 2020. There continues to be considerable uncertainty regarding how current and future health and safety measures implemented in response to the pandemic will impact our business.
Due to the changing nature and continuing uncertainty around the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to predict the impact of COVID-19 on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and our business in future periods remains limited. While we use the best information available in developing significant estimates included in our financial statements, the effects of the pandemic on our operations may not be fully realized, or reflected in our financial results, until future periods. As such, actual results could differ from our estimates, and these differences resulting from changes in facts and circumstances could be material.
Seasonality: Our revenues and operating results are subject to seasonal fluctuations. Generally, our second and fourth quarter revenues and operating results are stronger than those we report for the first and third quarter. This is driven by the second quarter reflecting increased spring seasonal advertising, while the fourth quarter typically includes increased advertising related to the holiday season. In addition, our revenue and operating results are subject to significant fluctuations across yearly periods resulting from political advertising. In even numbered years, political spending is usually significantly higher than in odd numbered years due to advertising for the local and national elections. Additionally, every four years, we typically experience even greater increases in political advertising in connection with the presidential election. The strong demand for advertising from political advertisers in these even years can result in the significant use of our available inventory (leading to a “crowd out” effect), which can diminish our AMS revenue in the even year of a two year election cycle, particularly in the fourth quarter of those years.
Consolidated Results from Operations
The following discussion is a comparison of our consolidated results on a GAAP basis. The year-to-year comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of future results. In addition, see the section on page 30 titled ‘Operating results non-GAAP information’ for additional tables presenting information which supplements our financial information provided on a GAAP basis.
During 2019, we acquired multiple local television stations and multicast networks. Specifically, we acquired the Gray stations (January 2, 2019), Justice (recently rebranded as True Crime Network) and Quest multicast networks (June 18, 2019), the Dispatch stations (August 8, 2019) and the Nexstar stations (September 19, 2019). See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for further details. The multicast networks, Dispatch stations, and Nexstar stations are collectively referred to as the “2019 Acquisitions” in the discussion that follows. These 2019 Acquisitions did not contribute to the periods prior to their acquisition in our financial statements which impacts the year-to-year comparability of our consolidated operating results. The Gray stations do not impact the 2020 to 2019 year-to-year comparability, but do impact 2020 to 2018 year-to-year comparability.
As discussed above, our operating results are subject to significant fluctuations across yearly periods (driven by even-year election cycles). As such, our management team and Board of Directors also review current period operating results compared to the prior two year period (e.g., 2020 vs. 2018). We believe this comparison will also provide useful information to investors, and therefore, we have supplemented our prior year comparison of consolidated results to also include a comparison against 2018 results (through operating income). For purposes of this comparison, the definition of “2019 Acquisitions” also includes the operating results of the Gray stations (as this acquisition does impact the 2020 to 2018 year-to-year comparability).
For a comparative discussion of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 2, 2020.
A consolidated summary of our results is presented below (in thousands):
*** Not meaningful
Revenues
Our Subscription revenue category includes revenue earned from cable and satellite providers for the right to carry our signals and the distribution of TEGNA stations on OTT streaming services. Our AMS category includes all sources of our traditional television advertising and digital revenues including Premion and other digital advertising and marketing revenues across our platforms.
While we expect the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic to continue to have a dampening effect on non-political advertising placements and revenues while containment measures are in place and possibly longer, it is too early to tell with any kind of precision how or the extent to which future declines in non-political advertising revenues, particularly with respect to local AMS advertising, will impact our revenues and operating results in future quarters.
The following table summarizes the year-over-year changes in our revenue categories (in thousands):
*** Not meaningful
2020 vs. 2019
Total revenues increased $638.3 million in 2020. Our 2019 Acquisitions contributed $296.7 million to this increase. Excluding the 2019 Acquisitions from both periods, total revenues increased $341.6 million. This increase was primarily due to a $363.8 million increase in legacy station political advertising, reflecting increased spending on the elections and a $141.3 million increase in legacy subscription revenue from annual rate increases under existing and newly renegotiated retransmission agreements. This increase was partially offset by a decline in legacy AMS revenue of $166.2 million primarily driven by reduced advertising demand caused by COVID-19, partially offset by increases from Premion revenue.
2020 vs. 2018
Total revenues increased $730.5 million in 2020. Our 2019 Acquisitions contributed $480.8 million to this increase. Excluding the 2019 Acquisitions, total revenues increased $249.7 million. This increase was primarily due to a $236.6 million increase in legacy subscription revenue from annual rate increases under existing and newly renegotiated retransmission agreements and a $161.7 million increase in legacy station political advertising, reflecting increased spending on the elections. This increase was partially offset by a decline in legacy AMS revenue of $153.8 million primarily driven by reduced advertising demand caused by COVID-19, partially offset by increases from Premion revenue.
Cost of revenues
2020 vs. 2019
Cost of revenues increased $275.1 million in 2020. Our 2019 Acquisitions contributed $152.0 million to this increase. Excluding the 2019 Acquisitions from both periods, cost of revenues increased $123.1 million. This increase was primarily due to a $120.0 million increase in programming costs, due to the combination of growth in subscription revenues (certain programming costs are linked to such revenues) and annual fee escalators with other programming arrangements.
2020 vs. 2018
Cost of revenues increased $437.4 million in 2020. Our 2019 Acquisitions contributed $248.4 million to this increase. Excluding the 2019 Acquisitions, cost of revenues increased $189.0 million. This increase was primarily due to a $183.1 million increase in programming costs, due to the combination of growth in subscription revenues (certain programming costs are linked to such revenues) and annual fee escalators with other programming arrangements.
Business units - Selling, general and administrative expenses
2020 vs. 2019
Business unit selling, general, and administrative (SG&A) expenses increased $38.8 million in 2020. Our 2019 Acquisitions contributed expenses of $33.2 million to this increase. Excluding the 2019 Acquisitions from both periods, SG&A expenses increased $5.6 million primarily due to increases to bad debt expense and outside professional services costs.
2020 vs. 2018
Business unit SG&A expenses increased $50.3 million in 2020. Our 2019 Acquisitions added business unit SG&A expenses of $58.7 million. Excluding the 2019 Acquisitions, SG&A expenses decreased $8.4 million. The decrease was primarily the result of an $7.7 million reduction of professional and legal costs (due to now settled Department of Justice Antitrust Division matter). This decline was partially offset by $3.0 million primarily due to increases to bad debt expense.
Corporate - General and administrative expenses
Our corporate costs are separated from our business expenses and are recorded as general and administrative expenses in our Consolidated Statement of Income. This category primarily consists of broad corporate management functions including Legal, Human Resources, and Finance, as well as activities and costs not directly attributable to the operations of our media business.
2020 vs. 2019
Corporate general and administrative expenses decreased $6.8 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to incurring $36.8 million less of acquisition-related costs (principally advisory fees) due to the reduction of acquisition activity in 2020. This decline was partially offset by incurring $23.1 million of costs for successful activism defense and $4.6 million of M&A due diligence costs in 2020.
2020 vs. 2018
Corporate general and administrative expenses increased $20.8 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to $23.1 million of costs for successful activism defense and $4.6 million of M&A due diligence costs in 2020. Excluding these professional fees, corporate expenses were down approximately $6.9 million, primarily due to a decline in workforce restructuring charges of $5.4 million as well as the full-year impact of certain cost-saving initiatives implemented in 2018.
Depreciation expense
2020 vs. 2019
Depreciation expense increased $6.4 million in 2020. Our 2019 Acquisitions contributed $8.9 million to this increase. Excluding the impact of 2019 Acquisitions from both periods, depreciation expense decreased $2.5 million due to certain assets reaching the end of their assumed useful lives.
2020 vs. 2018
Depreciation expense increased $10.9 million in 2020. Our 2019 Acquisitions contributed $15.0 million to the increase. Excluding the impact of 2019 Acquisitions, depreciation expense decreased $4.1 million due to certain assets reaching the end of their assumed useful lives.
Amortization of intangible assets
2020 vs. 2019
Intangible asset amortization expense increased $17.6 million in 2020. Intangibles from our 2019 Acquisitions contributed $22.1 million to this increase. Excluding the impact of the 2019 Acquisitions from both periods, amortization expense decreased $4.5 million due to certain assets reaching the end of their assumed useful lives.
2020 vs. 2018
Intangible asset amortization expense increased $36.9 million in 2020. Our 2019 Acquisitions contributed $41.1 million to this increase. Excluding the impact of the 2019 Acquisitions, amortization expense decreased $4.2 million due to certain assets reaching the end of their assumed useful lives.
Spectrum repacking reimbursements and other, net
2020 vs. 2019
We had other net gains of $10.0 million in 2020 compared to net gains of $5.3 million in 2019. The 2020 net gains primarily consisted of $13.2 million of reimbursements received from the FCC for required spectrum repacking, partially offset by a $2.1 million impairment charge due to the retirement of a brand name and a $1.1 million FCC license impairment charge. The 2019 net gains consisted of gains of $17.0 million of reimbursements received from the Federal Communications Commission for required spectrum repacking and a gain of $2.9 million as a result of the sale of certain real estate. These gains were partially offset by a $5.5 million in contract termination charge and transition costs related to bringing our national sales
organization in-house and $9.1 million of non-cash charges to reduce the value of certain assets classified as held-for-sale.
2020 vs. 2018
We had other net gains of $10.0 million in 2020 compared to net gains of $11.7 million in 2018. The 2020 net gains are discussed in the prior year comparison above. The 2018 net gains primarily consisted of $7.4 million of spectrum repack reimbursements and a $6.0 million gain recognized on the sale of real estate in Houston.
Operating income
2020 vs. 2019
Our operating income increased $312.0 million in 2020. Our 2019 Acquisitions contributed $80.5 million to this increase. Excluding the impact of 2019 Acquisitions from both periods, operating income increased $231.5 million. Our operating margins were 29.6% in 2020 compared to 24.3% in 2019. The increase was driven by the changes in revenues and expenses discussed above.
2020 vs. 2018
Operating income increased $172.5 million in 2020. Our 2019 Acquisitions contributed $117.7 million in operating income. Excluding the impact of 2019 Acquisitions, operating income increased $54.8 million. The increase in operating income was driven by the changes in revenues and expenses discussed above. Our operating margins were 29.6% in 2020 compared to 31.6% in 2018. The decline in margin was primarily driven by the increases in programming costs and intangible amortization.
Programming and payroll expense trends
Programming and payroll expenses are the two largest elements of our operating expenses, and are summarized below, expressed as a percentage of total operating expenses. Programming expenses as a percentage of total operating expenses have increased due to an increase in reverse compensation payments to our network affiliation partners associated with higher subscription revenues. Payroll expenses have increased during 2020 primarily due to our 2019 Acquisitions, but as a percentage of total operating expenses have decreased in 2020 primarily due to increases in programming expenses, which make up a larger percentage of operating costs.
Non-operating income and expense
Equity income: This income statement category reflects earnings or losses from our equity method investments. Equity income increased from $10.1 million in 2019 to $10.4 million in 2020. The 2020 income was primarily due to equity income from our CareerBuilder investment (which sold several subsidiary businesses in 2020). The 2019 income was primarily due to a gain of $12.2 million recognized in connection with the sale of our investment in Captivate.
Interest expense: Interest expense increased $4.8 million in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to a higher average outstanding total debt balance (reflective of borrowings to finance the 2019 Acquisitions), partially offset by lower interest rates, driven by refinancings. The total average outstanding debt was $4.02 billion in 2020 compared to $3.37 billion in 2019. The impact of the increase in outstanding debt was partially offset by a decrease in the weighted average interest rate on total outstanding debt, which was 5.03% in 2020 compared to 5.85% in 2019.
A further discussion of our borrowing and related interest cost is presented in the “Liquidity and capital resources” section of this report beginning on page 34 and in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements.
Other non-operating items, net: Other non-operating items increased $46.0 million from a net income of $12.0 million in 2019 to a net expense of $34.0 million in 2020. This change was comprised of charges incurred in 2020 including a $17.3 million call premium related to the repayment of our 2023 and 2024 unsecured senior notes; and acceleration of $11.8 million of previously deferred financing fees associated with early repayment of unsecured senior notes in 2020. In addition, the increase was driven by the $9.2 million impairment of an equity investment in 2020 and the absence of a $7.3 million gain we recognized from the acquisition of Justice and Quest in 2019.
Provision for income taxes
We reported pre-tax income of $637.1 million for 2020. The effective tax rate on pre-tax income was 24.2%, which is comparable to the effective tax rate in 2019 of 23.8%. Further information concerning income tax matters is contained in Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements.
Income from continuing operations
Income from continuing operations and related per share amounts are presented in the table below (in thousands, except per share amounts):
Our 2020 earnings per share was higher than 2019 due to the factors discussed above including, most notably, the increase in political revenue reflecting increased spending on elections, increase in subscription revenue from annual rate increases under existing and newly renegotiated retransmission agreements, partially offset by a decline of AMS due, in part, to reduced advertising demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating results non-GAAP information
Presentation of non-GAAP information: We use non-GAAP financial performance measures to supplement the financial information presented on a GAAP basis. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, the related GAAP measures, nor should they be considered superior to the related GAAP measures, and should be read together with financial information presented on a GAAP basis. Also, our non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
Management and our Board of Directors use the non-GAAP financial measures for purposes of evaluating company performance. Furthermore, the Leadership Development and Compensation Committee of our Board of Directors uses non-GAAP measures such as Adjusted EBITDA, non-GAAP net income, non-GAAP EPS, and free cash flow to evaluate management’s performance. Therefore, we believe that each of the non-GAAP measures presented provides useful information to investors and other stakeholders by allowing them to view our business through the eyes of management and our Board of Directors, facilitating comparisons of results across historical periods and focus on the underlying ongoing operating performance of our business. We also believe these non-GAAP measures are frequently used by investors, securities analysts and other interested parties in their evaluation of our business and other companies in the broadcast industry.
We discuss in this Form 10-K non-GAAP financial performance measures that exclude from our reported GAAP results the impact of “special items” which are described in detail below in the section titled “Discussion of special charges and credits affecting reporting results”. We believe that such expenses and gains are not indicative of normal, ongoing operations. While these items may be recurring in nature and should not be disregarded in evaluation of our earnings performance, it is useful to exclude such items when analyzing current results and trends compared to other periods as these items can vary significantly from period to period depending on specific underlying transactions or events that may occur. Therefore, while we may incur or recognize these types of expenses, charges and gains in the future, we believe that removing these items for purposes of calculating the non-GAAP financial measures provides investors with a more focused presentation of our ongoing operating performance.
We discuss Adjusted EBITDA (with and without corporate expenses), a non-GAAP financial performance measure that we believe offers a useful view of the overall operation of our businesses. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income attributable to TEGNA before (1) net loss attributable to redeemable noncontrolling interest, (2) income taxes, (3) interest expense, (4) equity income in unconsolidated investments, net, (5) other non-operating items, net, (6) workforce restructuring expense, (7) M&A due diligence costs, (8) acquisition-related costs, (9) advisory fees related to activism defense, (10) spectrum repacking reimbursements and other, net, (11) depreciation and (12) amortization. We believe these adjustments facilitate company-to-company operating performance comparisons by removing potential differences caused by variations unrelated to operating performance, such as capital structures (interest expense), income taxes, and the age and book appreciation of property and equipment (and related depreciation expense). The most directly comparable GAAP financial measure to Adjusted EBITDA is Net income attributable to TEGNA. Users should consider the limitations of using Adjusted EBITDA, including the fact that this measure does not provide a complete measure of our operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to purport to be an alternate to net income as a measure of operating performance or to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of liquidity. In particular, Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to be a measure of cash flow available for management’s discretionary expenditures, as this measure does not consider certain cash requirements, such as working capital needs, capital expenditures, contractual commitments, interest payments, tax payments and other debt service requirements.
We also discuss free cash flow, a non-GAAP performance measure that the Board of Directors uses to review the performance of the business. The most directly comparable GAAP financial measure to free cash flow is Net income attributable to TEGNA. Free cash flow is calculated as non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA (as defined above), further adjusted by adding back (1) stock-based compensation, (2) non-cash 401(k) company match, (3) syndicated programming amortization, (4) pension reimbursements, (5) dividends received from equity method investments and (6) reimbursements from spectrum repacking. This is further adjusted by deducting payments made for (1) syndicated programming, (2) pension, (3) interest, (4) taxes (net of refunds) and (5) purchases of property and equipment. Like Adjusted EBITDA, free cash flow is not intended to be a measure of cash flow available for management’s discretionary use.
Discussion of special charges and credits affecting reported results: Our results during 2020 and 2019 included the following items we consider “special items” that while at times recurring, can vary significantly from period to period:
Results for the year ended December 31, 2020:
•Workforce restructuring expense which included payroll and related benefit costs at our stations (including the shutdown of our TMS Phoenix operations) and corporate headquarters;
•M&A due diligence costs we incurred to assist prospective buyers of our company with their due diligence;
•Advisory fees related to activism defense;
•Spectrum repacking reimbursements and other, net consists of gains due to reimbursements from the FCC for required spectrum repacking, partially offset by an intangible asset impairment charge due to the retirement of a brand name and an FCC license impairment charge related to a radio station;
•Gains recognized in our equity income in unconsolidated investments, primarily related to our share of CareerBuilder’s gain on the sale of certain subsidiary businesses;
•Other non-operating items primarily related to costs incurred in connection with the early extinguishment of debt, and an impairment from one of our investments; and
•Deferred tax benefits related to partial capital loss valuation allowance release.
Results for the year ended December 31, 2019:
•Workforce restructuring expense which included payroll and related benefit costs at our stations and corporate headquarters;
•Acquisition-related costs which primarily included advisory fees associated with business acquisitions;
•Advisory fees related to activism defense;
•Spectrum repacking reimbursements and other, net was comprised of gains due to reimbursements from the FCC for required spectrum repacking, non-cash charges to reduce the value of certain assets classified as held-for-sale, gains recognized on the sale of real estate, and a contract termination and incremental transition costs related to bringing our national sales organization in-house;
•Gains recognized in our equity income in unconsolidated investments as a result of the sale of two investments;
•Other non-operating items primarily related to a gain for the remeasurement of our previously held ownership in Justice Network and Quest to fair value, a charitable donation made to the TEGNA Foundation, costs incurred in connection with the early extinguishment of debt, and a gain due to an observable price increase in an equity investment; and
•Realization of discrete tax benefits related to one of the recent acquisitions and a previously-disposed business.
Below are reconciliations of certain line items impacted by special items to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP on our Consolidated Statements of Income (in thousands, except per share amounts):
Non-GAAP consolidated results
The following is a comparison of our as adjusted non-GAAP financial results between 2020 and 2019. Changes between the periods are driven by the same factors summarized above in the “Results of Operations” section within Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (in thousands, except per share amounts).
Adjusted EBITDA - Non-GAAP
Reconciliations of Adjusted EBITDA (inclusive and exclusive of Corporate expenses) to net income from continuing operations presented in accordance with GAAP on our Consolidated Statements of Income is presented below (in thousands):
*** Not meaningful
Adjusted EBITDA margin was 36% (without corporate expense) and 35% including corporate. Our total Adjusted EBITDA increased $316.8 million or 45% in 2020 compared to 2019. Our 2019 Acquisitions added $111.5 million of Adjusted EBITDA. Excluding the 2019 Acquisitions, Adjusted EBITDA increased by $205.3 million. This increase was primarily driven by the operational factors discussed above within the revenue and operating expense fluctuation explanation sections, most notably, the increase in political revenue in 2020.
Free cash flow reconciliation
Our free cash flow, a non-GAAP performance measure, was $741.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $376.2 million for the same period in 2019. Our free cash flow in 2020 was higher compared to 2019 primarily due to higher EBITDA and lower capital expenditures.
Reconciliations from “Net income attributable to TEGNA Inc.” to “Free cash flow” are presented below (in thousands):
FINANCIAL POSITION
Liquidity and capital resources
Our operations have historically generated strong positive operating cash flow which, along with availability under our existing revolving credit facility as well as cash and cash equivalents on hand, have been sufficient to fund our capital expenditures, interest expense, dividends, investments in strategic initiatives (including acquisitions) and other operating requirements.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had far-reaching material adverse impacts on many aspects of our operations, directly and indirectly, including our employees, consumer behavior, distribution of our content, our vendors, and the overall market. In light of the uncertain situation relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, we took a number of precautionary measures to mitigate the financial impact of the pandemic, and minimize the resultant risks to our company, employees, our shareholders, customers, and the communities in which we serve. Such steps included the following:
• Refinanced $538.0 million of debt with maturities in 2021 or 2024 to 2026;
• Amended our revolving credit facility on June 11, 2020 to extend the initial step-down of the maximum permitted total leverage ratio by 15 months. Under the amendment our maximum leverage ratio covenant will remain at 5.50x until the fiscal quarter ending March 31, 2022;
• Implemented temporary company-wide one-week furlough program of our workforce during the second quarter of 2020;
• Announced temporary pay reductions of 8% for certain key newsroom personnel, 20% for general managers and all corporate executive and senior vice presidents, and 25% for our CEO and Board of Directors during the second quarter of 2020, in lieu of the one week furlough;
• Reduced and/or deferred capital expenditures and non-critical operating expenses; and
• Implemented travel bans and restrictions.
During 2020 several pieces of legislation were enacted in response to COVID-19. The most impactful to TEGNA was the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the CARES Act) on March 27, 2020. The CARES Act provided numerous tax provisions and other stimulus measures. We benefited from the CARES Act as a result of lower 2020 tax payments of approximately $5 million from the provisions that allow for (1) immediate deduction of any eligible leasehold improvements placed in service during 2018 and 2019, and (2) temporary relaxation of net interest deduction limitations which will allow us to
immediately deduct 2019 interest expense that would otherwise have been disallowed and carried forward to future periods. We also elected to defer the employer portion of the social security payroll tax (6.2%) as outlined within the CARES Act. The deferral was effective from March 27, 2020 through December 31, 2020. This produced a cash flow benefit of approximately $20 million in 2020. The deferred amount will be paid in two installments and the amount will be considered timely paid if 50% of the deferred amount is paid by December 31, 2021 and the remainder by December 31, 2022.
As we summarize in the Long-term debt section below, during 2020 we completed several strategic actions which have positioned us to continue to pursue strategic acquisition opportunities that may develop in our sector, invest in new content and revenue initiatives, and grow revenue in fiscal year 2021. Over the longer term, we expect to continue to fund debt maturities, acquisitions and investments through a combination of cash flows from operations, borrowings under our revolving credit facility and funds raised in the capital markets.
Since 2017, we have been paying a regular quarterly cash dividend of $0.07 per share. We paid dividends totaling $76.5 million in 2020 and $60.6 million in 2019. We expect to continue paying comparable regular cash dividends in the future. The rate and frequency of future dividends will depend on future earnings, capital requirements and financial condition and other factors considered relevant by our Board of Directors.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants contained in our debt agreements and credit facility and our leverage ratio, calculated in accordance with our revolving credit agreement and term loan agreements, was 3.86x, well below the permitted leverage ratio of less than 5.50x. The leverage ratio is calculated using annualized adjusted EBITDA (as defined in the agreement) for the trailing eight quarters. We believe that we will remain compliant with all covenants for the foreseeable future. Our financial and operating performance, as well as our ability to generate sufficient cash flow to maintain compliance with credit facility covenants, are subject to certain risk factors; see Item 1A. “Risk Factors” for further discussion.
Contractual obligations
An important use of our liquidity pertains to purchasing programming rights. Most of our stations have network affiliations agreements with major broadcast networks (ABC, CBS, NBC, and Fox). Under these agreements the television networks produce and distribute programming to us in exchange for our stations commitments to air the programming at specified times and to pay the networks compensation at fixed or variable rates (such as a rate per number of MVPD subscribers accessing the programming). The network affiliation agreements generally have a three-year term. In addition, programming commitments include acquired syndicated programming (television series and movies that are purchased on a group basis for use by our owned stations). These contracts typically cover a period of up to five years, with payments typically made over several years. As of December 31, 2020, we had total programming commitments of $2.20 billion, of which $810.0 million will be settled within the next twelve months. See Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for further details regarding programming commitments.
We also secure our on-air talent and other key personnel at our television stations through multi-year talent and employment agreements. We expect our contracts for talent and other key personnel will be renewed or replaced with similar agreements upon their expiration. As of December 31, 2020, amounts due under these contracts were approximately $201.8 million, of which approximately $121.3 million will be paid within the next twelve months.
Other material contractual obligations include our operating leases (see Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for further details) as well as our long-term debt and interest payments (see ‘Long-term debt’ section below, as well as Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for further details).
The following table provides a summary of our cash flow information for the three years ended December 31, 2020 followed by a discussion of the key elements of our cash flows (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash flow from operating activities was $805.1 million in 2020, compared to $297.5 million in 2019. This $507.6 million increase was primarily driven by the $407.1 million increase in political revenue in 2020. As political advertisements are typically paid upfront, they provide an immediate benefit to operating cash flow as compared to non-political advertising which is billed and collected in arrears after the advertisement has been delivered. Also contributing to the increase was a favorable change in accounts receivable of $113.7 million due to increases in cash collection on AMS. These increases were partially offset by an increase in interest payments of $14.7 million.
Investing Activities
Cash flow used for investing activities was $59.5 million in 2020, compared to $1.56 billion in 2019. The decrease of $1.50 billion was primary due to $34.8 million being spent on acquisitions in 2020 as compared to cash used in 2019 of $1.51 billion for the acquisitions of the Gray Stations, Justice and Quest multicast networks, Dispatch stations, and Nexstar stations.
Financing Activities
Cash flow used for financing activities was $734.1 million in 2020, compared to cash provided by financing of $1.16 billion in 2019. The change was primarily due to debt activity. Specifically, in January 2020 we issued $1.0 billion of senior unsecured notes, the proceeds of which were used to early redeem $650.0 million of senior unsecured notes due in October 2023 and $310.0 million due in July 2020. Additionally, in September 2020 we issued $550 million of senior unsecured notes. In October 2020 we repaid the entire $350 million aggregate principal amount of our 4.875% senior unsecured notes due in 2021 and $188 million aggregate principal amount of our 5.500% senior unsecured notes due in 2024.
In 2019, we issued $1.1 billion of senior unsecured notes, the proceeds of which were used to finance a portion of the acquisition of the Nexstar Stations, and along with borrowing under the revolving credit facility, to repay the remaining $320 million of notes due in October 2019 and early repay $290 million of our $600 million senior unsecured notes due in July 2020. We also paid down $548.0 million on our revolving credit facility in 2020 as compared to borrowing $853.0 million in 2019.
For a comparative discussion of changes in our cash flow comparing the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, see “Part II, Item 7. Financial Position” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 2, 2020.
Long-term debt
As of December 31, 2020, our total principal debt outstanding was $3.58 billion, cash and cash equivalents totaled $41.0 million, and we had unused borrowing capacity of $1.13 billion under our revolving credit facility, which is our primary source for funding short-term cash requirements. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $3.23 billion, or 90%, of our debt had a fixed interest rate. See “Note 6 Long-term debt” to our consolidated financial statements for a table summarizing the components of our long-term debt.
On January 9, 2020 we issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of senior unsecured notes bearing an interest rate of 4.625% which are due in March 2028. These senior notes, as well as those issued in September 2019, include customary market covenants and call provisions consistent with our past issuances. On February 11, 2020 we used the net proceeds to repay the remaining $310 million principal amount of our 5.125% Senior Notes due 2020, the $650 million principal amount of our 6.375% Senior Notes due 2023, a $13.8 million call premium on our 6.375% Senior Notes due 2023 and borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
On September 10, 2020, we issued $550 million aggregate principal amount of senior unsecured notes bearing an interest rate of 4.750% which are due in March 2026. The proceeds were used to reduce borrowings from our revolving credit facility.
On October 13, 2020 we utilized our revolving credit facility to repay the entire $350 million aggregate principal amount of our 4.875% Senior Notes due in 2021 and $188 million aggregate principal amount of our 5.500% Senior Notes due in 2024 and a $3.4 million redemption premium on our Senior Notes due in 2024.
We expect our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash flow from our operations and borrowing capacity under the revolving credit facility will be sufficient to satisfy our debt service obligations, capital expenditure requirements, and working capital needs for the next twelve months. Our interest payments and debt maturities may be repaid with cash flow from operating activities, accessing capital markets or a combination of both. Interest payments on the senior notes are based on the stated cash coupon rate. As of December 31, 2020, we had future interest payments on our senior notes of $1.19 billion, of which $167.8 million will be paid within the next twelve months. We also had $355.0 million of outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit facility as of December 31, 2020. Future interest payments on the revolving credit facility are not known with certainty as payments into and out of the credit facility can change daily and interest payments are based variable interest rates. For illustrative purposes, assuming the December 31, 2020 revolving credit facility balance does not change during 2021 and rates remain at the same level as those existing as of December 31, 2020, we estimate interest payments in 2021 will be approximately $9.6 million.
The following schedule discloses future annual maturities of the principal amount of total debt due (in thousands):
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission include the following four categories: obligations under certain guarantee contracts; retained or contingent interests in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity or similar arrangements that serve as credit, liquidity or market risk support; obligations under certain derivative arrangements classified as equity; and obligations under material variable interests. As of December 31, 2020, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our consolidated financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Capital stock
In December 2020, our Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program for up to $300.0 million of our common stock over the next three years. The shares may be repurchased at management’s discretion, either in the open market or in privately negotiated block transactions. Management’s decision to repurchase shares will depend on price and other corporate developments. Purchases may occur from time to time and no maximum purchase price has been set. The program was previously suspended on March 20, 2019 simultaneously with the announcement of our acquisition of the Nexstar-Tribune divestiture stations to prioritize use of cash for debt repayment associated with those acquisitions. In 2018, approximately 545,000 shares were purchased for $5.8 million. Certain of the shares we previously acquired have been reissued in settlement of employee stock awards.
The renewal of the share repurchase program demonstrates the Board’s and management’s confidence in the business and continued focus on making prudent, disciplined decisions intended to drive near and long-term shareholder value. Our capital allocation decisions focus on optimizing investments in organic and inorganic growth opportunities, paying down debt, issuing dividends, and repurchasing shares.
Our common stock outstanding as of December 31, 2020, totaled 219,500,272 shares, compared with 217,463,550 shares as of December 31, 2019.
Critical accounting policies and the use of estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates. We believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are material to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s most subjective and complex judgments. This commentary should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the remainder of this Form 10-K.
Goodwill: As of December 31, 2020, our goodwill balance was $3.0 billion and represented approximately 43% of our total assets. Goodwill represents the excess of acquisition cost over the fair value of assets acquired, including identifiable intangible assets, net of liabilities assumed.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at a level referred to as the reporting unit. A reporting unit is a business for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews the operating results. The level at which we test goodwill for impairment requires us to determine whether the operations below the operating segment level constitute a reporting unit. We have determined that our one segment, Media, consists of a single reporting unit.
Goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis (first day of our fourth quarter) or between annual tests if events or changes in circumstances occurred that indicate the fair value of a reporting unit may be below its carrying amount.
Before performing the annual goodwill impairment test quantitatively, we first have the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine if the quantitative test must be completed. The qualitative assessment considers events and circumstances such as macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors and overall financial performance, as well as company and specific reporting unit specifications. If after performing this assessment, we conclude it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then we are required to perform the quantitative test. Otherwise, the quantitative test is not required. In 2020, we elected not to perform the optional qualitative assessment of goodwill and instead performed the quantitative impairment test.
When performing the quantitative test, we determine the fair value of the reporting unit and compare it to the carrying amount, including goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, the reporting unit’s goodwill is impaired and we recognize an impairment loss equal to the difference between the reporting unit’s carrying amount and fair value.
We estimate the fair value of our one reporting unit based on a market-based valuation methodology, which is primarily based on our consolidated market capitalization plus a control premium. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we completed our annual goodwill impairment test for our reporting unit. The results of the test indicated that the estimated fair value of our reporting unit significantly exceeded the carrying value. We do not believe that the reporting unit is currently at risk of incurring a goodwill impairment in the foreseeable future.
Impairment assessment inherently involves management judgments regarding the assumptions described above. Fair value of the reporting unit also depends on the future strength of the economy in our principal media markets. New and developing competition as well as technological change could also adversely affect our stock price and future fair value estimates.
Indefinite Lived Intangibles: Consist entirely of FCC broadcast licenses related to our acquisitions of television stations. As of December 31, 2020, indefinite lived intangible assets were $2.1 billion and represented approximately 31% of our total assets.
The FCC broadcast licenses are recorded at their estimated fair value as of the date of the business acquisition. We determine the fair value of each FCC broadcast license using an income approach referred to as the Greenfield method. The Greenfield method utilizes a discounted cash flow model that incorporates several key assumptions, including market revenues, long-term growth projections, estimated market share for a typical market participant, estimated profit margins based on market size and station type, and a discount rate (determined using a weighted average cost of capital). Since these licenses are considered indefinite lived intangible assets we do not amortize them, rather they are tested for impairment annually (on the first day of our fourth quarter), or more often if circumstances dictate, for impairment and written down to fair value as required.
We have the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of the indefinite lived asset is more than its carrying amount. If that is the case, then we do not need to perform the quantitative analysis. The qualitative assessment considers trends in macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors and overall financial performance of the indefinite lived asset. In 2020, we elected to perform the quantitative assessment for FCC licenses acquired in the 2018 KFMB acquisition as well as those acquired in our 2019 acquisitions, which represented an aggregate carrying value of $897.7 million. These licenses have more limited headroom due to the fact that we recently recorded them at fair value upon their respective acquisition. To estimate the fair values for this subset of our FCC broadcast licenses, we applied an income approach, using the Greenfield method. The results of our 2020 annual impairment test of FCC broadcast licenses indicated the fair value of a radio license was less than its carrying amount; and therefore, a $1.1 million impairment charge was recorded. No other impairments occurred in 2020.
We performed the optional qualitative assessment for all of our other FCC licenses, which represented an aggregate carrying value of $1.23 billion. In performing the qualitative impairment analysis, we analyzed trends in the significant inputs used in the fair value determination of the FCC license assets. This included reviewing trends in market revenues, market share, profit margins, long-term expected growth rates, and changes in the discount rate. The results of our qualitative procedures showed no material adverse change in inputs that would indicate an impairment exists since the last quantitative test of these assets. As such, we concluded it was more likely than not that the fair value of these indefinite lived FCC broadcast licenses was more than their carrying amounts. Therefore, we did not perform a quantitative test on these FCC licenses in 2020.
The quantitative and qualitative analysis performed included projected estimated economic impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic. A sustained economic decline resulting from COVID-19 larger than what was projected in our analysis could result in future non-cash impairment charges of our recently acquired FCC licenses, and any related impairment could have a material adverse impact on our results of operations. In particular, one recently acquired TV station and one radio station have FCC licenses, that have a combined carrying value of $67.2 million and have individual headroom of less than 5%, and therefore, are at a heightened risk of future impairment. Changes in key fair value assumptions that could result in a future impairment charge include increases in discount rates and declines in market revenues. A 100 basis point increase in our discount rate or a 10% decline in market revenues (holding all other assumptions in the fair value model constant) would result in an aggregate impairment charge of these FCC licenses of less than approximately $8.0 million.
Pension Liabilities: Certain employees participate in qualified and non-qualified defined benefit pension plans (see Note 7 to consolidated financial statements). Our principal defined benefit pension plan is the TEGNA Retirement Plan (TRP). We also sponsor the TEGNA Supplemental Retirement Plan (SERP) for certain employees. Substantially all participants in the TRP and SERP had their benefits frozen before 2009, and in December 2017, we froze all remaining accruing benefits for certain grandfathered SERP participants.
We recognize the net funded status of these postretirement benefit plans as a liability on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. There is a corresponding non-cash adjustment to accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of tax benefits recorded as deferred tax assets, in stockholders’ equity. The funded status represents the difference between the fair value of each plan’s assets and the benefit obligation of the plan. The benefit obligation represents the present value of the estimated future benefits we currently expect to pay to plan participants based on past service.
The plan assets and benefit obligations are measured as of December 31 of each year, or more frequently, upon the occurrence of certain events such as a plan amendment, settlement, or curtailment. The amounts we record are measured using actuarial valuations, which are dependent upon key assumptions such as discount rates, participant mortality rates and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. The assumptions we make affect both the calculation of the benefit obligations as of the measurement date and the calculation of net periodic pension expense in subsequent periods. When reassessing these assumptions we consider past and current market conditions and make judgments about future market trends. We also consider factors such as the timing and amounts of expected contributions to the plans and benefit payments to plan participants.
The most important assumptions include the discount rate applied to pension plan obligations and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets related for the TRP (the SERP is an unfunded plan). The discount rate assumption is based on
investment yields available at year-end on corporate bonds rated AA and above with a maturity to match the expected benefit payment stream. A decrease in discount rates would increase pension obligations.
We establish the expected long-term rate of return by developing a forward-looking, long-term return assumption for each pension fund asset class, taking into account factors such as the expected real return for the specific asset class and inflation. A single, long-term rate of return is then calculated as the weighted average of the target asset allocation percentages and the long-term return assumption for each asset class. We apply the expected long-term rate of return to the fair value of its pension assets in determining the dollar amount of its expected return. Changes in the expected long-term return on plan assets would increase or decrease pension plan expense. For 2020, we assumed a rate of 6.75% for our long-term expected return on pension assets used for our TRP plan. As an indication of the sensitivity of pension expense to the long-term rate of return assumption, a plus or minus 50 basis points change in the expected rate of return on pension assets (with all other assumptions held constant) would have decreased or increased estimated pension plan expense for 2020 by approximately $2.3 million. The effects of actual results differing from these assumptions are accumulated as unamortized gains and losses.
For the December 31, 2020 measurement, the assumption used for the discount rate was 2.55% for our principal retirement plan. As an indication of the sensitivity of pension liabilities to the discount rate assumption, a plus or minus 50 basis points change in the discount rate as of the end of 2020 (with all other assumptions held constant) would have decreased or increased plan obligations by approximately $31.2 million. For 2020, the discount rate used to determine the pension expense was 3.30%. A 50 basis points increase or decrease in this discount rate would have decreased or increased total pension plan expense for 2020 by approximately $0.6 million.
Income Taxes: Our annual tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates, and tax planning opportunities available in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Significant judgment is required in determining our annual tax expense and in evaluating our tax positions.
Tax law requires certain items to be included in our tax returns at different times than when the items are reflected in the financial statements. The annual tax expense reflected in the Consolidated Statements of Income is different than that reported in our tax returns. Some of these differences are permanent (for example, expenses recorded for accounting purposes that are not deductible in the returns such as certain entertainment expenses) and some differences are temporary and reverse over time, such as depreciation expense. Temporary differences create deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax liabilities generally represent tax expense recognized in the financial statements for which payment has been deferred, or expense for which a deduction has been taken already in the tax return but the expense has not yet been recognized in the financial statements. Deferred tax assets generally represent items that can be used as a tax deduction or credit in tax returns in future years for which a benefit has already been recorded in the financial statements, as well as tax losses that can be carried over and used in future years. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred income tax assets to the amounts we believe are more likely than not to be recovered. In evaluating the amount of any such valuation allowance, we consider the existence of cumulative income or losses in recent years, the reversal of existing temporary differences, the existence of taxable income in prior carry back years, available tax planning strategies and estimates of future taxable income for each of our taxable jurisdictions. The latter two factors involve the exercise of significant judgment. As of December 31, 2020, deferred tax asset valuation allowances totaled $43.5 million, primarily related to federal and state capital losses, minority investments, state interest disallowance carryovers, and state net operating losses available for carry forward to future years. Although realization is not assured, we believe it is more likely than not that all other deferred tax assets for which no valuation allowances have been established will be realized. This conclusion is based on our history of cumulative income in recent years and review of historical and projected future taxable income.
We determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination by the appropriate taxing authorities before any part of the benefit is recorded in our financial statements. A tax position is measured as the portion of the tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely to be realized upon settlement with a taxing authority (that has full knowledge of all relevant information). We may be required to change our provision for income taxes when the ultimate treatment of certain items is challenged or agreed to by taxing authorities, when estimates used in determining valuation allowances on deferred tax assets significantly change, or when receipt of new information indicates the need for adjustment in valuation allowances. Future events, such as changes in tax laws, tax regulations, or interpretations of such laws or regulations, could have an impact on the provision for income tax and the effective tax rate. Any such changes could significantly affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements in the year these changes occur.