ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Special Note Regarding COVID-19
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus known as COVID-19 was reported to have surfaced in China, and by March 2020 the spread of the virus had resulted in a world-wide pandemic. The U.S. economy was largely shut down by mass quarantines and government mandated stay-at-home orders (the “Orders”) to halt the spread of the virus. These Orders have required some of our employees to work from home when possible, and other employees have been entirely prevented from performing their job duties until the Orders are relaxed or lifted. The COVID-19 pandemic has required alternative selling approaches such as through social media. We may be unable to avoid future reductions in net revenue using these alternative selling approaches that avoid direct contact with our customers. The world-wide response to the pandemic has resulted in a significant downturn in economic activity and there is no assurance that government stimulus programs will successfully restore the economy to the levels that existed before the pandemic. If an economic recession or depression is sustained, it could have a material adverse effect on our business as demand for our technology could decrease.
While some of these Orders were relaxed or lifted in different jurisdictions at various times during the year ended September 30, 2020, the overall impact of COVID-19 continues to have an adverse impact on business activities around the world. There is no assurance that Orders that were previously relaxed or lifted will not be reinstated as the spread of COVID-19 continues. For example, many jurisdictions have recently reinstated masking orders after test results have showed a resurgence of the pandemic. Resurgence of the pandemic in some markets has slowed the reopening process of businesses in those areas, including Europe where additional lockdowns have been recently reinstated. If COVID-19 infection trends continue to reverse and the pandemic intensifies and expands geographically, its negative impacts on our sales could be more prolonged and may become more severe. The long-term financial impact on our business cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Overview
Theralink is a commercial-stage precision medicine and molecular data-generating company that focuses on the development and commercialization of a series of patented, proprietary data-generating assays that may provide important actionable information for physicians and patients, as well as biopharmaceutical companies, in the areas of oncology. Our near-term goal is to continue to commercialize the technology originally developed by Theranostics, a company whose assets we acquired in May 2016. The Company differentiates itself by:
● An exclusive license agreement with George Mason University (“GMU”), that has well-published scientists in our area of expertise.
● Having access to the Ph.D.’s at GMU who have completed pioneering work in phosphoproteomic-based biomarkers diagnostics.
● Domain expertise in cancer biomarker and data-generating laboratory testing data.
● Development of proprietary, cutting edge assays focused on precision oncology care.
● Building revenue streams based on our proprietary technology Theralink.
● Having a patent portfolio licensed from GMU and the NIH.
Theralink is advancing its patented, proprietary technology in the field of phosphoproteomic research, a sector which has emerged as one of the most exciting new components in the high-growth field of precision molecular diagnostics. The Theralink platform makes it possible to generate an accurate and comprehensive portrait of protein pathway activation in diseased cells from each patient, and thereby determining which individuals may be better responders to certain targeted molecular therapies. The platform enables the quantitative measurement of the level of activation. Moreover, the sensitivity is many times greater than conventional mass spectrometry and other protein immunoassays. Initially spun-out of GMU in 2006, and subsequently brought to the federal government’s Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services’ (“CMS”) Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (“CLIA”) standards, the diagnostics suite may be highly relevant for oncology patient management today that may improve (i) chemotherapy drug selection; (ii) immunotherapy drug selection; and (iii) optimization of combination therapy selection.
The biomarker and data-generating tests may provide biopharmaceutical companies, clinical scientists and physicians with molecular-based guidance as to which patients may benefit from the new, molecular targeted therapeutics being developed and used to treat various life-threatening oncology diseases, as well as existing treatment standards that are recognized as the standard of care in the oncology treatment community. This addresses the core aspect of precision treatment today - identifying which individuals are more likely to respond to specific targeted molecular therapies, thus forming the basis for personalized medicine.
The technology is based upon the pioneering work of three noted scientists, Drs. Lance Liotta, Emanuel Petricoin and Virginia Espina in proteomic-based diagnostics. We benefits from a portfolio of intellectual property derived from licensing agreements with:
● The US Public Health Service (“PHS”), the federal agency that supervises the National Institutes of Health (“NIH”), which provides us with broad protection around its technology platform; and
● GMU which provides access to additional intellectual property around improvements to the technology platform and biomarker signatures that form the basis for future diagnostic products.
Theralink is committed to advancing the technologies from GMU and the NIH as a platform for the development of new clinical biomarkers and diagnostics. These diagnostic and monitoring products have the potential to provide biopharmaceutical companies and doctors with critical molecular-based knowledge to make the best therapeutic decisions based on a patient’s unique, individual medical needs.
Our plan of operation over the next 12 months is to:
● Choose members to sit on our Medical and Scientific Advisory Boards;
● Continue to validate the Theralink cancer biomarker technology for additional solid tumors under CAP/CLIA standards to provide personalized medicine regarding treatment options for biopharmaceutical companies, clinical oncologists and their cancer patients;
● Grow revenue generated from pharmaceutical companies.
● Complete partnerships with pharmaceutical companies to perform oncology-related data-generating testing services to create revenue; and
● Continue to seek financing to grow the Company.
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the following plans have been completed:
● The leasehold improvements in the lab have been completed.
● The lab has received CLIA certification for most states, including California CLIA certification.
● A full-time Lab Director, a Medical Director, two additional business development professionals, two techs and two histotechs have been hired.
● The lab is GLP compliant.
● Our CLIA lab, with GMU scientists as consultants, is now accessioning tumor and biopharmaceutical samples that provide the basis to drive revenue channels.
Results of Operations
Comparison for the Years Ended September 30, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
● During the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, we generated revenues of $181,229 and $0, respectively, an increase of $181,229 or 100%. The increase was primarily attributable to services performed under research and development contracts for pharmaceutical companies in 2020.
Costs of Revenues
● During the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, we incurred cost of revenue of $52,587 and $0, respectively, an increase of $52,587 or 100%. The increase was primarily attributable to the increase in revenue discussed above.
Gross Margin
● For the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, gross margin was $128,642 and $0, respectively, an increase of $128,642 or 100%. The increase was primarily attributable to the increase in revenue and cost of revenue discussed above.
Operating Expenses
For the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, operating expenses consisted of the following:
Professional fees:
● For the year ended September 30, 2020, professional fees increased by $469,733 or 103%, as compared to the year ended September 30, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in accounting and audit fees of $20,713, an increase in consulting fees of $275,315, an increase in IT services of $36,829, an increase in legal fees of $35,722 and an increase in talent search fees of $96,750.
Consulting fee - related party:
● For the year ended September 30, 2020, consulting fee - related party decreased by $165,267 or 70%, as compared to the year ended September 30, 2019. The decrease was the result of the Company terminating the consulting agreements with AVDX Investors Group, whose partner is on our Board, in May 2019 and International Infusion whose principal owner served as an officer of the Company in December 2019.
Compensation expense:
● For the year ended September 30, 2020, compensation expense increased by $910,146 or 242%, as compared to the year ended September 30, 2019. The increase was attributable to an increase in administrative compensation and related expenses of $880,116 and an increase in employee benefits of $30,030 resulting from hiring a research specialist, assistant laboratory director and other laboratory employees in fiscal year 2020.
Licensing fees:
● For the year ended September 30, 2020, licensing fees increased by $124 or 0.2%, as compared to the year ended September 30, 2019.
General and administrative expenses:
● For the year ended September 30, 2020, general and administrative expenses increased by $785,561 or 214%, as compared to the year ended September 30, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in director’s fees of $30,000, an increase in biological expense of $364,282, an increase in repairs and maintenance of $67,008, an increase in sample analysis expense of $25,000, an increase on royalty fee of $20,663, an increase in general computer and communication expenses of $76,483, an increase in insurance expense of $24,855, an increase in depreciation expense of $50,220, an increase in building expenses of $51,117, an increase in travel expense of $28,126, and an increase in office expense of approximately $34,914. These increases were a result of the growth of revenue producing activities in fiscal year 2020.
Loss from Operations
For the year ended September 30, 2020, operating expenses from operations amounted to $3,485,432 as compared to $1,485,135 for the year ended September 30, 2019, an increase of $2,000,297, or 135%. The increase was primarily a result of the increase in operating expenses discussed above.
Other Income (Expenses), net
For the year ended September 30, 2020, we had total other income of $186,523 and total other (expense) of $(112,699) for the year ended September 30, 2019, a change of $299,222 or 266%. This change was primarily due to the increase in gain on debt extinguishment of $165,439, an increase on unrealized gain on exchange rate, net of $49,202 which was related to the write-off of liabilities from discontinued operation, an increase in other income of $10,000 from the Economic Injury Disaster Laon (“EIDL”) stimulus check, a decrease in loss on legal judgement of $30,100, a decrease in interest expense of $35,581 and a decrease in unrealized loss on marketable securities of $8,900.
Net Loss
For the year ended September 30, 2020, net loss attributed to common stockholders amounted to $3,170,267, or $(0.06) per share (basic and diluted) compared to net loss attributed to common stockholders of $1,597,834, or $(0.00) per share (basic and diluted), for the year ended September 30, 2019, an increase of $1,572,433, or 98%. The change was a result of the changes in operating expenses and other expenses, net as discussed above.
Preferred Stock Dividend and Deemed Dividend
For the year ended September 30, 2020, the Company recorded a beneficial conversion feature related to the Series E Preferred stock of $2,000,000 accounted for as deemed dividend and Series E Preferred stock dividends of $6,120.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability of an enterprise to generate adequate amounts of cash to meet its needs for cash requirements. We had working capital of $877,234 and $1,779,283 of cash as of September 30, 2020 and a working capital (deficit) of $(964,769) and $560,407 of cash as of September 30, 2019.
The increase in working capital was primarily attributable to the increase in current assets of $1,476,510 and decrease in current liabilities of $365,493.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of changes in cash flows for the years ended September 30 2020 and 2019:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities:
Net cash used in operating activities was $3,470,755 for the year ended September 30, 2020 as compared to $1,119,881 for the year ended September 30, 2019, an increase of $2,350,874 or 210%.
● Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended September 30, 2020 primarily reflected our net loss of $3,170,267 adjusted for the add-back on non-cash items such as depreciation expense of $97,761, lease cost of $6,633, gain on debt extinguishment of $165,439, unrealized gain on exchange rate of $49,202, unrealized loss on marketable securities of $6,900 and changes in operating asset and liabilities consisting primarily of an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $194,994, an increase in accounts payable of $46,341, offset by a decrease in accrued liabilities and other liabilities of $48,488.
● Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended September 30, 2019 primarily reflected our net loss of $1,597,834 adjusted for the add-back on non-cash items such as depreciation expense of $47,450, stock-based compensation expense of $100, amortization of debt discount of $25,000, unrealized loss on marketable securities of $15,800 and changes in operating asset and liabilities consisting primarily of an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $16,512, an increase in accounts payable of $177,449, an increase in accrued liabilities and other liabilities of $126,657 and an increase due to related parties of $101,919.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $144,390 for the year ended September 30, 2020 as compared to net cash (used in) investing activities $(38,232) for the year ended September 30, 2019, a change of $182,622, or 478%.
● Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended September 30, 2020, resulted from the cash acquired from the Asset Sale Transaction of $675,928 offset by the purchase of property and equipment of $531,538.
● Net cash used by investing activities for the year ended September 30, 2019, resulted from the purchase of property and equipment of $38,232.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities:
Net cash provided by financing activities was $4,545,241 for the year ended September 30, 2020 as compared to $1,697,624 for the year ended September 30, 2019, an increase of $2,847,617 or 168%.
● Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended September 30, 2020, consisted of $4,590,000 of net proceeds from the sale of preferred stock offset by the repayment of a related party advance of $20,000 and repayment of convertible debt of $24,759.
● Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended September 30, 2019, consisted of proceeds from the sale of preferred stock of $1,599,469, the proceeds of $100,000 from convertible debt, net of debt discount, the proceeds from related party advances of $115,050, offset by the repayment of convertible debt of $31,500, repayment of related party advances of $67,000 and repayment of financing right of use liabilities of $18,395.
Cash Requirements
Our management does not believe that our current capital resources will be adequate to continue operating our Company and maintaining our business strategy for more than 12 months from the date of this report. Accordingly, we will have to raise additional capital in the near future to meet our working capital requirements. There can be no assurance that additional financing will be available to us when needed or, if available, that it can be obtained on commercially reasonable terms. If we are not able to obtain the additional financing on a timely basis, if and when it is needed, we will be forced to scale down or perhaps even cease the operation of our business.
Going Concern
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company had net loss and net cash used in operations of $3,170,267 and $3,470,755, respectively, for the year ended September 30, 2020. Additionally, the Company had an accumulated deficit, stockholders’ equity and working capital of $43,187,588, $307,595 and $877,234 at September 30, 2020. Management believes that these matters raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for twelve months from the issuance date of this report.
The Company cannot provide assurance that it will ultimately achieve profitable operations or become cash flow positive or raise additional debt or equity capital. Additionally, the current capital resources are not adequate to continue operating and maintaining the business strategy for a period of twelve months from the issuance date of this report. The Company will seek to raise capital through additional debt and equity financings to fund its operations in the future.
Although the Company has historically raised capital from sales of equity and from the issuance of promissory notes, there is no assurance that it will be able to continue to do so. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital or secure additional lending in the near future, management expects that the Company will need to curtail or cease operations. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
The global pandemic COVID-19, otherwise referred to as the Coronavirus, could impair our ability to raise additional funding or make such funding more costly. The ongoing global pandemic has caused cessation of normal business operations and caused capital markets to decline sharply. This could make it more difficult for the Company to access capital. It is currently difficult to estimate with any certainty how long the pandemic and resulting curtailment of business will continue, and its effect on capital markets and the Company’s ability to raise funds is, accordingly, difficult to quantify. In addition, to the extent that any of the Company’s personnel or consultants are affected by the virus, this could cause delays or disruption in our planned research and development activities.
Current and Future Financings
Sales of Series E Preferred Stock and Warrants Pursuant to Subscription Agreement
On September 16, 2020, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “SPA”) with an investor to purchase an aggregate amount of 1,000 shares of the newly created Series E Convertible Preferred Stock of the Company (the “Series E Preferred”) for an aggregate investment amount of $2,000,000. The Company’s Series E Preferred Stock has a stated value of $2,000 per share and shall accrue, on a quarterly basis in arrears, dividends at the rate of 8% per annum on the stated value. The dividends shall be paid quarterly at the option of the holder of the Series E Preferred in either cash or shares of common stock of the Company. The number of shares of common stock issuable on the conversion of the Series E Preferred is determined by dividing the stated value of the number of shares being converted, plus any accrued and unpaid dividends, by the lesser of: (i) $0.00375 and (ii) 75% of the average closing price of the Company’s common stock during the prior five trading days including a price protection provision for offerings below the conversion price. However, the conversion price shall never be less than $0.0021. For eighteen months from the anniversary of the closing, the Company needs to obtain consent from a group of investors prior to engaging in any future capital raises.
Pursuant to the Series E Certificate of Designation, Series E Preferred Stock is redeemable at the option of the holder in the event that the Company is prohibited from issuing shares of common stock to a holder upon any conversion due to insufficient shares of common stock available (“Authorized Failure Shares”) and therefore meets the criteria of a contingently redeemable instrument in accordance with ASC 480-10-25-7 - Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity. The Series E Preferred Stock is contingently redeemable upon the occurrence of an event that is outside of the issuer’s control. Thus, it should be classified as temporary equity pursuant to ASC 480-10-S99.
Future Financings
We will require additional financing to fund our planned operations. We currently do not have committed sources of additional financing and may not be able to obtain additional financing particularly, if the volatile conditions of the stock and financial markets, and more particularly the market for early development stage company stocks persist.
There can be no assurance that additional financing will be available to us when needed or, if available, that it can be obtained on commercially reasonable terms. If we are not able to obtain the additional financing on a timely basis, if and when it is needed, we will be forced to further delay or further scale down some or all of our activities or perhaps even cease the operations of the business.
Since inception we have funded our operations primarily through equity and debt financings and we expect that we will continue to fund our operations through equity and debt financing, either alone or through strategic alliances. If we are able to raise additional financing by issuing equity securities, our existing stockholders’ ownership will be diluted. Obtaining commercial or other loans, assuming those loans would be available, will increase our liabilities and future cash commitments.
Critical Accounting Policies
We have identified the following policies as critical to our business and results of operations. Our reported results are impacted by the application of the following accounting policies, certain of which require management to make subjective or complex judgments. These judgments involve making estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may significantly impact quarterly or annual results of operations. For all of these policies, management cautions that future events rarely develop exactly as expected, and the best estimates routinely require adjustment. Specific risks associated with these critical accounting policies are described in the following paragraphs.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from these estimates. Management bases its estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience, and various other factors that it believes are reasonable under the circumstances, to determine the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Significant estimates during the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019 include, but are not necessarily limited to, the valuation of assets and liabilities of discontinued operations, estimates of contingent liabilities, valuation of marketable securities, useful life of property and equipment, valuation of right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities, assumptions used in assessing impairment of long-lived assets, allowances for sales returns, estimates of current and deferred income taxes and deferred tax valuation allowances and the fair value of non-cash equity transactions.
Additionally, the full impact of COVID-19 is unknown and cannot be reasonably estimated. However, the Company has made appropriate accounting estimates based on the facts and circumstances available as of the reporting date. To the extent there are material differences between the Company’s estimates and the actual results, the Company’s future consolidated results of operation will be affected.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements
FASB ASC 820 - Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. FASB ASC 820 requires disclosures about the fair value of all financial instruments, whether or not recognized, for financial statement purposes. Disclosures about the fair value of financial instruments are based on pertinent information available to the Company on September 30, 2020. Accordingly, the estimates presented in these financial statements are not necessarily indicative of the amounts that could be realized on disposition of the financial instruments. FASB ASC 820 specifies a hierarchy of valuation techniques based on whether the inputs to those valuation techniques are observable or unobservable. Observable inputs reflect market data obtained from independent sources, while unobservable inputs reflect market assumptions. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurement) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurement). The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as follows:
Level 1-Inputs are unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities available at the measurement date.
Level 2-Inputs are unadjusted quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar assets and liabilities in markets that are not active, inputs other than quoted prices that are observable, and inputs derived from or corroborated by observable market data.
Level 3-Inputs are unobservable inputs which reflect the reporting entity’s own assumptions on what assumptions the market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability based on the best available information.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13-Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement, to modify the disclosure requirements on fair value measurements in Topic 820, Fair Value Measurement, based on the concepts in the Concepts Statement, including the consideration of costs and benefits. The amendments in this update are effective for all entities for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019. The Company adopted ASU 2018-13 during the quarter ended March 31, 2020 and its adoption did not have any material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation is accounted for based on the requirements of the Share-Based Payment Topic of ASC 718 which requires recognition in the financial statements of the cost of employee and director services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments over the period the employee or director is required to perform the services in exchange for the award (presumptively, the vesting period). The ASC also requires measurement of the cost of employee and director services received in exchange for an award based on the grant-date fair value of the award.
Pursuant to ASC 505-50 - Equity-Based Payments to Non-Employees, all share-based payments to non-employees, including grants of stock options, are recognized in the consolidated financial statements as compensation expense over the service period of the consulting arrangement or until performance conditions are expected to be met. Using a Black Scholes valuation model, the Company periodically reassessed the fair value of non-employee options until service conditions are met, which generally aligns with the vesting period of the options, and the Company adjusts the expense recognized in the consolidated financial statements accordingly. In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-07, Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting, which simplifies several aspects of the accounting for nonemployee share-based payment transactions by expanding the scope of the stock-based compensation guidance in ASC 718 to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from non-employees. ASU No. 2018-07 is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within those annual periods. Early adoption is permitted, but entities may not adopt prior to adopting the new revenue recognition guidance in ASC 606. The Company early adopted ASU No. 2018-07 during the period September 30, 2018, and the adoption did not have any impact on its consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014, FASB issued an Accounting Standards Update, ASU 2014-09, establishing ASC 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers. ASU 2014-09, as amended by subsequent ASUs on the topic, establishes a single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers and supersedes most of the existing revenue recognition guidance. This standard, which is effective for interim and annual reporting periods in fiscal years that begin after December 15, 2017, requires an entity to recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services and also requires certain additional disclosures. The Company adopted this standard during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2018 using the modified retrospective approach, which requires applying the new standard to all existing contracts not yet completed as of the effective date and recording a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the fiscal year of adoption. Based on an evaluation of the impact ASU 2014-09 will have on the Company’s sources of revenue, the Company has concluded that ASU 2014-09 did not have any impact on the process for, timing of, and presentation and disclosure of revenue recognition from customers and there was no cumulative effect adjustment.
The Company provides research and development support to biopharmaceutical companies to assist their drug development programs. The services provided by the Company are performance obligations under services contracts. These contracts are completed over time and may lead to deferred revenue for services not completed at the end of a period. Management reviews the completion status of all jobs monthly to determine the appropriate amount of revenue to recognize.
Leases
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). The updated guidance requires lessees to recognize lease assets and lease liabilities for most operating leases. In addition, the updated guidance requires that lessors separate lease and non-lease components in a contract in accordance with the new revenue guidance in ASC 606. The updated guidance is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2018.
On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted ASU No. 2016-02, applying the package of practical expedients to leases that commenced before the effective date whereby the Company elected to not reassess the following: (i) whether any expired or existing contracts contain leases and; (ii) initial direct costs for any existing leases. For contracts entered into on or after the effective date, at the inception of a contract the Company assessed whether the contract is, or contains, a lease. The Company’s assessment is based on: (1) whether the contract involves the use of a distinct identified asset, (2) whether we obtain the right to substantially all the economic benefit from the use of the asset throughout the period, and (3) whether it has the right to direct the use of the asset. The Company will allocate the consideration in the contract to each lease component based on its relative stand-alone price to determine the lease payments. The Company has elected not to recognize right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities for short-term leases that have a term of 12 months or less.
Operating and financing lease ROU assets represents the right to use the leased asset for the lease term and operating and financing lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term at the commencement date. As most leases do not provide an implicit rate, the Company uses an incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the adoption date in determining the present value of future payments. Lease expense for minimum lease payments is amortized on a straight-line basis over the lease term and is included in general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06-Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and edging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify the accounting for convertible instruments by removing certain separation models in Subtopic 470- 20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options, for convertible instruments. Under the amendments in ASU 2020-06, the embedded conversion features no longer are separated from the host contract for convertible instruments with conversion features that are not required to be accounted for as derivatives under Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, or that do not result in substantial premiums accounted for as paid-in capital. Consequently, a convertible debt instrument will be accounted for as a single liability measured at its amortized cost and a convertible preferred stock will be accounted for as a single equity instrument measured at its historical cost, as long as no other features require bifurcation and recognition as derivatives. By removing those separation models, the interest rate of convertible debt instruments typically will be closer to the coupon interest rate when applying the guidance in Topic 835, Interest. The amendments in ASU 2020-06 provide financial statement users with a simpler and more consistent starting point to perform analyses across entities. The amendments also improve the operability of the guidance and reduce, to a large extent, the complexities in the accounting for convertible instruments and the difficulties with the interpretation and application of the relevant guidance. To further improve the decision usefulness and relevance of the information being provided to users of financial statements, amendments in ASU 2020-06 increased information transparency by making the following amendments to the disclosure for convertible instruments:
1. Add a disclosure objective
2. Add information about events or conditions that occur during the reporting period that cause conversion contingencies to be met or conversion terms to be significantly changed
3. Add information on which party controls the conversion rights
4. Align disclosure requirements for contingently convertible instruments with disclosure requirements for other convertible instruments
5. Require that existing fair value disclosures in Topic 825, Financial Instruments, be provided at the individual convertible instrument level rather than in the aggregate.
Additionally, for convertible debt instruments with substantial premiums accounted for as paid-in capital, amendments in ASU 2020-06 added disclosures about (1) the fair value amount and the level of fair value hierarchy of the entire instrument for public business entities and (2) the premium amount recorded as paid-in capital.
The amendments in ASU 2020-06 are effective for public business entities, excluding entities eligible to be smaller reporting companies as defined by the SEC, for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. For all other entities, the amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Entities should adopt the guidance as of the beginning of its annual fiscal year and are allowed to adopt the guidance through either a modified retrospective method of transition or a fully retrospective method of transition. In applying the modified retrospective method, entities should apply the guidance to transactions outstanding as of the beginning of the fiscal year in which the amendments are adopted. Transactions that were settled (or expired) during prior reporting periods are unaffected. The cumulative effect of the change should be recognized as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings at the date of adoption. If an entity elects the fully retrospective method of transition, the cumulative effect of the change should be recognized as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings in the first comparative period presented. The Company is evaluating the impact of the revised guidance and believes that it will not have a significant impact on its consolidated financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective accounting pronouncements, if adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to our stockholders.