ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, as well as disclosures found elsewhere in this report are based upon First Financial Corporation's consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires the Corporation to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses. Material estimates that are particularly susceptible to significant change in the near term relate to the determination of the allowance for loan losses, securities valuation and goodwill. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Allowance for credit losses. The allowance for credit losses represents management's estimate of expected losses inherent within the existing loan portfolio. The allowance for credit losses is increased by the provision for credit losses charged to expense and reduced by loans charged off, net of recoveries. The allowance for credit losses is determined based on management's assessment of several factors: reviews and evaluations of specific loans, changes in the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, current economic conditions, nonperforming loans, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Loans are individually evaluated when they do not share risk characteristics with other loans in the respective pool. Loans evaluated individually are excluded from the collective evaluation. Management elected the collateral dependent practical expedient upon adoption of ASC 326. Expected credit losses on individually evaluated loans are based on the fair value of the collateral at the reporting date, adjusted for selling costs as appropriate.
We utilize a cohort methodology to determine the allowance for credit losses. This method identifies and captures the balance of a pool of loans with similar risk characteristics, as of a particular point in time to form a cohort, then tracks the respective losses generated by that cohort of loans over their remaining life. Our cohorts track loan balances and historical loss experience since 2008. Where past performance may not be representative of future losses, loss rates are adjusted for qualitative and economic forecast factors. Qualitative factors include items such as changes in lending policies or procedures, asset specific risks, the impact of COVID-19 on customer's operations, and economic uncertainty in forward-looking forecasts. Economic indicators utilized in forecasting include unemployment rate, gross domestic product, housing starts, and interest rates.
Changes in the financial condition of individual borrowers, economic conditions, historical loss experience, or the condition of the various markets in which collateral may be sold may affect the required level of the allowance for credit losses and the associated provision for credit losses. Should cash flow assumptions or market conditions change, a different amount may be recorded for the allowance for credit losses and the associated provision for credit losses.
Securities valuation and potential impairment. Securities available-for-sale are carried at fair value, with unrealized holding gains and losses reported separately in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax. The Corporation obtains market values from a third party on a monthly basis in order to adjust the securities to fair value. Equity securities that do not have readily determinable fair values are carried at cost. Additionally, all securities are required to be evaluated for impairment related to credit losses. In evaluating for impairment, management considers the reason for the decline, the extent of the decline, and whether the Corporation intends to sell a security or is more likely than not to be required to sell a security before recovery of its amortized cost. If an entity intends to sell or it is more likely than not it will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, the security's amortized cost is written down to fair value through income. If an entity does not intend to sell the security and it is not more likely than not that the entity will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis less any current-period loss, a credit loss exists and an allowance for credit losses is recorded, limited to the amount that the fair value of the security is less than its amortized cost basis. Any impairment that has not been recorded through an allowance for credit losses is recognized in other comprehensive income, net of applicable taxes. No allowance for credit losses for available-for-sale securities was needed at December 31, 2020.
Goodwill. The carrying value of goodwill requires management to use estimates and assumptions about the fair value of the reporting unit compared to its book value. An impairment analysis is prepared on an annual basis. Fair values of the reporting units are determined by an analysis which considers cash flows streams, profitability and estimated market values of the reporting unit. With the decrease in market value as a result of the pandemic, the Corporation engaged a third party to conduct an in-depth analysis of the Corporation as of October 31, 2020. The final results determined that there was no impairment of goodwill. From the effective date of the analysis to December 31, 2020, the Corporation's market value increased. The majority of the Corporation's goodwill is recorded at First Financial Bank, N. A.
Management believes the accounting estimates related to the allowance for credit losses, valuation of investment securities and the valuation of goodwill are "critical accounting estimates" because: (1) the estimates are highly susceptible to change from period to period because they require management to make assumptions concerning, among other factors, the changes in the types and volumes of the portfolios, valuation assumptions, and economic conditions, and (2) the impact of recognizing an impairment or credit loss could have a material effect on the Corporation's assets reported on the balance sheet as well as net income.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - SUMMARY FOR 2020
COMPARISON OF 2020 TO 2019
Net income for 2020 was $53.8 million, or $3.93 per share versus $48.9 million, or $3.80 per share for 2019. The increase in 2020 net income is primarily due to an increase in net interest income related to full year impact of acquisition. 2019 net income includes the results from the acquisition of HopFed, Inc. Return on average assets at December 31, 2020 decreased 11.97% to 1.25% compared to 1.42% at December 31, 2019.
The primary components of income and expense affecting net income are discussed in the following analysis.
NET INTEREST INCOME
The principal source of the Corporation's earnings is net interest income, which represents the difference between interest earned on loans and investments and the interest cost associated with deposits and other sources of funding. Net interest income increased in 2020 to $146.3 million compared to $131.7 million in 2019. Total average interest earning assets increased to $3.71 billion in 2020 from $3.20 billion in 2019. The tax-equivalent yield on these assets decreased to 4.43% in 2020 from
4.79% in 2019. Total average interest-bearing liabilities increased to $2.98 billion in 2020 from $2.59 billion in 2019. The average cost of these interest-bearing liabilities decreased to 0.47% in 2020 from 0.67% in 2019.
The net interest margin decreased from 4.25% in 2019 to 4.05% in 2020. Earning asset yields decreased 36 basis points while the rate on interest-bearing liabilities decreased by 20 basis points.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET - AVERAGE BALANCES AND INTEREST RATES
(1)For purposes of these computations, non-accruing loans are included in the daily average loan amounts outstanding.
(2)Interest income includes the effect of tax equivalent adjustments using a federal tax rate of 21%.
The following table sets forth the components of net interest income due to changes in volume and rate. The table information compares 2020 to 2019 and 2019 to 2018.
(1)For purposes of these computations, non-accruing loans are included in the daily average loan amounts outstanding.
(2)Interest income includes the effect of tax equivalent adjustments using a federal tax rate of 21%.
PROVISION FOR CREDIT LOSSES
The provision for credit losses charged to expense is based upon current expected loss and the results of a detailed analysis estimating an appropriate and adequate allowance for credit losses. The analysis is governed by Accounting Standards Codification (ASC 326), implemented in 2020, which uses an economic forecast that includes the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the provision for credit losses was $10.5 million, an increase of $5.8 million, or 124%, compared to 2019. Additional provisions were primarily recorded to accommodate anticipated losses from the pandemic. Continued loan growth in future periods, an increase in charge-offs, or a decline in our current level of recoveries could result in an increase in provision expense. Additionally, with the adoption of ASC 326 in 2020, provision expense may become more volatile due to changes in CECL model assumptions of credit quality, economic conditions, and loan composition, which drive allowance for credit losses.
Net charge-offs for 2020 were $3.5 million as compared to $5.2 million for 2019 and $5.2 million for 2018. Non-accrual loans, excluding TDR's, increased to $15.4 million at December 31, 2020 from $9.5 million at December 31, 2019. Loans past due 90 days and still on accrual increased to $2.3 million compared to $1.6 million at December 31, 2019.
NON-INTEREST INCOME
Non-interest income of $42.5 million increased $4.0 million from the $38.5 million earned in 2019. Non-interest income increased primarily due to an increase in gains on sales of mortgage loans.
NON-INTEREST EXPENSES
Non-interest expenses increased to $112.8 million in 2020 from $104.4 million in 2019. The increase was mainly due to a full year of increased expenses from the acquisition of HopFed, Inc. Salaries and benefits, as well as equipment expense increases were due to recognizing a full year of expenses from the acquisition of HopFed, Inc.
INCOME TAXES
The Corporation's federal income tax provision was $11.7 million in 2020 compared to $12.1 million in 2019. The overall effective tax rate in 2020 of 17.8% decreased as compared to a 2019 effective rate of 20.0%. The decrease is primarily due to increase of general business tax credits benefits earned in 2020.
COMPARISON OF 2019 TO 2018
Net income for 2019 was $48.9 million or $3.80 per share compared to $46.6 million in 2018 or $3.80 per share. The increase in 2019 net income results from the acquisition of HopFed, Inc. 2018 net income includes the recovery of a security previously written down for other-than temporary impairment, which contributed $2.4 million pre-tax to interest income and $4.5 million pre-tax to other income.
Net interest income increased $15.1 million in 2019 compared to 2018. The provision for loan losses decreased $1.1 million from $5.8 million in 2018 to $4.7 million in 2019. Non-interest expenses increased $13.1 million and non-interest income increased $246 thousand. The increase in non-interest expenses was largely due to the acquisition of HopFed, Inc.
The provision for income taxes increased $1.0 million from 2018 to 2019 and the effective tax rate increased to 20.0% in 2019 from 19.3% in 2018.
COMPARISON AND DISCUSSION OF 2020 BALANCE SHEET TO 2019
The Corporation's total assets increased 13.3% or $534.3 million at December 31, 2020, from a year earlier. Available-for-sale securities increased $94.0 million at December 31, 2020, from the previous year. Loans, net decreased by $73.2 million to $2.56 billion. Deposits increased $480.6 million while borrowings increased by $10.8 million. Total shareholders' equity increased $39.4 million to $597.0 million at December 31, 2020. In 2020 dividends paid by the Corporation totaled $1.04 per share. There were also 39,029 shares from the treasury with a value of $1.47 million that were contributed to the ESOP plan in 2020 compared to 28,470 shares with a value of $1.25 million in 2019.
Following is an analysis of the components of the Corporation's balance sheet.
SECURITIES
The Corporation's investment strategy seeks to maximize income from the investment portfolio while using it as a risk management tool and ensuring safety of principal and capital. During 2020 the portfolio's balance increased by 10.2%. The average life of the portfolio decreased from 4.2 years in 2019 to 3.8 years in 2020. The portfolio structure will continue to provide cash flows to be reinvested during 2021.
(1) Distribution of maturities is based on the estimated life of the asset.
(1) Distribution of maturities is based on the estimated life of the asset.
LOAN PORTFOLIO
Loans outstanding by major category as of December 31 for each of the last five years and the maturities at year end 2020 are set forth in the following analyses.
ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES
The activity in the Corporation's allowance for credit losses is shown in the following analysis:
The allowance is maintained at an amount management believes sufficient to absorb expected losses in the loan portfolio. Monitoring loan quality and maintaining an adequate allowance is an ongoing process overseen by senior management and the loan review function. On at least a quarterly basis, a formal analysis of the adequacy of the allowance is prepared and reviewed by management and the Board of Directors. This analysis serves as a point in time assessment of the level of the allowance and serves as a basis for provisions for credit losses. The loan quality monitoring process includes assigning loan grades and the use of a watch list to identify loans of concern.
The analysis of the allowance for credit losses includes the allocation of specific amounts of the allowance to individually evaluated loans, generally based on an analysis of the collateral securing those loans. Portions of the allowance are also allocated to loan portfolios, based upon a variety of factors including historical loss experience, trends in the type and volume of the loan portfolios, trends in delinquent and non-performing loans, and economic trends affecting our market, including current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts about the future. These components are added together and compared to the balance of our allowance at the evaluation date. The allowance for credit losses as a percentage of total loans increased to 1.80% at year end 2020 compared to 0.75% at year end 2019. The increase is primarily due to the adoption of CECL. A portion of the increase was due to the requirement to include an allowance for credit losses on purchased loans that previously only required an allocation if there was a deterioration since acquisition date. The calculation of historical losses used in the allowance computation averages the net charge off activity and qualitative factors that supplement historical losses and consider internal and external factors, including reasonable and supportable forecasts, that influence management's expectations of loss in the portfolio. Non-performing loans of $20.7 million at December 31, 2020 increased from $15.3 million at December 31, 2019. Management believes the allowance for credit losses balance at year end 2020 is reasonable based on their analysis of specific loans and the credit trends reflected within the loan portfolio.
The table below presents the allocation of the allowance to the loan portfolios at year-end.
NONPERFORMING LOANS
Management monitors the components and status of nonperforming loans as a part of the evaluation procedures used in determining the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses. It is the Corporation's policy to discontinue the accrual of interest on loans where, in management's opinion, serious doubt exists as to collectability. The amounts shown below represent non-accrual loans, loans which have been restructured to provide for a reduction or deferral of interest or principal because of deterioration in the financial condition of the borrower and those loans which are past due more than 90 days where the Corporation continues to accrue interest. Restructured loans increased slightly in 2020 and decreased in 2019 due to the reduced number and balance of loans added combined with the continued receipt of payments in accordance with the restructuring terms. Additional information regarding restructured loans is available in the footnotes to the financial statements.
The ratio of the allowance for loan losses as a percentage of nonperforming loans was 226.83% at December 31, 2020, compared to 130.01% in 2019. In the footnotes to the financial statements the amount reported for nonperforming loans is the recorded investment which includes accrued interest receivable. The following loan categories comprise significant components of the nonperforming loans at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Management considers the present allowance to be appropriate and adequate to cover expected losses inherent in the loan portfolio based on the current economic environment. However, future economic changes cannot be predicted. Deteriorating economic conditions could result in an increase in the risk characteristics of the loan portfolio and an increase in the potential for credit losses.
DEPOSITS
The information below presents the average amount of deposits and rates paid on those deposits for 2020, 2019 and 2018.
The maturities of certificates of deposit of more than $100 thousand outstanding at December 31, 2020, are summarized as follows:
OTHER BORROWINGS
Advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank decreased to $5.9 million in 2020 compared to $20.8 million in 2019. In 2019 other borrowings included trust preferred securities acquired in the assumption of liabilities of HopFed, Inc. totaling $10.2 million. The Asset/Liability Committee reviews these funding sources and considers the related strategies on a monthly basis. See Interest Rate Sensitivity and Liquidity below for more information.
CAPITAL RESOURCES
Bank regulatory agencies have established capital adequacy standards which are used extensively in their monitoring and control of the industry. These standards relate capital to level of risk by assigning different weightings to assets and certain off-balance-sheet activity. As shown in the footnote to the consolidated financial statements ("Regulatory Matters"), the Corporation's subsidiary banking institutions capital exceeds the requirements to be considered well capitalized at December 31, 2020.
First Financial Corporation's objective continues to be to maintain adequate capital to merit the confidence of its customers and shareholders. To warrant this confidence, the Corporation's management maintains a capital position which they believe is sufficient to absorb unforeseen financial shocks without unnecessarily restricting dividends to its shareholders. The Corporation's dividend payout ratio for 2020 and 2019 was 26.6% and 27.7%, respectively. The Corporation expects to continue its policy of paying regular cash dividends, subject to future earnings and regulatory restrictions and capital requirements.
INTEREST RATE SENSITIVITY AND LIQUIDITY
First Financial Corporation has established risk measures, limits and policy guidelines for managing interest rate risk and liquidity. Responsibility for management of these functions resides with the Asset/Liability Committee. The primary goal of the Asset/Liability Committee is to maximize net interest income within the interest rate risk limits approved by the Board of Directors.
Interest Rate Risk: Management considers interest rate risk to be the Corporation's most significant market risk. Interest rate risk is the exposure to changes in net interest income as a result of changes in interest rates. Consistency in the Corporation's net interest income is largely dependent on the effective management of this risk. The Asset/Liability position is measured using sophisticated risk management tools, including earnings simulation and market value of equity sensitivity analysis. These tools
allow management to quantify and monitor both short-and long-term exposure to interest rate risk. Simulation modeling measures the effects of changes in interest rates, changes in the shape of the yield curve and the effects of embedded options on net interest income. This measure projects earnings in the various environments over the next three years. It is important to note that measures of interest rate risk have limitations and are dependent on various assumptions. These assumptions are inherently uncertain and, as a result, the model cannot precisely predict the impact of interest rate fluctuations on net interest income. Actual results will differ from simulated results due to timing, frequency and amount of interest rate changes as well as overall market conditions. The Committee has performed a thorough analysis of these assumptions and believes them to be valid and theoretically sound. These assumptions are continuously monitored for behavioral changes.
The Corporation from time to time utilizes derivatives to manage interest rate risk. Management continuously evaluates the merits of such interest rate risk products but does not anticipate the use of such products to become a major part of the Corporation's risk management strategy.
The table below shows the Corporation's estimated sensitivity profile as of December 31, 2020. The change in interest rates assumes a parallel shift in interest rates of 100 and 200 basis points. Given a 100 basis point increase in rates, net interest income would increase 5.38% over the next 12 months and increase 9.89% over the following 12 months. Given a 100 basis point decrease in rates, net interest income would decrease 4.70% over the next 12 months and decrease 7.08% over the following 12 months. These estimates assume all rate changes occur overnight and management takes no action as a result of this change.
Typical rate shock analysis does not reflect management's ability to react and thereby reduce the effects of rate changes, and represents a worst-case scenario.
Liquidity Risk Liquidity is measured by the bank's ability to raise funds to meet the obligations of its customers, including deposit withdrawals and credit needs. This is accomplished primarily by maintaining sufficient liquid assets in the form of investment securities and core deposits. The Corporation has $13.3 million of investments that mature throughout the coming 12 months. The Corporation also anticipates $206.3 million of principal payments from mortgage-backed securities. Given the current rate environment, the Corporation anticipates $20.9 million in securities to be called within the next 12 months.
The Corporation also has additional sources of liquidity available through secured and unsecured borrowing capacity. These include upstream correspondents, the Federal Home Loan Bank and the Federal Reserve Bank.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS, COMMITMENTS, CONTINGENT LIABILITIES AND OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The Corporation has various financial obligations, including contractual obligations and commitments that may require future cash payments.
Contractual Obligations: The following table presents, as of December 31, 2020, significant fixed and determinable contractual obligations to third parties by payment date. Further discussion of the nature of each obligation is included in the referenced note to the consolidated financial statements.
The Corporation has obligations under its pension, supplemental executive retirement plan and post-retirement medical benefits plan as described in Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements.
The Corporation has lease obligations on certain branch properties and equipment as described in Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements.
Commitments: The following table details the amount and expected maturities of significant commitments as of December 31, 2020. Further discussion of these commitments is included in Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements.
Commitments to extend credit, including loan commitments, standby and commercial letters of credit do not necessarily represent future cash requirements, in that these commitments often expire without being drawn upon.