ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
Executive Overview
Description of Operating Segments
Results of Operations - Consolidated
Results of Operations - Segments
Investments
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
Other Items
Discontinued Operations - Chaucer Business
Income Taxes
Critical Accounting Estimates
Statutory Surplus of Insurance Subsidiaries
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Contingencies and Regulatory Matters
Rating Agencies
Risks and Forward-Looking Statements
Glossary of Selected Insurance Terms
INTRODUCTION
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to assist readers in understanding the consolidated results of operations and financial condition of The Hanover Insurance Group, Inc. and its subsidiaries (“THG”). Consolidated results of operations and financial condition are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related footnotes included elsewhere herein.
Results of operations include the accounts of The Hanover Insurance Company (“Hanover Insurance”) and Citizens Insurance Company of America (“Citizens”), our principal property and casualty companies, and certain other insurance and non-insurance subsidiaries. Our results of operations also include the results of our discontinued operations, consisting primarily of our former Chaucer international business, Chaucer Holdings Limited (“Chaucer”), a United Kingdom (“U.K.”) domiciled specialist insurance underwriting group which operates through the Society and Corporation of Lloyd’s (“Lloyd’s”), and international insurance and non-insurance subsidiaries, which collectively constituted our former Chaucer segment. On December 28, 2018, we completed the sale of Chaucer to China Reinsurance (Group) Corporation (“China Re”), and subsequently completed the sales of the Chaucer-related Irish and Australian entities on February 14, 2019 and April 10, 2019, respectively. For all periods presented, operations from Chaucer are presented as discontinued operations. Discontinued operations also include the results of our accident and health and former life insurance businesses.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Business operations consist of three operating segments: Commercial Lines, Personal Lines and Other.
Our strategy, which focuses on the independent agency distribution channel, supports THG’s commitment to our agency partners. It is designed to generate profitable growth by leveraging the strengths of our distribution approach, including expansion of our agency footprint in underpenetrated geographies, as warranted. As part of that strategy, we have increased our capabilities in specialty markets and made investments designed to develop growth solutions for our agency distribution channel. Our goal is to grow responsibly in all of our businesses, while managing volatility.
The outbreak of the novel coronavirus, also known as COVID-19, and subsequent global pandemic (“Pandemic”) significantly impacted the U.S. and global financial markets and economies during the year ended December 31, 2020. Circumstances relating to the Pandemic are unprecedented in scope and impact, continue to evolve, and are complex and uncertain. Our investment portfolio was affected by the deterioration in investment markets during March 2020, as well as volatility in the subsequent months. In addition, we experienced both favorable and adverse effects from the Pandemic on our underwriting results and operations, as well as our financial condition, during March through December 2020. We continue to believe that the Pandemic’s impacts on our near-term results should be manageable. However, the severity, duration and long-term impacts of the Pandemic, including continued declines in general economic conditions, adverse impacts to our investment portfolio and uncertainty around possible and actual governmental responses to the crisis, may significantly affect the property and casualty insurance industry, our business, and our financial results over the intermediate and long-term. (See “Contingencies and Regulatory Matters” and “Item 1A - Risk Factors” for further discussion).
Net income was $358.7 million in 2020, compared to $425.1 million in 2019, a decrease of $66.4 million, primarily due to changes in the fair value of equity securities and, to a lesser extent, impairment losses on fixed income securities.
Operating income before interest expense and income taxes (a non-GAAP financial measure; see also “Results of Operations - Consolidated - Non-GAAP Financial Measures”) was $484.7 million in 2020 compared to $453.6 million in 2019, an increase of $31.1 million. This increase is primarily due to lower non-catastrophe current accident year losses, primarily in our personal and commercial automobile lines, and favorable development on prior years’ loss and loss adjustment expense (“LAE”) reserves (“prior years’ loss reserves”), partially offset by higher catastrophe losses and, to a lesser extent, lower net investment income. The lower non-catastrophe current accident year losses reflect a reduced level of economic activity as a result of the Pandemic.
Pre-tax catastrophe losses were $286.7 million in 2020, compared to $169.3 million in 2019, an increase of $117.4 million primarily due to higher property damages related to riots and civil unrest in several major cities across the country, hurricane Isaias, wildfires on the West Coast, and wind and hailstorms in the Midwest and Southeast. Net favorable development on prior years’ loss reserves was $15.5 million in 2020, compared to $0.9 million in 2019.
Commercial Lines
Our account-focused approach to the small commercial market, distinctiveness in the middle market, and continued development of specialty lines provides us with a diversified portfolio of products and delivers significant value to agents and policyholders. We continue to pursue our core strategy of developing strong partnerships with agents, enhanced franchise value through selective distribution, distinctive products and coverages, and through continued investment in industry segmentation. Net premiums written increased 1.0% in 2020 compared to 2019. The modest premium growth during 2020 reflects a reduction in insured business activity as a result of the Pandemic.
Underwriting results declined in 2020, primarily due to higher catastrophe losses, partially offset by lower large non-catastrophe current accident year losses. The lower non-catastrophe current accident year losses were primarily due to lower loss activity in our specialty industrial property and marine lines, and lower losses in our commercial automobile line, partially offset by reserve provisions for exposures related to the Pandemic and to higher property losses in our commercial multiple peril line. The lower non-catastrophe current accident year losses reflect a reduced level of economic activity as a result of the Pandemic. The competitive nature of the Commercial Lines market requires us to be highly disciplined in our underwriting process to ensure that we write business at acceptable margins, and we continue to seek rate increases across many lines of business. Due to uncertainty caused by the Pandemic, there is a level of uncertainty in our ability to grow our business, and to maintain or improve our underwriting profitability in this environment.
Personal Lines
Personal Lines focuses on partnering with high quality, value-oriented agencies that deliver consultative selling to customers and stress the importance of account rounding (the conversion of single policy customers to accounts with multiple policies and/or additional coverages, to address customers’ broader objectives). Approximately 85% of our policies in force have been issued to customers with multiple policies and/or coverages with us. We are focused on seeking profitable growth opportunities, building a distinctive position in the market in order to meet our customers’ needs and diversifying geographically. We continue to seek appropriate rate increases that meet or exceed underlying loss cost trends, subject to regulatory and competitive considerations. Due to uncertainty caused by the Pandemic, there is a level of uncertainty in our ability to grow our business, and to maintain or improve our underwriting profitability in this environment.
Net premiums written decreased by 0.5% in 2020. During the second quarter of 2020, we returned approximately $30 million of premiums to our eligible personal automobile customers in all of our markets, providing financial relief during the Pandemic. Excluding the impact of the premium refund, net premiums written would have increased 1.1%. Underwriting results improved in 2020, primarily due to lower non-catastrophe current accident year losses in our personal automobile line, a favorable change in development of prior years’ loss reserves and a non-recurring premium tax benefit, partially offset by higher catastrophe losses. The lower personal automobile losses were due to fewer accidents and decreased claim activity resulting from fewer miles driven as a result of the Pandemic.
DESCRIPTION OF OPERATING SEGMENTS
Primary business operations include insurance products and services currently provided through three operating segments: Commercial Lines, Personal Lines and Other. Commercial Lines includes commercial multiple peril, commercial automobile, workers’ compensation, and other commercial coverages, such as management and professional liability, marine, Hanover Programs, specialty industrial and commercial property, monoline general liability and surety. Personal Lines includes personal automobile, homeowners, and other personal coverages, such as umbrella. Included in the “Other” segment are Opus Investment Management, Inc., which markets investment management services to institutions, pension funds, and other organizations; earnings on holding company assets; holding company and other expenses, including certain costs associated with retirement benefits due to our former life insurance employees and agents; and a run-off voluntary property and casualty pools business. The operations of Chaucer are classified as discontinued operations for all periods presented. We present the separate financial information of each segment consistent with the manner in which our chief operating decision maker evaluates results in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing performance.
We report interest expense on debt separately from the earnings of our operating segments. This consists of interest on our senior and subordinated debentures.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONSOLIDATED
2020 Compared to 2019
Consolidated net income was $358.7 million in 2020, compared to $425.1 million in 2019, a decrease of $66.4 million. The year over year comparison of consolidated net income reflects a decrease in after-tax net realized and unrealized investment gains of $82.5 million, principally related to changes in the fair value of equity securities. This was partially offset by an increase in operating income before interest expense and income taxes of $31.1 million, primarily due to lower non-catastrophe current accident year losses, primarily in our personal and commercial automobile lines, and favorable development on prior years’ loss reserves, partially offset by higher catastrophe losses and, to a lesser extent, lower net investment income.
2019 Compared to 2018
Consolidated net income was $425.1 million in 2019, compared to $391.0 million in 2018, an increase of $34.1 million. The year over year comparison of consolidated net income reflects an increase in after-tax net realized and unrealized investment gains of $132.1 million, principally related to changes in the fair value of equity securities. Additionally, operating income before interest expense and income taxes increased $47.1 million, primarily due to lower catastrophe losses, earned premium growth, lower expenses and higher net investment income, partially offset by higher current accident year large loss activity, particularly in the property lines. The increase in the year over year net income comparison was partially offset by the $131.9 million gain from the sale of our former Chaucer business in 2018.
The following table reflects operating income (loss) before interest expense and income taxes for each operating segment and a reconciliation to consolidated net income from operating income before interest expense and income taxes (a non-GAAP measure).
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to consolidated net income, discussed above, we assess our financial performance based upon pre-tax “operating income,” and we assess the operating performance of each of our three operating segments based upon the pre-tax operating income (loss) generated by each segment. As reflected in the table above, operating income before interest expense and income taxes excludes interest expense on debt and certain other items, which we believe are not indicative of our core operations, such as net realized and unrealized investment gains and losses. Such gains and losses are excluded since they are determined by interest rates, financial markets and the timing of sales. Also, operating income before interest expense and income taxes excludes net gains and losses on disposals of businesses, gains and losses related to the repayment of debt, discontinued operations, costs to acquire businesses, restructuring costs, the cumulative effect of accounting changes and certain other items. Although the items excluded from operating income before interest expense and income taxes are important components in understanding and assessing our overall financial performance, we believe a discussion of operating income before interest expense and income taxes enhances an investor’s understanding of our results of operations by highlighting net income attributable to the core operations of the business. However, operating income before interest expense and income taxes, which is a non-GAAP measure, should not be construed as a substitute for income before income taxes or income from continuing operations, and operating income should not be construed as a substitute for net income.
Catastrophe losses and prior years’ reserve development are significant components in understanding and assessing the financial performance of our business. Management reviews and evaluates catastrophes and prior years’ reserve development separately from the other components of earnings. References to “current accident year underwriting results” exclude prior accident year reserve development, and may also be presented, “excluding catastrophes.” Prior years’ reserve development and catastrophes are not predictable as to timing or the amount that will affect the results of our operations and have an effect on each year’s operating and net income. Management believes that providing certain financial metrics and trends excluding the effects of catastrophes and prior years’ reserve development helps investors to understand the variability in periodic earnings and to evaluate the underlying performance of our operations. Discussion of catastrophe losses in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis includes development on prior years’ catastrophe reserves and, unless otherwise indicated, such development is excluded from discussions of prior year loss and LAE reserve development.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - SEGMENTS
The following is our discussion and analysis of the results of operations by business segment. The operating results are presented before interest expense, income taxes and other items which management believes are not indicative of our core operations, including realized gains and losses, as well as unrealized gains and losses on equity securities, and the results of discontinued operations.
The following table summarizes the results of operations for the periods indicated:
2020 Compared to 2019
Operating income before interest expense and income taxes was $484.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $453.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $31.1 million. This increase was primarily due to lower non-catastrophe current accident year losses primarily in our personal and commercial automobile lines, and favorable development on prior years’ loss reserves, partially offset by higher catastrophe losses and lower net investment income. The lower non-catastrophe current accident year losses reflect a reduced level of economic activity as a result of the Pandemic. The increase in catastrophe losses was primarily due to higher property damages related to riots and civil unrest in several major cities across the country, hurricane Isaias, wildfires on the West Coast, and wind and hailstorms in the Midwest and Southeast.
Net premiums written increased by $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Premiums grew during 2020 in both our Commercial and Personal Lines segments, partially offset by the personal automobile premium refund of approximately $30 million in the second quarter of 2020.
2019 Compared to 2018
Operating income before interest expense and income taxes was $453.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $406.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $47.1 million. This increase was primarily due to lower catastrophe losses, earned premium growth, lower expenses and higher net investment income, partially offset by higher current accident year large loss activity in our specialty industrial property line, personal automobile and, to a lesser extent, our homeowners and marine lines.
Net premiums written increased by $196.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, due to growth in both our Commercial and Personal Lines segments.
PRODUCTION AND UNDERWRITING RESULTS
The following table summarizes premiums written on a gross and net basis, net premiums earned and loss (including catastrophe losses), LAE, expense and combined ratios for the Commercial Lines and Personal Lines segments. Loss, LAE, catastrophe loss and combined ratios shown below include prior year reserve development. These items were not meaningful for our Other segment.
The following tables summarize net premiums written, and loss and LAE and catastrophe loss ratios by line of business for the Commercial Lines and Personal Lines segments. Loss and LAE and catastrophe loss ratios include prior year reserve development.
The following tables summarize GAAP underwriting results for the Commercial Lines, Personal Lines and Other segments and reconciles them to operating income (loss) before interest expense and income taxes.
2020 Compared to 2019
Commercial Lines
Commercial Lines net premiums written were $2,733.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2,707.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $25.9 million. The modest premium growth during 2020 reflects a reduction of insured business activity as a result of the Pandemic.
Commercial Lines underwriting profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $106.3 million, compared to $121.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $15.2 million. Catastrophe-related losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $132.2 million, compared to $83.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $49.0 million. Favorable development on prior years’ loss reserves, excluding catastrophes, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $19.0 million, compared to $28.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $9.7 million.
Commercial Lines current accident year underwriting profit, excluding catastrophes, was $219.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $176.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This $43.5 million increase was primarily due to lower non-catastrophe current accident year losses. The lower current year non-catastrophe losses were primarily due to lower large loss activity in our specialty industrial property and marine lines, and lower losses in our commercial automobile line, partially offset by reserve provisions for exposures due to the Pandemic and to higher property losses in our commercial multiple peril line. The reserve provisions for exposures due to the Pandemic of approximately $19 million were primarily reflected in our workers’ compensation, healthcare, commercial multiple peril, management and professional liability, and surety lines. The lower non-catastrophe current accident year losses reflect a reduced level of economic activity as a result of the Pandemic.
We continue to manage underwriting performance through increased rates, pricing segmentation, specific underwriting actions and targeted new business growth. Our ability to achieve overall rate increases is affected by many factors, including regulatory activity and the current competitive pricing environment, particularly within the workers’ compensation line. Due to uncertainty caused by the Pandemic, there is a level of uncertainty in our ability to grow our business, and to maintain or improve our underwriting profitability in this environment. The extent and duration of the Pandemic's future disruption to our businesses are unknown and may result in continued moderation in claims volumes due to a substantial reduction in business activity. For example, less traffic and congestion on the roads may result in fewer accidents involving our insureds in our commercial automobile line. In addition, a reduction in our insureds’ underlying business activity, as well as the inability of certain businesses to fully restart operations and recover from the economic impacts of the prolonged stay-at-home orders, may result in a significant reduction in our future commercial multiple peril, workers' compensation and general liability premium levels.
Personal Lines
Personal Lines net premiums written were $1,865.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1,874.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $9.1 million. During the second quarter of 2020, we returned approximately $30 million of premiums to our eligible Personal Lines automobile customers in all markets, providing financial relief during the Pandemic. Excluding the impact of the premium refund, net premiums written would have increased 1.1%.
Net premiums written in the personal automobile line of business for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1,151.5 million, compared to $1,186.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $34.6 million. This decrease was primarily due to the aforementioned premium refund of approximately $30 million and a decrease in policies in force of 2.8%. Net premiums written in the homeowners line of business for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $653.4 million, compared to $636.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $16.5 million. This increase was primarily driven by pricing increases, partially offset by a 1.1% decrease in policies in force.
Personal Lines underwriting profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $132.9 million, compared to $59.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $73.8 million. Catastrophe losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $154.5 million, compared to $86.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $68.4 million. Favorable development on prior years’ loss reserves for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.7 million, compared to unfavorable development of $26.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a favorable change of $27.3 million.
Personal Lines current accident year underwriting profit, excluding catastrophes, was $286.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $171.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This $114.9 million increase was primarily due to lower current accident year losses in our personal automobile line, and, to a lesser extent, a non-recurring premium tax benefit. Personal automobile losses were lower due to fewer accidents and decreased claim activity resulting from fewer miles driven as a result of the Pandemic.
We have been able to obtain rate increases in our Personal Lines markets and believe that our ability to obtain increases will continue over the long term. Our ability to maintain Personal Lines net premiums written may be affected, however, by price competition, and regulatory activity and legal developments. See “Contingencies and Regulatory Matters.” Additionally, these factors along with weather-related loss volatility may also affect our ability to maintain and improve underwriting results. We monitor these trends and consider them in our rate actions. Due to uncertainty caused by the Pandemic, there is a level of uncertainty in our ability to retain or grow our business, and to maintain or improve our underwriting profitability in this environment. The extent and duration of the Pandemic's future disruption to our businesses are unknown and may result in a continued moderation in claims volumes due to a substantial reduction in customer activity including, for example, fewer miles driven by the insureds in our personal automobile line.
In addition, in 2019, Michigan enacted major reforms of its current system governing personal and commercial automobile insurance, especially related to automobile Personal Injury Protection (“PIP”) coverage. We believe that we are effectively executing the transition and will be able to navigate this market successfully. As of December 31, 2020, the net impact of these reforms was not significant to our total net premiums written and underwriting profit. For 2020, net premiums written that were attributable to PIP coverage in Michigan were $144.3 million, or 3.1% of our total company full year 2020 net premiums written, while Michigan personal automobile net premiums written represented 11.7% of our total company full year 2020 net premiums written. For more information, please refer to “Risk Factors” in Part I - Item 1A.
Other
Other operating losses were $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to other operating income of $8.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $11.8 million. This was primarily due to lower net investment income as a result of the deployment of proceeds in 2019 from the sale of our former Chaucer business, as well as increased charitable contributions in 2020.
2019 Compared to 2018
Commercial Lines
Commercial Lines net premiums written were $2,707.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $2,610.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This $96.5 million increase was primarily driven by pricing increases and strong retention.
Commercial Lines underwriting profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $121.5 million, compared to $85.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $36.5 million. Catastrophe-related losses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $83.2 million, compared to $142.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, a decrease of $59.1 million. This decrease is partially attributable to an increase in prior year favorable catastrophe development of $17.8 million, primarily due to the sale of subrogation rights on certain California wildfire losses incurred in 2017 and 2018. Favorable development on prior years’ loss reserves, excluding catastrophes, for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $28.7 million, compared to $34.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, a decrease of $5.4 million.
Commercial Lines current accident year underwriting profit, excluding catastrophes, was $176.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $193.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This $17.2 million decrease was primarily due to higher current accident year large property loss activity in our specialty industrial property line and, to a lesser extent, in our marine and Hanover Programs lines within other commercial lines, partially offset by earned premium growth and lower expenses.
Personal Lines
Personal Lines net premiums written were $1,874.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $1,774.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $100.4 million. This was primarily due to higher renewal premium driven by rate increases, which was modestly offset by lower policy retention.
Net premiums written in the personal automobile line of business for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $1,186.1 million, compared to $1,127.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $58.6 million. This increase was primarily due to rate increases and an increase in policies in force of 1.4%. Net premiums written in the homeowners line of business for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $636.9 million, compared to $604.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $32.9 million. This is attributable to rate increases and an increase in policies in force of 2.1%.
Personal Lines underwriting profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $59.1 million, compared to $66.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, a decrease of $7.5 million. Catastrophe losses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $86.1 million, compared to $76.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $9.2 million. Unfavorable development on prior years’ loss reserves for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $26.6 million, compared to $33.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, a decrease of $6.7 million.
Personal Lines current accident year underwriting profit, excluding catastrophes, was $171.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $176.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This $5.0 million decrease was primarily due to higher current accident year losses in our personal automobile and homeowners lines, partially offset by earned premium growth and lower expenses.
Other
Other operating income was $8.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to other operating losses of $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an improvement of $14.0 million. This was primarily due to higher net investment income, which includes the investment of the remaining proceeds from the Chaucer sale transaction. All of the proceeds of the Chaucer transaction were distributed in 2019 through share repurchases or special dividends.
Reinsurance Recoverables
Reinsurance recoverables were $1,874.3 million and $1,814.0 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, of which $88.4 million and $89.8 million, respectively, represent billed recoverables. A reinsurance recoverable is billed after an eligible reinsured claim is paid by an insurer. Billed reinsurance recoverables related to the Michigan Catastrophic Claims Association (“MCCA”) were $35.5 million and $29.2 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, and billed non-MCCA reinsurance recoverables totaled $52.9 million and $60.6 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, there were no balances outstanding greater than 90 days.
RESERVE FOR LOSSES AND LOSS ADJUSTMENT EXPENSES
Overview of Loss Reserve Estimation Process
We maintain reserves for our property and casualty insurance products to provide for our ultimate liability for losses and loss adjustment expenses (our “loss reserves”) with respect to reported and unreported claims incurred as of the end of each accounting period. These reserves are estimates, taking into account past loss experience, modified for current trends, as well as prevailing economic, legal and social conditions. Loss reserves represent our largest liability.
Management’s process for establishing loss reserves is a comprehensive process that involves input from multiple functions throughout our organization, including actuarial, finance, claims, legal, underwriting, distribution and business operations management. The process incorporates facts currently known, as well as the current, and in some cases, the anticipated, state of the law and coverage litigation. Based on information currently available, we believe that the aggregate loss reserves at December 31, 2020 were adequate to cover claims for losses that had occurred as of that date, including both those known to us and those yet to be reported. However, as described below, there are significant uncertainties inherent in the loss reserving process. Our estimate of the ultimate liability for losses that had occurred as of December 31, 2020 is expected to change in future periods as we obtain further information, and such changes could have a material effect on our results of operations and financial position.
Our loss reserves include case estimates for claims that have been reported and estimates for claims that have been incurred but not reported (“IBNR”) at the balance sheet date. They also include estimates of the expenses associated with processing and settling all reported and unreported claims, less estimates of anticipated salvage and subrogation recoveries. Our property and casualty loss reserves are not discounted to present value.
Case reserves are established by our claim personnel individually on a claim by claim basis and based on information specific to the occurrence and terms of the underlying policy. For some classes of business, average case reserves are used initially. Case reserves are periodically reviewed and modified based on new or additional information pertaining to the claim.
Our ultimate IBNR reserves are estimated by management and our reserving actuaries on an aggregate basis for each line of business or coverage for loss and loss expense liabilities not reflected within the case reserves. The sum of the case reserves and the IBNR reserves represents our estimate of total unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses.
We regularly review our loss reserves using a variety of industry accepted analytical techniques. We update the loss reserves as historical loss experience develops, additional claims are reported and resolved, and new information becomes available. Net changes in loss reserves are reflected in operating results in the period in which the reserves are changed.
The IBNR reserve includes a provision for claims that have occurred but have not yet been reported to us, some of which may not yet be known to the insured, as well as a provision for future development on reported claims. IBNR represents a significant proportion of our total net loss reserves, particularly for long-tail liability classes. In fact, approximately 50% of our aggregate net loss reserves at December 31, 2020 were for IBNR losses and loss expenses.
Critical Judgments and Key Assumptions
We determine the amount of our net loss reserves (i.e., net of estimated reinsurance recoverables) based on an estimation process that is complex and considers information from both company specific and industry data, as well as general economic and other information. The estimation process utilizes a combination of objective and subjective information, the blending of which requires significant professional judgment. There are various assumptions required, including future trends in frequency and severity of claims, operational changes in claim handling and case reserving practices and trends related to general economic and social conditions. Informed judgments as to our ultimate exposure to losses are an integral component of our loss reserve estimation process.
There is greater inherent uncertainty in estimating insurance reserves for certain types of property and casualty insurance lines, particularly liability lines, where a longer period of time may elapse before a definitive determination of ultimate liability and losses may be made (sometimes referred to as “long-tail” business). In addition, the technological, judicial, regulatory and political climates involving these types of claims are continuously evolving. The emergence of the Pandemic during 2020 resulted in an increased level of uncertainty for many lines of business, particularly for our long-tail lines. There is also greater uncertainty in establishing reserves with respect to business that is new to us, particularly new business which is generated with respect to newly introduced product lines, by newly appointed agents or in geographies in which we have less experience in conducting business. In both of these cases, there is less historical experience or knowledge, and less data upon which we can rely. A combination of business that is both new to us and has longer development periods provides even greater uncertainty in estimating insurance reserves. In our management and professional liability lines, we are modestly increasing, and expect to continue to increase, our exposure to longer-tailed liability lines, including directors and officers liability, errors and omissions liability and product liability coverages. In addition, in recent periods, we have experienced extensions of the “tails” in certain lines of business as the full value of claims are presented later than had been our historical experience. The broad impact of the Pandemic on our claims environment may extend these “tails” even further.
We regularly update our reserve estimates as new information becomes available and additional events occur which may impact the resolution of unsettled claims. Reserve adjustments are reflected in the results of operations as adjustments to losses and LAE. Often, these adjustments are recognized in periods subsequent to the period in which the underlying policy was written and the loss event occurred. When these types of subsequent adjustments affect prior years, they are described separately as “prior year reserve development”. Such development can be either favorable or unfavorable to our financial results and may vary by line of business. As discussed below, estimated loss and LAE reserves for claims occurring in prior years, in the aggregate, developed favorably by $15.5 million and $0.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively and unfavorably by $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, although there was some significant variance by line of business. Additionally, our estimated loss and LAE reserves for catastrophe claims occurring in prior years developed favorably by $17.1 million, $27.5 million and $9.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. There can be no assurance that current loss and LAE reserves will be sufficient.
We regularly review our reserving techniques, our overall reserving position and our reinsurance. Based on (i) our review of historical data, legislative enactments, judicial decisions, legal developments in impositions of damages and policy coverage, political attitudes and trends in general economic conditions, (ii) our review of per claim information, (iii) our historical loss experience and that of the industry, (iv) the nature of policies written by us, and (v) our internal estimates of required reserves, we believe that adequate provision has been made for loss reserves. Given the inherent complexity of our loss reserve estimation process and the potential variability of the assumptions used, the actual emergence of losses will vary, perhaps substantially, from the estimate of losses included in our financial statements, particularly in those instances where settlements or other claim resolutions do not occur until well into the future. Our net loss reserves at December 31, 2020 were $4.4 billion. Therefore, a relatively small percentage change in the estimate of net loss reserves would have a material effect on our results of operations. Similarly, a one percentage point change in the aggregate loss and LAE ratio resulting from a change in reserve estimation is currently projected to have an approximate $46 million impact on operating income, based on 2020 full year premiums.
The major causes of material uncertainty relating to ultimate losses and LAE (“risk factors”) generally vary for each line of business, as well as for each separately analyzed component of the line of business. In some cases, such risk factors are explicit assumptions of the estimation method and in others, they are implicit. For example, a method may explicitly assume that a certain percentage of claims will close each year, but will implicitly assume that the legal interpretation of existing contract language will remain substantially unchanged. Actual results will likely vary from expectations for each of these assumptions, resulting in an ultimate claim liability that is different from that being estimated currently.
Some risk factors affect multiple lines of business. Examples include changes in claim handling and claim reserving practices, changes in claim settlement patterns due to the Pandemic and other factors, regulatory and legislative actions, court actions, so-called “social inflation,” timeliness of claim reporting, state mix of claimants and degree of claimant fraud. Additionally, there is also a higher degree of uncertainty due to growth in our acquired businesses, with respect to which we have less familiarity and, in some cases, limited historical claims experience. The extent of the impact of a risk factor will also vary by components within a line of business. Individual risk factors are subject to interactions with other risk factors within line of business components. Thus, risk factors can have offsetting or compounding effects on required reserves.
Inflation generally increases the cost of losses covered by insurance contracts. The effect of inflation varies by product. Our property and casualty insurance premiums are established before the amount of losses and LAE and the extent to which inflation may affect such expenses are known. Consequently, we attempt, in establishing rates and reserves, to anticipate the potential impact of inflation in the projection of ultimate costs. For example, we monitor, and continue to experience, increases in medical costs, wages and legal costs, which are key considerations in setting reserve assumptions for workers’ compensation, bodily injury and other liability lines. We are also monitoring the continued advancements in technology and design found in automobiles and homes and the increased claims settlement costs that result from repairs or replacement of such equipment. Estimated increases are reflected in our current reserve estimates, but continued increases are expected to contribute to increased losses and LAE in the future.
We are also defendants in various litigation matters, including putative class actions, which may seek punitive damages, bad faith or extra-contractual damages, legal fees and interest, or claim a broader scope of policy coverage or settlement and payment obligations than our interpretation. Resolution of these cases is often highly unpredictable and could involve material unanticipated damage awards. We have experienced, and others in the industry have reported, increased attorney involvement in claims including COVID-19-related matters, delayed submissions of medical and other expense claims, and a trend toward higher valued settlements and litigation, all of which contribute to uncertainty regarding reserve estimates.
Loss and LAE Reserves by Line of Business
Reserving Process Overview
Our loss reserves include amounts related to short-tail and long-tail classes of business. “Tail” refers to the time period between the occurrence of a loss and the final settlement of the claim. The longer the time span between the incidence of a loss and the settlement of the claim (i.e., a longer tail), the more the ultimate settlement amount may likely vary from our original estimate.
Short-tail classes consist principally of automobile physical and property damage, homeowners property, commercial property and marine business. For these property coverages, claims are generally reported and settled shortly after the loss occurs because the claims relate to tangible property and are more likely to be discovered shortly after the loss occurs. Consequently, the estimation of loss reserves for these classes is generally less complex.
While we estimate that approximately half of our written premium is in what we would characterize as shorter-tail classes of business, most of our loss reserves relate to longer-tail liability classes of business. Long-tailed classes include automobile liability, commercial liability, third-party coverage and workers’ compensation. For many liability claims, significant periods of time, ranging up to several years or more, may elapse between the occurrence of the loss, the discovery and reporting of the loss to us and the settlement of the claim. As a result, loss experience in the more recent accident years for long-tailed liability coverage has limited statistical credibility because a relatively small proportion of losses in these accident years (the calendar years in which losses are incurred) are reported claims and an even smaller proportion are paid losses. Liability claims are also more susceptible to litigation and can be significantly affected by changing contract interpretations, the legal, political and social environment, the risk and expense of protracted litigation and inflation. Consequently, the estimation of loss reserves for these coverages is more complex and typically subject to a higher degree of variability and uncertainty compared to short-tailed coverages.
Most of our indirect business from our run-off voluntary and ongoing involuntary pools is assumed long-tailed casualty reinsurance. Reserve estimates for this business are therefore subject to the variability caused by extended loss emergence periods. The estimation of loss reserves for this business is further complicated by delays between the time the claim is reported to the ceding insurer and when it is reported by the ceding insurer to the pool manager and then to us, and by our dependence on the quality and consistency of the loss reporting by the ceding company and actuarial estimates by the pool manager. These reserving factors also apply to our discontinued assumed accident and health reinsurance pools and arrangements that are included in our liabilities of discontinued life businesses (See “Risk Factors” in Part I - Item 1A for further discussion).
A review of loss reserves for each of the classes of business in which we write is conducted regularly, generally quarterly. This review process takes into consideration a variety of trends that impact the ultimate settlement of claims. Where appropriate, the review includes a review of overall payment patterns and the emergence of paid and reported losses relative to expectations.
The loss reserve estimation process relies on the basic assumption that past experience, adjusted for the effects of current developments and likely trends, is an appropriate basis for predicting future outcomes. As part of this process, we use a variety of analytical methods that consider experience, trends and other relevant factors. IBNR reserves are generally calculated by first projecting the ultimate cost of all claims that have been reported or expected to be reported in the future and then subtracting reported losses and loss expenses. Reported losses include cumulative paid losses and loss expenses plus case reserves. Within the loss reserving process, standard actuarial methods which include: (1) loss development factor methods; (2) expected loss methods (Bornheutter-Ferguson); and (3) adjusted loss methods (Berquist-Sherman), are given due consideration. These methods are described below:
•
Loss development factor methods generally assume that the losses yet to emerge for an accident year are proportional to the paid or reported loss amount observed to date. Historical patterns of the development of paid and reported losses by accident year can be predictive of the expected future patterns that are applied to current paid and reported losses to generate estimated ultimate losses by accident year.
•
Bornheutter-Ferguson methods utilize the product of the expected ultimate losses times the proportion of ultimate losses estimated to be unreported or unpaid to calculate IBNR. The expected ultimate losses are based upon current estimates of ultimate losses from prior accident years, adjusted to reflect expected earned premium, current rating, claims cost levels and changes in business mix. The expected losses, and corresponding loss ratios, are a critical component of Bornheutter-Ferguson methodologies and provide a general reasonability guide.
•
Berquist-Sherman methods are used for estimating reserves in business lines where historical development patterns may be deemed less reliable for more recent accident years’ ultimate losses. Under these methods, patterns of historical paid or reported losses are first adjusted to reflect current payment settlement patterns and case reserve adequacy and then evaluated in the same manner as the loss development factor methods described above. When the adequacy of case reserves change, the Berquist-Sherman incurred method may be deemed more reliable than the reported loss development factor method. Likewise, when the settlement patterns change, the Berquist-Sherman paid method may be deemed more reliable than the paid loss development factor method.
In addition to the methods described above, various tailored reserving methodologies are used for certain businesses. For example, for some low volume and high volatility classes of business, special reserving techniques are utilized that estimate IBNR by selecting the loss ratio that balances actual reported losses to expected reported losses as defined by the estimated underlying reporting pattern. Also, for some classes with long exposure periods (e.g., construction defect, engineering and surety), earnings patterns plus an estimated reporting lag applied to the Bornheutter-Ferguson initial expected loss ratio are used to estimate IBNR. This is done in order to reflect the changing average exposure periods by policy year (and consequently accident year).
In completing the loss reserve analysis, a variety of assumptions must be made for each line of business, coverage and accident year. Each estimation method has its own pattern, parameter and/or judgmental dependencies, with no estimation method being better than the others in all situations. The relative strengths and weaknesses of the various estimation methods, when applied to a particular class of business, can also change over time, depending on the underlying circumstances. In many cases, multiple estimation methods will be valid for the particular facts and circumstances of the relevant class of business. The manner of application and the degree of reliance on a given method will vary by line of business and coverage, and by accident year based on an evaluation of the above dependencies and the potential volatility of the loss frequency and severity patterns. The estimation methods selected or given weight at a particular valuation date are those that are believed to produce the most reliable indication for the loss reserves being evaluated. Selections incorporate input from claims personnel, pricing actuaries, and underwriting management on loss cost trends and other factors that could affect ultimate losses.
For most classes of shorter-tailed business in our Commercial and Personal Lines segments, the emergence of paid and incurred losses generally exhibits a relatively stable pattern of loss development from one accident year to the next. Thus, for these classes, the loss development factor method is generally appropriate. For many of the classes of shorter-tailed business, the emergence of paid and incurred losses may exhibit a relatively volatile pattern of loss development from one accident year to the next. In certain cases where there is a relatively low level of reliability placed on the available paid and incurred loss data, expected loss methods or adjusted loss methods are considered appropriate for the most recent accident year.
For longer-tailed lines of business, applying the loss development factor method often requires even more judgment in selecting development factors, as well as more significant extrapolation. For those long-tailed lines of business with high frequency and relatively low per-loss severity (e.g., personal automobile liability), volatility will often be sufficiently modest for the loss development factor method to be given significant weight, even in the most recent accident years, but expected loss methods and adjusted loss methods are always considered and frequently utilized in the selection process. For those long-tailed lines of business with low frequency and high loss potential (e.g., commercial general liability), anticipated loss experience is less predictable because of the small number of claims and erratic claim severity patterns. In these situations, the loss development factor methods may not produce a reliable estimate of ultimate losses in the most recent accident years since many claims either have not yet been reported or are only in the early stages of the settlement process. Therefore, the loss reserve estimates for these accident years may be based on methods less reliant on extrapolation, such as Bornheutter-Ferguson. Over time, as a greater number of claims are reported and the
statistical credibility of loss experience increases, loss development factor methods or adjusted loss methods are given increasing weight.
Management endeavors to apply as much available data as practicable to estimate the loss reserve amount for each line of business, coverage and accident year, utilizing varying assumptions, projections and methods. The ultimate outcome is expected to fall within a range of potential outcomes around this loss reserve estimated amount.
Our carried reserves for each line of business and coverage are determined based on our quarterly loss reserving process. In making the determination, we consider numerous quantitative and qualitative factors. Quantitative factors include changes in reserve estimates in the period, the maturity of the accident year, trends observed over the recent past, the level of volatility within a particular class of business, the estimated effects of reinsurance, including reinstatement premiums, general economic trends and other factors. Qualitative factors may include legal and regulatory developments, changes in claim handling and case reserving practices, recent entry into new markets or products, changes in underwriting practices or business mix, concerns that we do not have sufficient or quality historical reported and paid loss and LAE information with respect to a particular line or segment of our business, effects of the economy and political outlook, perceived anomalies in the historical results, evolving trends or other factors such as the impact of the Pandemic. In doing so, we must evaluate whether a change in the data represents credible actionable information or an anomaly. Such an assessment requires considerable judgment. Even if a change is determined to be apparent, it is not always possible to determine the extent of the change. As a result, there can be a time lag between the emergence of a change and a determination that the change should be partially or fully reflected in the carried loss reserves. In general, changes are made more quickly to reserves for more mature accident years and less volatile classes of business.
Reserving Process Uncertainties
As stated above, numerous factors (both internal and external) contribute to the inherent uncertainty in the process of establishing loss reserves, including changes in the rate of inflation for goods and services related to insured damages (e.g., medical care, home repairs, etc.), changes in the judicial interpretation of policy provisions and settlement obligations, changes in the general attitude of juries in determining damage awards, legislative actions, such as expanding liability, coverage mandates or expanding or suspending statutes of limitations which otherwise limit the times within which claims can be made, changes in the extent of insured injuries, changes in the trend of expected frequency and/or severity of claims, changes in our book of business (e.g., change in mix due to new or modified product offerings, new or rapidly expanding geographic areas, etc.), changes in our underwriting practices and changes in claim handling procedures and/or systems. Regarding our indirect business from voluntary and involuntary pools, we are periodically provided loss estimates by managers of each pool. We adopt reserve estimates for the pools that consider this information and other facts.
In addition, we must consider the uncertain effects of emerging or potential claims and coverage issues that arise as legal, judicial, social conditions, political risks and economic conditions change. For example, claims which we consider closed may be re-opened as additional damages surface or new liability or damage theories are presented. Also, historically, we have observed more frequent and higher severity in workers’ compensation, bodily injury and other liability claims and more credit related losses (for example, in our surety business) during periods of economic uncertainty or high unemployment. These, and other issues, could have a negative effect on our loss reserves by either extending coverage beyond the original underwriting intent or by increasing the number or size of claims.
As part of our loss reserving analysis, we consider the various factors that contribute to the uncertainty in the loss reserving process. Those factors that could materially affect our loss reserve estimates include loss development patterns and loss cost trends, reporting lags, rate and exposure level changes, the effects of changes in coverage and policy limits, business mix shifts, the effects of regulatory and legislative developments, economic circumstances, the effects of changes in judicial interpretations, the effects of emerging claims and coverage issues and the effects of changes in claim handling and claim reserving practices. In making estimates of reserves, however, we do not necessarily make an explicit assumption for each of these factors. Moreover, all estimation methods do not utilize the same assumptions and typically no single method is determinative in the reserve analysis for a line of business and coverage. Consequently, changes in our loss reserve estimates generally are not the result of changes in any one assumption. Instead, the variability will be affected by the interplay of changes in numerous assumptions, many of which are implicit to the approaches used.
For each line of business and coverage, we regularly adjust the assumptions and methods used in the estimation of loss reserves in response to our actual loss experience, as well as our judgments regarding changes in trends and/or emerging patterns. In those instances where we primarily utilize analyses of historical patterns of the development of paid and reported losses, this may be reflected, for example, in the selection of revised loss development factors. In longer-tailed classes of business and for which loss experience is less predictable due to potential changes in judicial interpretations, potential legislative actions, the cost of litigation or determining liability and the ultimate loss, inflation, potential claims and other issues, this may be reflected in a judgmental change in our estimate of ultimate losses for particular accident years. Most of the insurance policies we have written over many years are written on an “occurrence” basis, which means we insure specified acts or events which occurred during the covered period, even if claims first arise from such events many years later. For example, the industry incurred significant losses as a result of claims arising
from asbestos and environmental damage which occurred decades ago and was not known at such time, and in many cases policy limits were available for each year during which such occurrence policies were in place.
The impact of the Pandemic could have a material adverse effect on our carried loss reserves. While we believe that our in-force Commercial Lines policies in large part do not cover business interruption losses related to the Pandemic, legislation has been discussed and introduced to retroactively amend insurance contracts to provide business interruption coverage, to impose presumptions on insurance policy interpretation, and/or limit policy exclusions for losses allegedly related to the Pandemic. If these changes were to be enacted and upheld, we would be exposed to a significant unfunded liability.
The future impact of the various factors that contribute to the uncertainty in the loss reserving process is impossible to predict. There is potential for significant variation in the development of loss reserves, particularly for long-tailed classes of business and classes of business that are more vulnerable to economic or political risks.
Reserving Process for Catastrophe Events
The estimation of claims and claims expense reserves for catastrophes also comprises estimates of losses from reported claims and IBNR, primarily for damage to property. In general, our estimates for catastrophe reserves are determined on an event basis by considering various sources of available information, including specific loss estimates reported to us based on claim adjuster inspections, overall industry loss estimates, our internal data regarding exposures related to the geographical location of the event and estimates of potential subrogation recoveries. However, depending on the nature of the catastrophe, the estimation process can be further complicated by other impediments. For example, for hurricanes, other severe wind storms and wildfires, complications often include the inability of insureds to promptly report losses, delays in the ability of claims adjusting staff to inspect losses, difficulties in determining whether wind storm losses are covered by our homeowners policy (generally for damage caused by wind or wind driven rain) or are specifically excluded from coverage caused by flood, and challenges in estimating additional living expenses, assessing the impact of demand surge, exposure to mold or smoke damage and the effects of numerous other considerations. Another example is the complication of estimating the cost of business interruption coverage on Commercial Lines policies. Estimates for catastrophes which occur at or near the end of a financial reporting period may be even less reliable since we will have less claims data available and little time to complete our estimation process. In such situations, we may adapt our practices to accommodate the circumstances.
For events designated as catastrophes, we generally calculate IBNR reserves directly as a result of an estimated IBNR claim count and an estimated average claim amount for each event. Such an assessment involves a comprehensive analysis of the nature of the event, of policyholder exposures within the affected geographic area and of available claims intelligence. Depending on the nature of the event, available claims intelligence could include surveys of field claims associates within the affected geographic area, aerial photographs of the affected area, feedback from a catastrophe claims team sent into the area, as well as data on claims reported as of the financial statement date. In addition, loss emergence from similar historical events is compared to the estimated IBNR for our current catastrophe events to help assess the reasonableness of our estimates. However, in some cases, it may be difficult to estimate certain catastrophe losses which are unique and do not have instances of historical precedence, such as the property damage arising from the 2020 riots and civil unrest.
Reserving Sensitivity Analysis
The following discussion presents disclosure related to possible variation in net reserve estimates (i.e., net of estimated reinsurance recoverables) due to changes in key assumptions. This information is provided for illustrative purposes only. Many other assumptions may also lead to material reserve adjustments. If any such variations do occur, then they would likely occur over a period of several years and therefore their impact on our results of operations would be recognized during the same periods. It is important to note, however, that there is the potential for future variations greater than the amounts described below and for any such variations to be recognized in a single quarterly or annual period. No consideration has been given to potential correlation or lack of correlation among key assumptions or among lines of business and coverage as described below. As a result, and because there are so many other factors which affect our net reserve estimate, it would be inappropriate to take the amounts described below and simply add them together in an attempt to estimate volatility in total. While we believe these are reasonably possible scenarios, the reader should not consider the following sensitivity analysis as illustrative of a net reserve range.
•
Personal and Commercial Automobile Bodily Injury - loss reserves recorded for bodily injury on voluntary business were $769.9 million as of December 31, 2020. A key assumption for bodily injury is the inflation rate underlying the estimated reserve. A five point change (e.g., 4% changed to 9% or -1%) in the embedded inflation rate would have changed total reserves by approximately $71 million, either positive or negative, respectively, at December 31, 2020.
•
Personal Automobile Personal Injury Protection Medical Payment - loss reserves recorded for personal injury protection medical payment on voluntary business were $148.5 million as of December 31, 2020, of which approximately 95% relates to Michigan policies. A key assumption for this coverage is the inflation rate underlying the estimated reserve. Given the long reporting pattern for this line of business, an additional key assumption is the amount of additional development required to reach full maturity, thereby reflecting ultimate costs, as represented by the tail factor. A five point change in the embedded inflation rate and a one point change to the tail factor assumption (e.g., 2% changed to 1%
or 3%) would have changed total reserves by approximately $52 million, either positive or negative, at December 31, 2020.
•
Workers’ Compensation - loss reserves recorded for workers’ compensation on voluntary business were $448.0 million as of December 31, 2020. A key assumption for workers’ compensation is the inflation rate underlying the estimated reserve. Given the long reporting pattern for this line of business, an additional key assumption is the amount of additional development required to reach full maturity, thereby reflecting ultimate costs, as represented by the tail factor. A five point change in the embedded inflation rate and a one point change to the tail factor assumption would have changed total reserves by approximately $132 million, either positive or negative, at December 31, 2020.
•
Monoline and Multiple Peril General Liability - loss reserves recorded for monoline and multiple peril general liability on voluntary business were $899.8 million as of December 31, 2020. A key assumption for monoline and multiple peril general liability is the implied adequacy of the underlying case reserves. A ten point change in case adequacy (e.g., 10% deficiency changed to 0% or 20% deficiency) would have changed total reserves by approximately $99 million, either positive or negative, at December 31, 2020.
•
Specialty Programs - loss reserves recorded for Hanover Programs were $361.3 million as of December 31, 2020. Two key assumptions underlying the actuarial reserve analysis for specialty programs are the inflation rate underlying the estimated reserve for our commercial automobile liability, general liability and workers' compensation coverages, as well as the tail factor selection for workers' compensation. A five point change to the embedded inflation rate for the aforementioned coverages, and a one point change in the workers' compensation tail factor on Hanover Programs would have changed total reserves by approximately $49 million at December 31, 2020.
Carried Reserves and Reserve Rollforward
The following table provides a reconciliation of the gross beginning and ending reserve for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses.
The following table summarizes the gross reserve for losses and LAE by line of business.
“Other commercial lines - Other lines” in the table above, is primarily comprised of our fidelity and crime line of business. Loss and LAE reserves in our “Total Other Segment” relate to our run-off voluntary assumed reinsurance pools business.
Prior Year Development
Conditions and trends that have affected reserve development in the past will not necessarily recur in the future. As discussed under “Reserving Process Overview” in the preceding section, our historical loss experience and loss development patterns are important factors in estimating loss reserves, however, they are not the only factors we evaluate to establish reserves. Therefore, a mechanical application of standard actuarial methodologies in projecting ultimate claims could result in materially different reserves to those held. Accordingly, it is not appropriate to extrapolate future favorable or unfavorable development based on amounts experienced in prior periods.
The following table summarizes prior year (favorable) unfavorable development by segment for the periods indicated:
Catastrophe Loss Development
In 2020, favorable catastrophe development was $17.1 million, primarily due to lower than expected losses related to certain 2017, 2018, and 2019 wind storms, winter storms and hurricanes and the 2017 and 2018 California wildfires. In 2019, favorable catastrophe development was $27.5 million, primarily due to lower than expected losses related to the 2017 and 2018 California wildfires, including the sale of subrogation rights on certain California wildfire losses, and the 2018 hurricane Florence. In 2018, favorable catastrophe development was $9.3 million, primarily due to lower than expected losses related to the 2017 hurricanes Harvey, Irma and Maria and California wildfires.
Loss and LAE Development, excluding catastrophes
The following table provides a summary of unfavorable/(favorable) loss and LAE reserve development, excluding catastrophes.
2020 Loss and LAE Development, excluding catastrophes
In 2020, net favorable loss and LAE development, excluding catastrophes, was $15.5 million. Commercial Lines favorable development of $19.0 million was primarily due to lower than expected losses of $36.0 million within the workers’ compensation line in accident years 2016 through 2019. This was partially offset by higher than expected losses in our commercial automobile line driven by higher bodily injury and personal protection losses, primarily in accident years 2017 through 2019, and the commercial multiple peril line, primarily in accident years 2017 and 2019. Within other commercial lines, lower than expected losses in our marine line, in accident years 2017 through 2019 and specialty industrial property lines were partially offset by higher than expected losses in the general liability coverages within Hanover Programs. In addition, the adverse prior development in our Other Segment was due to our run-off voluntary assumed property and casualty reinsurance pools business primarily based on an updated third-party actuarial study received in the first quarter of 2020 for the legacy Excess and Casualty Reinsurance Association (“ECRA”) pool that consists primarily of asbestos and environmental exposures.
2019 Loss and LAE Development, excluding catastrophes
In 2019, net favorable loss and LAE development, excluding catastrophes, was $0.9 million. Commercial Lines favorable development of $28.7 million was primarily due to lower than expected losses of $32.6 million within the workers’ compensation line in accident years 2015 through 2018, and lower than expected losses in our commercial multiple peril line, primarily in accident years 2015 through 2016, partially offset by higher than expected losses in our commercial automobile and other commercial lines. Higher than expected losses in the commercial automobile line was driven by higher bodily injury severity and personal injury protection in accident years 2016 through 2017. Within other commercial lines, higher than expected losses of $24.6 million in Hanover Programs, primarily in accident years 2011, 2013, 2015, and 2017, was partially offset by lower than expected losses in our general liability, marine and surety lines. Personal Lines unfavorable development of $26.6 million was primarily due to higher than expected losses of $22.0 million in the personal automobile line, driven by bodily injury severity and personal injury protection in accident years 2016 through 2017. In addition, Other Segment unfavorable development of $1.2 million was due to adverse loss trends in our run-off voluntary assumed property and casualty reinsurance pools business which includes asbestos and environmental reserves.
2018 Loss and LAE Development, excluding catastrophes
In 2018, net unfavorable loss and LAE development, excluding catastrophes, was $0.4 million. Commercial Lines favorable development of $34.1 million was primarily due to lower than expected losses of $31.0 million within the workers’ compensation line in accident years 2015 through 2017, and $25.1 million in other commercial lines, partially offset by higher than expected losses of $23.2 million in the commercial automobile line, driven by higher bodily injury severity in the 2014, 2016 and 2017 accident years. Within other commercial lines, lower than expected losses in our general liability lines, related to the 2014 through 2016 accident years, and our surety line in accident years 2015 and 2017, was partially offset by higher than expected losses in Hanover Programs, primarily in accident years 2010 through 2014. Personal Lines unfavorable development of $33.3 million was primarily due to higher than expected losses within the homeowners line in accident years 2015 through 2017, and in the personal automobile line, driven by bodily injury severity in the 2016 accident year and, to a lesser extent, the 2015 accident year. In addition, Other segment unfavorable
development of $1.2 million was due to adverse loss trends in our run-off voluntary assumed property and casualty reinsurance pools business which includes asbestos and environmental reserves.
Asbestos and Environmental Reserves
As of December 31, 2020, we have $39.8 million of net asbestos and environmental reserves, comprised of $8.3 million of direct reserves and $31.5 million of assumed reinsurance pool reserves. This compares to net reserves of $37.9 million and $38.9 million as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Ending loss and LAE reserves for all direct business written by our property and casualty companies related to asbestos and environmental damage liability were $8.3 million, $8.4 million and $8.9 million, net of reinsurance of $17.9 million, $17.6 million and $18.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Activity for our direct asbestos and environmental reserves was not significant to our 2020, 2019 or 2018 financial results. As a result of our historical direct underwriting mix of Commercial Lines policies toward smaller and middle market risks, past asbestos and environmental damage liability loss experience has remained minimal in relation to our total loss and LAE incurred experience. Although we attempt to limit our exposures to asbestos and environmental damage liability through specific policy exclusions, we have been and may continue to be subject to claims related to these exposures.
In addition to reserves we carry to cover exposure in our direct business, we have established gross and net loss and LAE reserves for assumed reinsurance pool business with asbestos and environmental damage liability of $31.5 million, $29.5 million and $30.0 million at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. These reserves relate to pools in which we have terminated our participation; however, we continue to be subject to claims related to years in which we were a participant. Results of operations from these pools are included in our Other segment. A significant part of our pool reserves relates to our participation in the ECRA voluntary pool from 1950 to 1982. In 1982, the pool was dissolved and since that time, the business has been in run-off. Our percentage of the total pool liabilities varied from 1% to 6% during these years. Our participation in this pool has resulted in average paid losses of approximately $2 million annually over the past ten years. In the first quarter of 2020, we received an updated third-party actuarial study for the ECRA voluntary pool which resulted in the aforementioned modest increase in our asbestos and environmental reserves.
We estimate our ultimate liability for asbestos, environmental and toxic tort liability claims, whether resulting from direct business, assumed reinsurance or pool business, based upon currently known facts, reasonable assumptions where the facts are not known, current law and methodologies currently available. Although these outstanding claims are not believed to be significant, their existence gives rise to uncertainty and are discussed because of the possibility that they may become significant. We believe that, notwithstanding the evolution of case law expanding liability in asbestos and environmental claims, recorded reserves related to these claims are adequate. Nevertheless, the asbestos, environmental and toxic tort liability reserves could be revised, and any such revisions could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations for a particular quarterly or annual period or on our financial position.
INVESTMENTS
INVESTMENT RESULTS
Net investment income before income taxes was as follows:
The decrease in net investment income in 2020 was primarily due to the impact of lower new money yields, the deployment of cash during 2019 for accelerated share repurchases and special dividends, and lower limited partnership income. These decreases were partially offset by the continued investment of operational cash flows. In 2019, the increase in net investment income was primarily due to the continued investment of operational cash flows and the investment of proceeds from the sale of Chaucer, partially offset by lower limited partnership income and the impact of lower new money yields. We expect average fixed income yields to continue to decline as new money rates remain lower than embedded book yields.
INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO
We held cash and investment assets diversified across several asset classes, as follows:
CASH AND INVESTMENTS
Total cash and investments increased $755.0 million, or 9.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to operational cash flows, net proceeds from our senior debt issuance in August 2020 and market value appreciation. These increases were partially offset by the funding of financing activities, including our stock repurchases, debt retirement and dividend payments.
The following table provides information about the investment types of our fixed maturities portfolio:
The increase in net unrealized gains on fixed maturities was primarily due to lower prevailing interest rates.
Amortized cost and fair value by rating category were as follows:
Based on ratings by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (“NAIC”), approximately 96% and 95% of our fixed maturity portfolio consisted of investment grade securities at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The quality of our fixed maturity portfolio remains strong based on ratings, capital structure position, support through guarantees, underlying security, issuer diversification and yield curve position.
Our investment portfolio primarily consists of fixed maturity securities whose fair value is susceptible to market risk, including interest rate changes. See also “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk”. Duration is a measurement used to quantify our inherent interest rate risk and analyze invested assets relative to our reserve liabilities.
The duration of our fixed maturity portfolio was as follows:
Our fixed maturity and equity securities are carried at fair value. Financial instruments whose value was determined using significant management judgment or estimation constituted less than 1% of the total assets we measured at fair value. See also Note 5 - “Fair Value” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Equity securities primarily consist of U.S. income-oriented large capitalization common stocks and developed market equity index and corporate bond exchange-traded funds.
Mortgage and other loans consist primarily of commercial mortgage loan participations, which represent our interest in commercial mortgage loans originated by a third-party. We share, on a pro-rata basis, in all related cash flows of the underlying mortgage loans, which are investment-grade quality and diversified by geographic area and property type.
Other investments consist primarily of our interest in corporate middle market and real estate limited partnerships. Corporate middle market limited partnerships may invest in senior or subordinated debt, preferred or common equity or a combination thereof, of privately-held middle market businesses. Real estate limited partnerships hold equity ownership positions in real properties and invest in debt secured by real properties. Our limited partnerships are generally accounted for under the equity method, or as a practical expedient using the fund’s net asset value, with financial information provided by the partnership on a two or three month lag.
Although we expect to invest new funds primarily in investment grade fixed maturities, we have invested, and expect to continue to invest, a portion of funds in limited partnerships, common equity securities, below investment grade fixed maturities and other investment assets.
We deposit funds with various state and governmental authorities. See Note 3 - “Investments” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
IMPAIRMENTS
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we recognized in earnings $26.3 million, $2.0 million and $4.6 million, respectively, of impairments. In 2020, impairments primarily consisted of $17.6 million on fixed maturities, primarily relating to intend-to-sell securities, and $6.7 million of estimated credit losses on mortgage loans. In 2019, impairments consisted entirely of corporate fixed maturity securities. In 2018, impairments consisted of $2.6 million on fixed maturities and $2.0 million on other invested assets.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the allowance for credit losses on mortgage loans was $7.9 million and $1.3 million, respectively. The allowance for credit losses on available-for-sale securities was $0.1 million at December 31, 2020. There was no allowance for credit losses on available-for-sale securities at December 31, 2019.
The carrying values of fixed maturity securities on non-accrual status at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were not material. The effects of non-accruals compared with amounts that would have been recognized in accordance with the original terms of the fixed maturities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were also not material. Any defaults in the fixed maturities portfolio in future periods may negatively affect investment income.
UNREALIZED LOSSES
Gross unrealized losses on fixed maturities at December 31, 2020 were $3.3 million, a decrease of $4.3 million compared to December 31, 2019, primarily attributable to lower prevailing interest rates. At December 31, 2020, gross unrealized losses consisted
primarily of $2.0 million on U.S. government securities, $0.6 million on residential mortgage-backed securities and $0.4 million on corporate fixed maturities. See also Note 3 - “Investments” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
We view gross unrealized losses on fixed maturities as non-credit related since it is our assessment that these securities will recover, allowing us to realize their anticipated long-term economic value. Further, we do not intend to sell, nor is it more likely than not we will be required to sell, such debt securities before this expected recovery of amortized cost (see also “Liquidity and Capital Resources”). Inherent in our assessment are the risks that market factors may differ from our expectations; the global economic downturn resulting from the Pandemic is longer and more severe than current expectations; we may decide to subsequently sell a security for unforeseen business needs; or changes in the credit assessment from our original assessment may lead us to determine that a sale at the current value would maximize recovery on such investments. To the extent that there are such adverse changes, an impairment would be recognized as a realized loss. Although unrealized losses on fixed maturities are not reflected in the results of financial operations until they are realized, the fair value of the underlying investment, which does reflect the unrealized loss, is reflected in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
The following table sets forth gross unrealized losses for fixed maturities by maturity period at December 31, 2020 and 2019. Actual maturities may differ from contractual maturities because borrowers may have the right to call or prepay obligations, with or without call or prepayment penalties, or we may have the right to put or sell the obligations back to the issuers.
Our investment portfolio and shareholders’ equity can be significantly impacted by changes in market values of our securities. Market volatility could increase and defaults on fixed income securities could occur. As a result, we could incur additional realized and unrealized losses in future periods, which could have a material adverse impact on our results of operations and/or financial position.
During 2020, the Pandemic resulted in widespread economic disruption due to various government-mandated emergency orders, consumer and business uncertainty, and forced business closures. Financial markets have substantially recovered from the significant declines experienced earlier in the year; however, the timing and strength of an economic recovery remains uncertain as global infection rates remain elevated and approval, production and distribution of vaccines will be phased in over time. Unemployment rates remain elevated, the number of companies issuing forward guidance remains below average, several foreign countries have placed restrictions on travel by U.S. citizens and many small businesses remain closed. The U.S. government and its agencies have taken extraordinary measures to stabilize the economy through fiscal policy actions, such as passage of the CARES Act and other bills that will provide trillions of dollars in economic support. These actions have largely muted the recessionary dynamics that occur in a downturn and have supported a strong but uneven recovery in labor markets. In addition, because the Pandemic still poses downside risks to economic activity and labor markets over the medium term, U.S. government officials are working toward another round of fiscal policy actions to support the economy and the flow of credit to households and businesses experiencing the greatest financial impact from the Pandemic. It is unclear whether such actions will be sufficient to support continued economic recovery in 2021 and in the intermediate term, and what long-term effects such unprecedented actions will ultimately have on our investment portfolio.
Due to the Pandemic, global monetary policies remain extremely accommodative in support of financial market stability. Major central banks have lowered interest rates, relaxed collateral requirements and instituted various asset purchase programs to stabilize financial markets and support economic growth. In the U.S., for example, the Federal Reserve (the “Fed”) is maintaining its federal funds target range at 0% to 0.25% and is conducting unprecedented quantities of asset purchases.
Fundamental conditions in certain corporate sectors directly impacted by the Pandemic, such as energy, lodging, restaurant and transportation services, have deteriorated. While market values have recovered with government fiscal and monetary support, the value of our holdings of related fixed maturities in these sectors remain most at risk in the near term. We may experience defaults on fixed income securities, particularly with respect to non-investment grade debt securities. Although we perform rigorous credit analysis of our fixed income investments, it is difficult to foresee which issuers, industries or markets will be most affected. As a result, the value of our fixed maturity portfolio could change rapidly in ways we cannot currently anticipate, and we could incur additional realized and unrealized losses in future periods.
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
INTEREST RATE SENSITIVITY
The valuation of the investment portfolio is subject to risk resulting from interest rate fluctuations, which may adversely impact the valuation of the investment portfolio. In a rising interest rate environment, the value of the fixed maturity sector, which comprises approximately 83% of our investment portfolio, may decline as a result of decreases in the fair value of the securities. Our intent is to hold securities to maturity and recover the decline in valuation as prices accrete to par. However, our intent may change prior to maturity due to changes in the financial markets, our analysis of an issuer’s credit metrics and prospects, or as a result of changes in cash flow needs. Interest rate fluctuations may also reduce net investment income and, as a result, profitability. The portfolio may realize lower yields and therefore lower net investment income on securities because securities with prepayment and call features may prepay at a different rate than originally projected. In an increasing rate environment, the duration of our fixed maturity portfolio could lengthen as issuers choose not to exercise their option to call or prepay their debt. For this and other reasons, funds may not be available to invest at higher interest rates.
In a declining interest rate environment, prepayments and calls may increase as issuers exercise their option to refinance at lower rates. The resulting funds would be reinvested at lower yields.
The following table illustrates the estimated impact on the fair value of our fixed maturity portfolio at December 31, 2020 and 2019 of hypothetical changes in prevailing interest rates, defined as changes in interest rates on U.S. Treasury debt. It does not reflect changes in credit spreads, liquidity spreads and other factors that also affect the value of securities. Since changes in prevailing interest rates are often accompanied by changes in these other factors, the reader should not assume that an actual change in interest rates would result in the values illustrated.
Our overall investment strategy is intended to balance investment income with credit and interest rate risk, while maintaining sufficient liquidity and the opportunity for capital growth. The asset allocation process takes into consideration the types of business written and the level of surplus required to support our different businesses and the risk return profiles of the underlying asset classes. We look to balance the goals of capital preservation, net investment income stability, liquidity and total return.
The majority of our assets are invested in the fixed income markets. Through fundamental research and credit analysis, with a focus on value investing, our investment professionals seek to identify a portfolio of stable income-producing higher quality U.S. government, foreign government, municipal, corporate, residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities and asset-backed securities. We have a general policy of diversifying investments both within and across major investment and industrial sectors to mitigate credit and interest rate risk. We monitor the credit quality of our investments and our exposure to individual markets, borrowers, industries, sectors and, in the case of commercial mortgage-backed securities and commercial mortgage loan participations, property types and geographic locations. In addition, we currently carry debt that is subject to interest rate risk, which was issued at fixed interest rates between 2.50% and 8.207%. Current market conditions, in light of our risk tolerance, restrict our ability to invest fixed income assets at similar rates of return; therefore, earnings on a similar level of assets are not sufficient to cover current debt interest costs.
EQUITY PRICE RISK
Our equity securities portfolio is exposed to equity price risk arising from potential volatility in equity market prices. Portfolio characteristics are analyzed regularly and price risk is actively managed through a variety of techniques. A hypothetical increase or decrease of 10% in the market price of our equity securities would have resulted in an increase or decrease in the fair value of the equity securities portfolio of approximately $60 million at December 31, 2020 and $58 million at December 31, 2019, which amounts, after taxes, would be reported in net income.
OTHER ITEMS
Net income also included the following items:
We manage investment assets for our Commercial Lines, Personal Lines and Other segments based on the requirements of our combined property and casualty companies. We allocate the investment income, expenses and realized gains and losses to our Commercial Lines, Personal Lines and Other segments based on actuarial information related to the underlying businesses. We managed investment assets separately for our former Chaucer business.
Net realized and unrealized investment gains were $5.0 million and $109.4 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, compared to net realized and unrealized investment losses of $50.7 million in 2018. Net realized and unrealized investment gains in 2020 were primarily due to net realized gains from sales and other of $17.9 million and, to a lesser extent, appreciation in the fair value of our equity securities of $13.4 million, partially offset by impairment losses on investments. Net realized and unrealized investment gains in 2019 were primarily due to $106.5 million of appreciation in the fair value of our equity securities. Net realized and unrealized investment losses in 2018 were primarily due to $43.4 million of losses from the net change in the fair value of equity securities. The change in the fair value of equity securities in both 2019 and 2018 resulted from prevailing market conditions. Additionally, in 2018 we recognized $4.6 million of OTTI losses and $2.7 million of losses recognized from the sale of securities, primarily fixed maturities.
In 2020, we repurchased all of our outstanding 6.35% subordinated debentures due March 30, 2053 with a net carrying value of $168.9 million, at a cost of $175.0 million, resulting in a pre-tax loss of $6.1 million. Additionally, in 2020 we repurchased a portion of our 7.625% senior debentures with a net carrying value of $0.8 million.
At December 31, 2018, we had informed the Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”) of our intent to repay a $125 million FHLB note due 2029 with a coupon of 5.5%, with settlement occurring on January 2, 2019. In the fourth quarter of 2018, we recorded a non-operating charge of $20.8 million after-taxes related to the pre-payment provision. Additionally, in 2018 we repurchased a portion of our 8.207% subordinated debentures with a net carrying value of $9.6 million at a cost of $11.5 million, resulting in a loss of $1.9 million.
Discontinued operations include our discontinued accident and health and life businesses as well as our former Chaucer operations. In 2020 and 2019, discontinued operations, in total, generated net losses of $3.3 million and $3.9 million, net of tax, respectively, primarily related to the long-term care pool in our discontinued accident and health business. In 2018, discontinued operations, in total, generated a gain of $152.0 million, net of tax, primarily related to the sale of the Chaucer business. See also “Discontinued Operations - Chaucer Business” below and Note 2 - “Discontinued Operations” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS - CHAUCER BUSINESS
Gain on Sale of Chaucer Business
On December 28, 2018, we completed the sale of Chaucer Holdings Limited to China Re and recognized a pre-tax gain on the sale of $174.4 million and an income tax expense of $42.5 million. THG paid customary transaction costs along with providing certain representations and warranties and agreeing to indemnify China Re for certain pre-sale contingent liabilities.
The following table summarizes the components of the estimated gain in 2018 related to the sale of the Chaucer business as of December 28, 2018. As discussed below the table, both the pre-tax gain and income tax expense were updated in 2019.
(1)
Initial consideration for Chaucer Holdings Limited as determined in the sales and purchase agreement was $779 million. This amount, along with $28 million in cash proceeds received from the sale of the Irish entity on February 14, 2019 and $13 million from the sale of the Australian entities on April 10, 2019, estimated contingent consideration of $31.7 million, and an $85 million pre-signing dividend from Chaucer that was received in the second quarter of 2018, resulted in expected total proceeds from the entire transaction of $936.7 million. These amounts were partially offset by $17.0 million paid to China Re to adjust the purchase price for amounts received by the Company from Chaucer prior to December 28, 2018.
(2)
Contingent proceeds, as reflected in the sales and purchase agreement, could have been up to $45 million and was determined based upon 2018 catastrophe losses. In 2018, our best estimate of contingent consideration was $31.7 million.
(3)
The carrying value of the Chaucer business reflects its U.S. GAAP book value at December 28, 2018, excluding $7.9 million of U.S.-related deferred tax assets that are no longer likely to be realized and therefore are reflected in the income tax expense category.
(4)
Transaction and other sale related costs primarily included brokerage, legal, actuarial, tax and other professional fees, employee retention costs, costs for the purchase of aggregate excess of loss catastrophe coverage in consideration of the contingent proceeds provision, along with certain other miscellaneous charges related to the execution of the transaction.
(5)
As part of the transaction, investments held by Chaucer were transferred to China Re resulting in the recognition of net realized investment losses that were previously reflected in accumulated other comprehensive income. Additionally, Chaucer’s deferred pension obligations and currency translation obligations previously recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income were recognized as losses associated with the transaction.
(6)
The income tax expense represented the current tax obligation on the sale and the derecognition of deferred tax assets that were no longer likely to be realized.
Included in the previously recorded $174.4 million gain was $31.7 million of contingent proceeds, which were subject to change, based on development of Chaucer’s 2018 catastrophe losses. During the first half of 2019, Chaucer experienced unfavorable development on its 2018 catastrophe losses, primarily due to higher than expected losses for hurricane Michael, Typhoon Jebi and a Colombian dam construction loss. Accordingly, we updated and reduced our best estimate of pre-tax contingent proceeds by $9.7 million. We received a cash payment of $22.0 million in final settlement of the contingent proceeds.
In addition, we recognized an income tax charge of $1.2 million in 2019 related to new tax regulations that were issued on June 14, 2019 by the U.S. Department of the Treasury, with an effective date retroactive to January 1, 2018. These new regulations retroactively changed the taxation of certain non-U.S. income. Although the impact of these regulations relates to the calculation of the income tax expense related to the sale of Chaucer, unlike the $42.5 million of income tax expense, noted above, that was reflected in discontinued operations, ASC 740, Income Taxes, prescribes that the effect of certain retroactive tax law changes be presented in continuing operations. Accordingly, we have presented this charge as a separate component of our non-operating items from continuing operations. (See also “Income Taxes” below). Additionally, in the third quarter of 2019, we recognized $3.4 million of tax benefits related to prior years.
On February 14, 2019, we completed the sale of our Chaucer-related Irish entity and on April 10, 2019, we finalized the sale of the Australian entities, completing the transfer of all Chaucer-related companies. Collectively, these entities constituted the Chaucer business in 2018 and prior, whereas just the Irish and Australian entities comprised the Chaucer business reported in our results in 2019, until their respective sales to China Re. The sale of the Irish entity provided total proceeds of $28 million and resulted in a pre-tax gain of $0.4 million, with a related income tax benefit of $0.5 million. The sale of the Australian entities for total proceeds of $13 million resulted in a pre-tax gain of $1.2 million and a related income tax expense of $0.1 million.
Income from Operations of Chaucer Business
During the year ended December 31, 2019, revenues from the portion of the Chaucer business remaining after the sale of the U.K. entities in 2018 was $6.7 million. Pre-tax operating losses in this business totaled $0.5 million during the same period, whereas this business provided after-tax income of $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Income from the Chaucer business in the year ended December 31, 2019 included a $2.0 million benefit related to a decrease in an uncertain tax position due to the expiration of the statute of limitations.
The following table summarizes the results of operations for Chaucer for 2018, reflecting the results of operations for the period in which we owned the Chaucer U.K. entities, which concluded with their sale on December 28, 2018.
INCOME TAXES
We are subject to the tax laws and regulations of the U.S. and foreign countries in which we operate or where we operated previously. We file a consolidated U.S. federal income tax return that includes our holding company and its U.S. subsidiaries. Generally, taxes are accrued at the U.S. statutory tax rate of 21% for income from the U.S. operations. Our primary non-U.S. jurisdiction was the U.K., until the sale of our Chaucer business, which completed on April 10, 2019 with the final sale of the Australian entities. The U.K. statutory tax rate was 19% during 2018. We accrue taxes on certain non-U.S. income that is subject to U.S. tax at the enacted U.S. tax rate. Foreign tax credits, where available, were utilized to offset U.S. tax as permitted.
The provision for income taxes from continuing operations was an expense of $82.8 million, $93.1 million, and $43.5 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. These amounts resulted in consolidated effective tax rates of 18.6%, 17.8% and 15.4% on pre-tax income for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The provisions in 2020, 2019 and 2018 reflect benefits related to tax planning strategies implemented in prior years of $9.2 million, $14.8 million and $9.2 million, respectively. The provisions in 2020, 2019 and 2018 also included excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation of $2.1 million, $3.0 million and $2.3 million, respectively. The provision for 2019 includes a charge of $1.2 million, which relates to the 2017 changes in the tax law related to the 2018 sale of Chaucer. The provision for 2018 reflects a tax benefit related to prior years of $4.3 million primarily resulting from a $40.0 million contribution to our U.S. pension plan made in September 2018, and reflected as a deduction in our 2017 U.S. income tax return at the then higher statutory tax rate of 35%. Absent these items, the provision for income taxes for 2020, 2019 and 2018 would have been expenses of $94.1 million, $109.7 million and $59.3 million, respectively, or 21.2% for 2020 and 21.0% for 2019 and 2018.
The income tax provision on operating income was an expense of $92.6 million, $84.5 million and $69.3 million for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. These provisions resulted in effective tax rates for operating income of 20.7%, 20.3% and 19.2% in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The provisions for 2020, 2019 and 2018 reflect the aforementioned excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation. In addition, the 2018 provision included the aforementioned tax benefit related to prior years of $4.3 million. Absent these items, the provision for income taxes for 2020, 2019 and 2018 would have been expenses of $94.7 million, $87.5 million and $75.9 million, or 21.2% for 2020 and 21.0% for 2019 and 2018.
The income tax provision on our former Chaucer business was an expense of $4.7 million for 2018. The 2018 income tax provision on the gain from the disposal of Chaucer business was an expense of $42.5 million. This provision includes a write off of $8.0 million of deferred tax assets primarily attributable to Lloyd’s underwriting losses.
During 2020 and 2019, we recorded decreases in reserves related to uncertain tax positions, due to the expirations of certain statutes of limitations. The 2020 reserve release of $0.5 million was recorded as a benefit to the income (loss) from discontinued life businesses, net of taxes. The 2019 reserve release of $2.0 million was recorded as a benefit to income from Chaucer business, net of taxes. We are subject to U.S. federal and state examinations and foreign examinations for years after 2016. There are no ongoing audits on our open tax years.
In prior years, we completed several transactions which resulted in the realization, for tax purposes only, of unrealized gains in our investment portfolio. As a result of these transactions, we were able to realize capital losses carried forward and release the valuation allowance recorded against the deferred tax asset related to those losses. The releases of valuation allowances were recorded as a benefit in accumulated other comprehensive income. Previously unrealized benefits of $9.2 million, $14.8 million and $9.2 million, attributable to non-operating income, were recognized as part of our income from continuing operations during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The remaining amount of $11.6 million in accumulated other comprehensive income will be released into income from continuing operations in future years, as the investment securities subject to these transactions are sold or mature.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements. These statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. The following critical accounting estimates are those which we believe affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements. Additional information about other significant accounting policies and estimates may be found in Note 1 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
RESERVE FOR LOSSES AND LOSS EXPENSES
See “Reserve for Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses” within “Results of Operations - Segments” for a discussion of our critical accounting estimates for loss reserves.
REINSURANCE RECOVERABLE BALANCES
See “Reinsurance Recoverables” in Part I - Item 1 for information on our reinsurance recoverable balances.
PENSION BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS
We currently have a qualified defined benefit plan and several smaller non-qualified benefit plans. In order to measure the liabilities and expense associated with these plans, we must make various estimates and key assumptions, including discount rates used to value liabilities, assumed rates of return on plan assets, employee turnover rates and anticipated mortality rates. These estimates and assumptions are reviewed at least annually and are based on our historical experience, as well as current facts and circumstances. In addition, we use outside actuaries to assist in measuring the expenses and liabilities associated with our defined benefit pension plan.
Two significant assumptions used in the determination of benefit plan obligations and expenses that are dependent on market factors, which have been subject to a greater level of volatility in recent years, are the discount rate and the return on plan asset assumptions. The discount rate enables us to state expected future benefit payments as a present value on the measurement date. We also use this discount rate in the determination of our pre-tax pension expense or benefit. A lower discount rate increases the present value of benefit obligations and increases pension expense. We determined our discount rate for the qualified benefit plan utilizing independent yield curves which provide for a portfolio of high quality bonds that are expected to match the cash flows of our pension plans. Bond information used in the yield curve included only those rated Aa or better as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and had been rated by at least two well-known rating agencies. The discount rates used to value liabilities in our qualified pension plan were 3.00% and 3.75% as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
To determine the expected long-term return on plan assets, we generally consider historical mean returns by asset class for passive indexed strategies, as well as current and expected asset allocations, and adjust for certain factors that we believe will have an impact on future returns. Actual returns on plan assets in any given year seldom result in the achievement of the expected rate of return on assets. Actual returns on plan assets in excess of these expected returns will generally reduce our net actuarial losses (or increase actuarial gains) that are reflected in the accumulated other comprehensive income balance in shareholders’ equity, whereas actual returns on plan assets that are less than expected returns will generally increase our net actuarial losses (or decrease actuarial gains) that are reflected in accumulated other comprehensive income. These gains or losses are amortized into expense in future years. The qualified benefit plan held assets consisting of approximately 90% fixed maturities and 10% equity securities at December 31, 2020.
The expected return on asset assumption was 4.75% and 5.50% in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Asset returns are reflected net of administrative expenses.
Net actuarial gains related to the qualified benefit plan of $7.2 million and $20.5 million were reflected as changes to accumulated other comprehensive income in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net actuarial gains in 2020 and 2019 resulted from net investment gains during each year, as well as favorable mortality experience, partially offset by decreases in the discount rate. In 2020 and 2019, amortization of actuarial losses from prior years was $5.4 million and $11.1 million, respectively.
Expenses related to our qualified benefit plan are generally calculated based upon information available at the beginning of the plan year. Our pre-tax expense related to our qualified benefit plan was $0.3 million and $7.6 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. As a result of favorable market returns in 2020 and favorable mortality experience, that were only partially offset by decreases in the discount rate, our pension expense related to our qualified benefit plan is expected to decrease from $0.3 million in 2020 to a benefit of $2.3 million in 2021.
Holding all other assumptions constant, sensitivity to changes in our key assumptions related to our qualified benefit plan is as follows:
INVESTMENT CREDIT LOSSES
We employ a systematic methodology to evaluate declines in fair values below amortized cost for all fixed maturity investments. The methodology utilizes a quantitative and qualitative process that seeks to ensure that available evidence concerning the declines in fair value below amortized cost is evaluated in a disciplined manner. In determining whether a decline in fair value below amortized cost
should be recorded as an impairment, we evaluate several factors and circumstances, including the issuer’s overall financial condition; the issuer’s credit and financial strength ratings; the issuer’s financial performance, including earnings trends, dividend payments and asset quality; any specific events which may influence the operations of the issuer; the general outlook for market conditions in the industry or geographic region in which the issuer operates; and the degree to which the fair value of an issuer’s securities is below our cost. We consider factors that might raise doubt about the issuer’s ability to make contractual payments as they become due and whether we expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security.
We monitor corporate fixed maturity securities with unrealized losses on a quarterly basis and more frequently when necessary to identify potential credit deterioration, as evidenced by ratings downgrades, unexpected price variances, and/or company or industry specific concerns. We apply consistent standards of credit analysis which includes determining whether the issuer is current on its contractual payments, and we consider past events, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts to evaluate whether we expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security. We utilize valuation declines as a potential indicator of credit deterioration and apply additional levels of scrutiny in our analysis as the severity of the decline increases.
For our impairment review of asset-backed fixed maturity securities, we forecast our best estimate of the prospective future cash flows of the security to determine if we expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security. Our analysis includes estimates of underlying collateral default rates based on historical and projected delinquency rates and estimates of the amount and timing of potential recovery. We consider available information relevant to the collectability of cash flows, including information about the payment terms of the security, prepayment speeds, the financial condition of the underlying borrowers, collateral trustee reports, credit ratings analysis and other market data when developing our estimate of the expected cash flows.
When an impairment of a fixed maturity security occurs, and we intend to sell or more likely than not will be required to sell the investment before recovery of its amortized cost basis, the amortized cost of the security is reduced to its fair value, with a corresponding charge to earnings, which reduces net income and earnings per share. If we do not intend to sell the fixed maturity investment or more likely than not will not be required to sell it, we separate the impairment into the amount we estimate represents the credit loss and the amount related to all other factors. The amount of the estimated loss attributable to credit is recognized in earnings, which reduces net income and earnings per share.
We estimate the amount of the credit impairment by comparing the amortized cost of the fixed maturity security with the net present value of the fixed maturity security’s projected future cash flows, discounted at the effective interest rate implicit in the investment prior to impairment.
Declines in market value which are not credit loss related are recorded as unrealized losses, which do not affect net income and earnings per share, but reduce accumulated other comprehensive income, which is reflected in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We cannot provide assurance that the impairments will be adequate to cover future losses or that we will not have substantial additional impairments in the future. See Note 3 - “Investments” and Note 4 - “Investment Income and Gains and Losses” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion regarding securities in an unrealized loss position and impairments.
DEFERRED TAXES
Deferred tax assets and liabilities primarily result from temporary differences between the amounts recorded in our consolidated financial statements and the tax basis of our assets and liabilities and loss and tax credit carryforwards. These temporary differences are measured at the balance sheet date using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years the temporary differences are expected to reverse.
The realization of deferred tax assets depends upon the existence of sufficient taxable income within the carryback or carryforward periods under the tax law in the applicable tax jurisdiction. Consideration is given to available positive and negative evidence, including reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income in each tax jurisdiction, tax planning strategies and recent financial operations. Valuation allowances are established if, based on the weight of available information, it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The determination of the valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets requires management to make certain judgments and assumptions. Our judgments and assumptions are subject to change given the inherent uncertainty in predicting future performance and specific industry and investment market conditions. Changes in valuation allowances are generally reflected in income tax expense or as an adjustment to other comprehensive income, depending on the nature of the item for which the valuation allowance is being recorded.
The following are the components of our deferred tax assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have a valuation allowance and believe it is more likely than not that the remaining deferred tax assets will be realized.
STATUTORY SURPLUS OF INSURANCE SUBSIDIARIES
The following table reflects statutory surplus for our insurance subsidiaries:
The statutory capital and surplus for our insurance subsidiaries increased $118.3 million during 2020, primarily due to approximately $383 million of underwriting profits, partially offset by the payment of a $245 million dividend.
The NAIC prescribes an annual calculation regarding risk based capital (“RBC”). RBC ratios for regulatory purposes, as described in the glossary, are expressed as a percentage of the capital required to be above the Authorized Control Level (the “Regulatory Scale”); however, in the insurance industry, RBC ratios are widely expressed as a percentage of the Company Action Level. The following table reflects the Company Action Level, the Authorized Control Level and RBC ratios for Hanover Insurance (which includes Citizens and other insurance subsidiaries), as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, expressed both on the Industry Scale (Total Adjusted Capital divided by the Company Action Level) and Regulatory Scale (Total Adjusted Capital divided by Authorized Control Level):
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity is a measure of our ability to generate sufficient cash flows to meet the cash requirements of business operations. As a holding company, our primary ongoing source of cash is dividends from our insurance subsidiaries. However, dividend payments to us by our insurance subsidiaries are subject to limitations imposed by regulators, such as prior notice periods and the requirement that dividends in excess of a specified percentage of statutory surplus or prior year’s statutory earnings receive prior approval (so called “extraordinary dividends”). Hanover Insurance paid $245.0 million in dividends to the holding company in 2020. In both 2019 and 2018, Hanover Insurance paid $140.0 million in dividends to the holding company.
Sources of cash for our insurance subsidiaries primarily consist of premiums collected, investment income and maturing investments. Primary cash outflows are payments for losses and loss adjustment expenses, policy and contract acquisition expenses, other underwriting expenses and investment purchases. Cash outflows related to losses and loss adjustment expenses can be variable because of uncertainties surrounding settlement dates for liabilities for unpaid losses and because of the potential for large losses, either individually or in the aggregate. We periodically adjust our investment policy to respond to changes in short-term and long-term cash requirements.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $707.6 million during 2020, as compared to $602.9 million during 2019 and $551.3 million in 2018. The $104.7 million increase in cash provided in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to lower loss and LAE payments, a decrease in Federal income tax payments, and a slight increase in premium collections. The $51.6 million increase in cash provided in 2019 as compared to 2018 was primarily the result of an increase in premiums collected, partially offset by higher loss payments.
Net cash used in investing activities was $608.8 million during 2020, as compared to $311.9 million during 2019 and net cash provided of $271.3 million in 2018. During 2020 and 2019, cash used in investing activities primarily related to net purchases of fixed maturities and, to a lesser extent, equity securities and other investments. During 2018, cash provided by investing activities primarily related to net proceeds received from the sale of Chaucer. These proceeds were partially offset by net purchases of fixed maturities, commercial mortgage loan participations, and other investments.
Net cash used in financing activities was $193.9 million during 2020, as compared to $1,099.3 million during 2019 and $171.0 million in 2018. During 2020, cash used in financing activities primarily resulted from repurchases of common stock through both an accelerated share repurchase (“ASR”) agreement and the open market, the repayment of subordinated debentures and the payment of quarterly dividends to shareholders, partially offset by cash received from the issuance of senior debentures. During 2019, cash used in financing activities primarily resulted from repurchases of common stock through three ASR agreements, the payments of two special dividends in addition to regular quarterly dividends to shareholders, and the repayment of the FHLB advances. (See further discussion below for additional information regarding the special dividend, the ASR agreements and the repayment of the FHLB advances). During 2018, cash used in financing activities primarily resulted from the payment of dividends to shareholders and repurchases of common stock.
Dividends to common shareholders are subject to quarterly board approval and declaration. During 2020, our Board declared dividends that totaled $100.7 million. This included three quarterly dividends of $0.65 per share and one quarterly dividend of $0.70 per share. We believe that our holding company assets are sufficient to provide for future shareholder dividends should the Board of Directors declare them.
At December 31, 2020, THG, as a holding company, held approximately $396.9 million of fixed maturities and cash. We believe our holding company assets will be sufficient to meet our current year obligations, which we expect to consist primarily of quarterly dividends to our shareholders (as and to the extent declared), interest on our senior and subordinated debentures, certain costs associated with benefits due to our former life employees and agents and, to the extent required, payments related to indemnification of liabilities associated with the sale of various subsidiaries. As discussed below, we have, and opportunistically may continue to, repurchase our common stock and debt. We do not expect that it will be necessary to dividend additional funds from our insurance subsidiaries in order to fund 2021 holding company obligations; however, we may decide to do so.
We expect to continue to generate sufficient positive operating cash to meet all short-term and long-term cash requirements relating to current operations, including the funding of our qualified defined benefit pension plan. We believe that this plan is fully funded. The ultimate payment amounts for our benefit plan is based on several assumptions, including but not limited to, the rate of return on plan assets, the discount rate for benefit obligations, mortality experience, interest crediting rates, inflation and the ultimate valuation and determination of benefit obligations. Since differences between actual plan experience and our assumptions are almost certain, changes, both positive and negative, to our current funding status and ultimately our obligations in future periods are likely.
Our insurance subsidiaries maintain a high degree of liquidity within their respective investment portfolios in fixed maturity and short-term investments. We believe that the quality of the assets we hold will allow us to realize the long-term economic value of our portfolio, including securities that are currently in an unrealized loss position. We do not anticipate the need to sell these securities to meet our insurance subsidiaries’ cash requirements since we expect our insurance subsidiaries to generate sufficient operating cash to meet all short-term and long-term cash requirements relating to current operations. However, there can be no assurance that unforeseen business needs or other items will not occur causing us to have to sell those securities in a loss position before their values fully recover, thereby causing us to recognize impairment charges in that time period.
The Board of Directors has authorized a stock repurchase program which provides for aggregate repurchases of our common stock of up to $900 million. Under the repurchase authorization, we may repurchase, from time to time, common shares in amounts, at prices and at such times as we deem appropriate, subject to market conditions and other considerations. Repurchases may be executed using open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, accelerated repurchase programs or other transactions. We are not required to purchase any specific number of shares or to make purchases by any certain date under this program. Pursuant to the terms of an ASR agreement executed on December 9, 2019 (the “December 2019 ASR”), we paid $150.0 million in exchange for shares of our common stock. Under the terms of the December 2019 ASR, we received an initial delivery of approximately 0.9 million shares of our common stock. On February 26, 2020, we received approximately 0.2 million shares of our common stock as final settlement of shares repurchased under the December 2019 ASR.
On October 29, 2020, pursuant to the terms of a second ASR agreement (the “October 2020 ASR”), we paid $100.0 million in exchange for shares of our common stock. Under the terms of the October 2020 ASR, we received an initial delivery of approximately 0.8 million shares of our common stock, which was approximately 80% of the total number of shares expected to be repurchased under the October 2020 ASR agreement. On January 29, 2021, we received approximately 45,000 shares of our common stock as final settlement of shares repurchased under the October 2020 ASR. In addition to the shares repurchased under the December 2019 ASR and the October 2020 ASR, during 2020 we repurchased approximately 1.1 million shares at an aggregate cost of $112.8 million. As of December 31, 2020, we have repurchased 6.4 million shares under this $900 million program and have approximately $124 million available for additional repurchases.
On August 24, 2020, we issued $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2.50% senior unsecured debentures due September 1, 2030. Net proceeds of the debt issuance were $297.7 million. A portion of the net proceeds was used to redeem $175.0 million outstanding 6.35% subordinated notes due 2053, resulting in a pre-tax loss of $6.1 million, related primarily to the accelerated amortization of debt issuance costs.
We maintain our membership in the FHLB to provide access to additional liquidity based on our holdings of FHLB stock and pledged collateral. At December 31, 2020, we had borrowing capacity of $94.9 million. There were no borrowings outstanding under this short-term facility at December 31, 2020; however, we have borrowed and may continue to borrow, from time to time, through this facility to provide short-term liquidity.
On April 30, 2019, we entered into a new credit agreement that provides for a five-year unsecured revolving credit facility not to exceed $200.0 million at any one time outstanding, with the option to increase the facility up to $300.0 million, (assuming no default and satisfaction of other specified conditions, including the receipt of additional lender commitments). The agreement also includes an uncommitted subfacility of $50.0 million for standby letters of credit. Borrowings, if any, under this new agreement are unsecured and incur interest at a rate per annum equal to, at our election, either (i) the greater of, (a) the prime commercial lending rate of the administrative agent, (b) the NYFRB Rate plus half a percent, or (c) the one month Adjusted LIBOR plus one percent and a margin that ranges from 0.25% to 0.625% depending on our debt rating, or (ii) Adjusted LIBOR for the applicable interest period, plus a margin that ranges from 1.25% to 1.625% depending on our debt rating. The agreement also contains certain financial covenants such as maintenance of specified levels of consolidated equity and leverage ratios, and requires that certain of our subsidiaries maintain minimum RBC ratios. We currently have no borrowings under this agreement during 2020. The LIBOR rate, upon which Adjusted LIBOR is based, is expected to be discontinued by the end of 2021. Our credit agreement permits us to agree with the Administrative Agent for the credit facility on a replacement to Adjusted LIBOR subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions.
At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants of our debt and credit agreements.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
Financing obligations generally include repayment of our senior debentures, subordinated debentures and lease payments. The following table represents our annual payments related to the contractual principal and interest payments of these financing obligations as of December 31, 2020, unless otherwise noted, and lease payments reflect expected cash payments based upon active lease terms. It is expected that in the normal course of business, leases that expire will generally be renewed or replaced by leases on similar property and equipment. In addition, we also have included our estimated payments related to our loss and LAE obligations and our current expectation of payments to be made to support the obligations of our benefit plans. The following table also includes commitments to purchase investment securities at a future date. Actual payments may differ from the contractual and/or estimated payments in the table.
(1)
The debt with a maturity of 4-5 years reflects our senior debentures due in 2025, which pay annual interest at a rate of 7.625%. Debt in the maturity in excess of 5 years category includes our senior debentures due in 2026, which pay annual interest at a rate of 4.50%, our subordinated debentures due in 2027, which pay interest at an annual rate of 8.207%, and our senior debentures due in 2030, which pay annual interest at a rate of 2.50%. Payments related to the principal amounts of these agreements represent contractual maturity; therefore, principal and interest associated with these obligations are reflected in the above table based upon the contractual maturity dates.
(2)
Our subsidiaries are lessees with a number of leases.
(3)
Amounts represent non-qualified defined benefit pension and postretirement benefit obligations and reflect estimated payments to be made through plan year 2030 for pension, postretirement, and postemployment benefits, although it is likely that payments will be made beyond 2030. Estimates of these payments and the payment patterns are based upon historical experience. We do not expect to make any significant contributions to our qualified plan in order to meet our minimum funding requirements for the next several years; therefore, no contributions for this plan are included in this schedule. However, additional contributions may be required in the future based on the level of pension assets and liabilities in future periods. The ultimate payment amount for our pension plan is based on several assumptions, including, but not limited to, the rate of return on plan assets, the discount rate for benefit obligations, mortality experience, interest crediting rates and the ultimate valuation of benefit obligations.
Differences between actual plan experience and our assumptions are likely and will likely result in changes to our funding obligations in future periods.
(4)
Investment commitments relate primarily to limited partnerships.
(5)
Unlike many other forms of contractual obligations, loss and LAE reserves do not have definitive due dates and the ultimate payment dates are subject to a number of variables and uncertainties. As a result, the total loss and LAE reserve payments to be made by period, as shown in the table, are estimates based principally on historical experience.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We currently do not have any material off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have an effect on our financial position, revenues, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources.
CONTINGENCIES AND REGULATORY MATTERS
Information regarding litigation and legal contingencies appears in Note 16 - “Commitments and Contingencies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Information related to certain regulatory and industry developments are contained in “Regulation” in Part I - Item 1 and in “Risk Factors” in Part I - Item 1A.
RATING AGENCIES
Insurance companies are rated by rating agencies to provide both industry participants and insurance consumers information on specific insurance companies. Higher ratings generally indicate the rating agencies’ opinion regarding financial stability and a stronger ability to pay claims.
We believe that strong ratings are important factors in marketing our products to our agents and customers, since rating information is broadly disseminated and generally used throughout the industry. Insurance company financial strength ratings are assigned to an insurer based upon factors deemed by the rating agencies to be relevant to policyholders and are not directed toward protection of investors. Such ratings are neither a rating of securities nor a recommendation to buy, hold or sell any security. Customers typically focus on claims-paying ratings, while creditors focus on debt ratings. Investors use both to evaluate a company’s overall financial strength.
RISKS AND FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. For a discussion of indicators of forward-looking statements and specific important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in forward-looking statements, see “Risk Factors” in Part I - Item 1A. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis should be read and interpreted in light of such factors.
GLOSSARY OF SELECTED INSURANCE TERMS
Account business - Customers with multiple policies and/or coverages.
Account rounding - The conversion of single policy customers to accounts with multiple policies and/or additional coverages, to address customers’ broader objectives.
Benefit payments - Payments made to an insured or their beneficiary in accordance with the terms of an insurance policy.
Big data - large, diverse, complex sets of information that grow at ever-increasing rates and require special tools and methods to process. It encompasses the volume of information, the velocity or speed at which it is created and collected, and the variety or scope of the data points being covered. Big data analytics refers to the use of predictive analytics, user behavior analytics, or certain other advanced data analytics methods that extract value from big data.
Casualty insurance - Insurance that is primarily concerned with the losses caused by injuries to third persons and their property (other than the policyholder) and the related legal liability of the insured for such losses.
Catastrophe - A severe loss, resulting from natural or manmade events, including, among others, hurricanes, tornadoes and other windstorms, earthquakes, hail, severe winter weather, fire, explosions, and terrorism.
Catastrophe loss - Loss and directly identified loss adjustment expenses from catastrophes, including development on prior years’ catastrophe loss reserves. The Insurance Services Office (“ISO”) Property Claim Services (“PCS”) defines a catastrophe loss as an event that causes $25 million or more in insured property losses from U.S. direct writers and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers. In limited instances where the impact of an event extends across multiple geographic areas or time periods, but is not within the specific parameters established by PCS, THG may determine that certain losses are better included within the same catastrophe event. In addition to those catastrophe events declared by ISO, claims management also generally includes within the definition of a “catastrophe loss”, a property loss event that causes approximately $5 million or more in Company insured losses and affects in excess of one hundred policyholders. For the international business in our Commercial Lines segment, management utilizes a “catastrophe loss” definition that is substantially consistent with the ISO definition framework.
Cede; cedent; ceding company - When a party reinsures its liability with another party, it “cedes” business and is referred to as the “cedent” or “ceding company”.
Credit spread - The difference between the yield on the debt securities of a particular corporate debt issue and the yield of a similar maturity of U.S. Treasury debt securities.
Current accident year results - A non-GAAP measure of the estimated earnings impact of current premiums offset by estimated loss experience and expenses for the current accident year. This measure includes the estimated increase in revenue associated with higher prices (premiums), including those caused by price inflation and changes in exposure, partially offset by higher volume driven expenses and inflation of loss costs. Volume driven expenses include acquisition costs such as commissions paid to agents, which are typically based on a percentage of premium dollars.
Earned premium - The portion of a premium that is recognized as income, or earned, based on the expired portion of the policy period, that is, the period for which loss coverage has actually been provided. For example, after six months, $50 of a $100 annual premium is generally considered earned premium. The remaining $50 of annual premium is unearned premium. Net earned premium is earned premium net of reinsurance.
Excess of loss reinsurance - Reinsurance that indemnifies the insured against all or a specific portion of losses under reinsured policies in excess of a specified dollar amount or “retention”.
Exposure - As it relates to underwriting, a measure of the rating units or premium basis of a risk; for example, an exposure of a number of automobiles. As it relates to loss events, the maximum value of claims made on an insurer from an event or events that would result in the total exhaustion of the cover or indemnity offered by an insurance policy.
Exposure management actions - Actions that focus on improving underwriting profitability and/or lessening earnings volatility by reducing our exposures and property concentrations in certain geographies and lines that are believed to be more prone to catastrophe and non-catastrophe losses. These actions include, but are not limited to, non-renewal, rate increases, stricter underwriting standards and higher deductible utilization, agency management actions, and more selective portfolio management by modifying our business mix.
Frequency - The number of claims occurring during a given coverage period.
Loss adjustment expenses (“LAE”) - Expenses incurred in the adjusting, recording, and settlement of claims. These expenses include both internal company expenses and outside services. Allocated LAE (“ALAE”) refers to defense and cost containment expenses, including legal fees, court costs, and investigation fees. Unallocated LAE (“ULAE”) refers to expenses that generally cannot be associated with a specific claim. ULAE includes internal costs such as salaries, fringe benefits and other overhead costs associated with the claim settlement process and external adjustment and appraisal fees.
Loss costs - An amount of money paid for an insurance claim.
Loss reserves - Liabilities established by insurers to reflect the estimated cost of claims payments and the related expenses that the insurer will ultimately be required to pay in respect of insurance it has written. Reserves are established for losses and for LAE.
Lower (higher) expenses - Represents the period over period comparison of expenses relative to growth in earned premium. Volume driven expenses typically fluctuate commensurate with changes in premium. Accordingly, as we grow premium, these expenses increase from an absolute dollar perspective, but tend to stay proportionate compared to premium. Fixed expenses can remain constant or increase or decrease irrespective of the growth or decline in premium. When describing expenses as being “lower” or “higher” we are generally referring to changes in fixed costs relative to premium (fixed cost leverage). These “lower” or “higher” expenses correspond to a lower or higher expense ratio.
Marine Insurance - In Commercial Lines, this is a type of coverage developed for insuring businesses against physical losses to property such as contractor’s equipment, builder’s risk and goods in transit. It covers articles in transit by all forms of land and air transportation as well as bridges, tunnels, ocean and other means of transportation and communication. In the context of Personal Lines, this term relates to floater policies that cover expensive personal items such as fine art and jewelry.
Morbidity - Morbidity relates to the occurrence of illness, disability or other physical or psychological impairment, whether temporary or permanent, for insured risks. Morbidity is a key assumption for long-term care insurance and other forms of individual and group health benefits.
Partner agents; partner agencies; partner independent agents; agency partners; business partners - Independent agents (agencies) are self-employed, commission-based businesses who generally represent, and sell insurance policies provided by, several insurance companies. THG has appointed and developed mutually beneficial relationships with a limited number of independent agents who are demonstrated experts in their field, growth-oriented and align with our strategy. Although we may refer to those agencies as “partner agents”, these are not legally binding “partnerships”, but rather an opportunity for both the agent (agencies) and THG to work together and achieve common goals.
Peril - A cause of loss.
Price(ing) increase or decrease (Commercial Lines) - Represents the average change in premium on renewed policies caused by the estimated net effect of base rate changes, discretionary pricing, inflation or changes in policy level exposure or insured risk.
Price(ing) increase or decrease (Personal Lines) - The estimated cumulative premium effect of approved rate actions applied to policies available for renewal, regardless of whether or not policies are actually renewed. Pricing changes do not represent actual increases or decreases realized by THG.
Property insurance - Insurance that provides coverage for tangible property in the event of loss, damage or loss of use.
Rate - The estimated pure pricing factor upon which the policyholder’s premium is based excluding changes in exposure or risk.
Ratios: (1)
Catastrophe loss ratio -The ratio of catastrophe losses incurred to premiums earned.
Combined ratio - This ratio is the GAAP equivalent of the statutory ratio that is widely used as a benchmark for determining an insurer’s underwriting performance. A ratio below 100% generally indicates profitable underwriting prior to the consideration of investment income (loss). A combined ratio over 100% generally indicates unprofitable underwriting prior to the consideration of investment income (loss). The combined ratio is the sum of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio and the expense ratio.
Expense Ratio - The ratio of underwriting expenses (including the amortization of deferred acquisition costs), less premium installment and other fee income and premium charge offs, to premiums earned for a given period.
Loss and Loss adjustment expense (“LAE”) ratio - The ratio of loss and loss adjustment expenses to premiums earned for a given period. The LAE ratio includes catastrophe losses and prior year reserve development.
Loss ratio - The ratio of losses (including catastrophe losses) to premiums earned for a given period.
Reinstatement premium - A pro-rata reinsurance premium that may be charged to us by our reinsurers. A reinstatement premium may be contractually required to be charged for restoring an amount of reinsurance coverage reduced as the result of a reinsurance loss payment that depletes or exhausts a reinsurance treaty or treaty layer. For example, in 2005, this premium was required to ensure that our property catastrophe occurrence treaty, which was exhausted by hurricane Katrina, was available again in the event of another large catastrophe loss in 2005. Reinsurance reinstatement premiums accrued by us are accounted for as a reduction in net premiums earned rather than as an “expense”. For certain reinsurance treaties, a ceding commission adjustment is recorded commensurate with a reinstatement premium accrual. A ceding commission is a fee paid by a reinsurance company to a direct writer to cover the costs of issuing the policy and is recorded as a contra-expense.
Reinsurance - An arrangement in which an insurance company, or a reinsurance company, known as the reinsurer, agrees to indemnify another insurance or reinsurance company, known as the ceding company, against all or a portion of the insurance or reinsurance risks underwritten by the ceding company under one or more policies. Reinsurance can provide a ceding company with several benefits, including a reduction in net liability on risks and catastrophe protection from large or multiple losses. Reinsurance does not legally discharge the primary insurer from its liability with respect to its obligations to the insured.
Risk based capital (“RBC”) - A method of measuring the minimum amount of capital appropriate for an insurance company to support its overall business operations in consideration of its size and risk profile. The RBC ratio for regulatory purposes is calculated as total adjusted capital divided by required risk based capital. Total adjusted capital for property and casualty companies is capital and surplus, adjusted for the non-tabular reserve discount applicable to our assumed discontinued accident and health insurance business. The Company Action Level is the first level at which regulatory involvement is specified based upon the level of capital.
Regulators may take action for reasons other than triggering various RBC action levels. The various action levels are summarized as follows:
•
The Company Action Level, which equals 200% of the Authorized Control Level, requires a company to prepare and submit a RBC plan to the commissioner of the state of domicile. A RBC plan proposes actions which a company may take in order to bring statutory capital above the Company Action Level. After review, the commissioner will notify the company if the plan is satisfactory.
•
The Regulatory Action Level, which equals 150% of the Authorized Control Level, requires the insurer to submit to the commissioner of the state of domicile a RBC plan, or if applicable, a revised RBC plan. After examination or analysis, the commissioner will issue an order specifying corrective actions to be taken.
•
The Authorized Control Level authorizes the commissioner of the state of domicile to take whatever regulatory actions are considered necessary to protect the best interest of the policyholders and creditors of the insurer.
•
The Mandatory Control Level, which equals 70% of the Authorized Control Level, authorizes the commissioner of the state of domicile to take actions necessary to place the company under regulatory control (i.e., rehabilitation or liquidation).
Securities Lending - We have, from time to time, engaged our banking provider to lend securities from our investment portfolio to third parties. These lent securities are fully collateralized by cash. When securities are lent, we monitor the fair value of the securities on a daily basis to assure that the collateral is maintained at a level of at least 102% of the fair value of the loaned securities. We record securities lending collateral as a cash equivalent, with an offsetting liability in expenses and taxes payable.
Severity - A monetary increase in the loss costs associated with the same or similar type of event or coverage.
Social Inflation - A term used to explain rising insurance claim payouts due to various factors associated with a more costly legal environment, such as increased litigation frequency, expanded theories of liability and higher jury awards. Higher than the expected litigation payouts to plaintiffs due to these and other factors, may then give rise to the initiation of additional lawsuits seeking similarly elevated awards and increasing settlement costs, which can compound the effect.
Specialty Lines - A major component of our Other commercial lines. There is no accepted industry definition of “specialty lines”, but for our purpose specialty lines consist of products such as marine, surety, specialty industrial property, professional liability, management liability and various other program businesses. When discussing net premiums written and other financial measures of our specialty businesses, we may include non-specialty premiums that are written as part of the entire account.
Statutory accounting practices - Recording transactions and preparing financial statements in accordance with the rules and procedures prescribed or permitted by insurance regulatory authorities including the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, which in general reflect a liquidating, rather than going concern, concept of accounting.
Underwriting - The process of selecting risks for insurance and determining in what amounts and on what terms the insurance company will accept risks.
Underwriting expenses - Expenses incurred in connection with the acquisition, pricing and administration of a policy or contract, and other insurance company expenses unrelated to claims handling or investments.
Unearned premiums - The portion of a premium representing the unexpired amount of the contract term as of a certain date.
Written premium - The premium assessed for the entire coverage period of an insurance policy or contract without regard to how much of the premium has been earned. See also “Earned premium” above. Net premium written is written premium net of reinsurance.
(1) Ratios may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.