ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by, our consolidated financial statements (and notes related thereto) and other more detailed financial information appearing elsewhere in this Report. Further, you should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. See also “Forward-Looking Statements” in Part I of this Report.
Overview
Gentherm Incorporated is a global developer and marketer of innovative thermal management technologies for a broad range of heating and cooling and temperature control applications. Our products provide solutions for automotive passenger climate comfort and convenience, battery thermal management and cell connecting systems, as well as patient temperature management within the health care industry. Our automotive products can be found on the vehicles of nearly all major automotive manufacturers operating in North America and Europe and several major auto manufacturers in Asia. We operate in locations aligned with our major customers’ product strategies to provide locally enhanced design, integration and production capabilities. The Company is also developing a number of new technologies and products that are expected to help enable improvements to existing products and to create new product applications for existing and new markets.
Our sales are driven by the number of vehicles produced by the automotive manufacturers, which is ultimately dependent on consumer demand for automotive vehicles, and our content per vehicle. Historically, new vehicle demand has been driven by macro-economic and other factors, such as interest rates, manufacturer and dealer sales incentives, fuel prices, consumer confidence, employment levels, income growth trends and government and tax incentives. Economic volatility or weakness, as well as geopolitical factors, in North America, Europe or Asia, could result in a significant reduction in automotive sales and production by our customers, which would have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition, as we experienced in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, as described below. While our diversified automotive OEM customer base and geographic revenue base, along with our flexible cost structure, have well positioned us to withstand the impact of industry downturns, including the current impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and benefit from industry upturns in the ordinary course, shifts in the mix of global automotive production to higher cost regions or to vehicles with less content could adversely impact our profitability. In addition, we may be adversely impacted by volatility, weakness or slow growth in markets for hybrid electric vehicles specifically.
Recent Trends
General Economic Condition
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly disrupted global economic activity, including the automotive market. The COVID-19 pandemic was first identified in China around December 2019. The impact of the outbreak quickly expanded beyond China and its surrounding region and has significantly and adversely impacted the entire global economy and automotive market in 2020. During the first quarter of 2020, customer plants in North America and Europe were closed beginning in the second half of March due to the pandemic. This resulted in temporary, partial closures of several of our manufacturing facilities in North America and Europe by the end of March 2020. Customer plants and our manufacturing facilities in Asia were closed for several weeks in February and operated at reduced volumes in March, resuming production to near full capacity by the end of the first quarter, which continued throughout the remainder of the year. However, during the second quarter of 2020, our manufacturing facilities in North America and Europe remained closed until the last week in May due to the pandemic, gradually resuming production to near full capacity in North America, and to about 70% capacity in Europe by the end of June. During the second half of 2020, our customers’ plants were open, and our production volumes were stronger than pre-COVID levels at our manufacturing facilities. The Company has implemented additional health and safety precautions and protocols in response to the pandemic and government guidelines to help ensure the safety and health of all its employees, and it continues to assess and update business continuity plans in the context of this pandemic.
The COVID-19 pandemic significantly adversely affected our operations, results of operations, financial condition, cash flows, liquidity and stock price in the first half of 2020. The second half of 2020 recovered with increased production from the first half of the year. However, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a significant impact on global automotive markets in 2021, in the form of supply chain and production disruptions, workforce restrictions, travel restrictions and reduced consumer spending, among other factors. There remains substantial uncertainty regarding the global economic impact of, and the speed and shape of the recovery from,
the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including for the global automotive industry and the resulting impact on our future operations and financial results.
Light Vehicle Production Volumes
Our sales are driven by the number of vehicles produced by the automotive manufacturers, which is ultimately dependent on consumer demand for automotive vehicles, and our content per vehicle. According to the forecasting firm IHS Markit (February 2021 release), global light vehicle production in 2020 in the Company’s key markets of North America, Europe, China, Japan and Korea, as compared to 2019, are shown below (in millions of units):
The IHS Markit (February 2021 release) forecasted light vehicle production volume in the Company’s key markets for full year 2021 to increase to 72.2 million units, a 12.1% increase from full year 2020 light vehicle production volumes. Forecasted light vehicle production volumes are a component of the data we use in forecasting future business. However, these forecasts generally are updated monthly, and future forecasts may be significantly different from period to period due to changes in macroeconomic conditions or matters specific to the automotive industry, such as the fluctuations that occurred in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Further, due to differences in regional product mix at our manufacturing facilities, as well as releases from customers on specific vehicle programs, our future forecasted results do not directly correlate with the global and/or regional light vehicle production forecasts of IHS Markit or other third-party sources.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In light of the substantial economic and financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to date, the Company took significant actions in 2020 to address its liquidity position. In March 2020, the Company borrowed an additional $169.5 million under its revolving credit facility to increase its cash position and provide additional financial flexibility. After the drawdown in March 2020, and through December 31, 2020, the Company repaid a net amount of $41.2 million of the amounts outstanding under the Amended Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, inclusive of the net new borrowings, $186.2 million was outstanding under the Amended Credit Agreement. In January 2021, the Company repaid an additional $80.0 million of the amounts outstanding under the Amended Credit Agreement.
In addition, the Company has been prudently addressing its day-to-day operations, including reducing expenses, inventory levels and capital spending, and had deferred a portion of 2020 base salaries generally for all salaried employees. The Company terminated the salary deferral earlier than planned on September 30, 2020 due to the improved market and financial conditions. Based upon consolidated EBITDA for the trailing twelve months calculated for purposes of the Consolidated Leverage Ratio, $288.8 million remained available as of December 31, 2020 for additional borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement subject to specified conditions that Gentherm currently satisfies. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for additional information.
New Business Awards
We believe that innovation is an important element to gaining market acceptance of our products and strengthening our market position. During 2020, we secured an estimated $940 million of automotive new business awards. Automotive new business awards represent the aggregate projected lifetime revenue of new awards provided by customers to Gentherm in the applicable period, with the value based on the price and volume projections received from each customer as of the award date. Although automotive new business awards are not firm customer orders, we believe that new business awards are an indicator of future revenue. New business awards are not projections of revenue or future business as of December 31, 2020, the date of this Report or any other date. Customer projections regularly change over time and we do not update our calculation of any new business award after the date initially communicated. Automotive new business awards in 2020 were adversely impacted by the macroeconomic changes and related uncertainties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, but also may not convert into future customer orders similar to historical periods due to the future impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Revenues resulting from automotive new business awards also are subject to additional risks and uncertainties as described under “Forward-Looking Statements” in Item 1 of this Report.
Stock Repurchase Program
In December 2016, the Board of Directors authorized a three-year, $100.0 million stock repurchase program. In June 2018, our Board of Directors authorized an increase in the stock repurchase plan to $300.0 million and extended the stock repurchase plan until December 15, 2020. In 2020, we repurchased approximately $9.1 million of shares under this plan. The repurchase authorization remaining at expiration was $74.2 million.
On December 11, 2020, the Board of Directors authorized the 2020 Stock Repurchase Program to commence upon expiration of the prior stock repurchase program on December 15, 2020. Under the 2020 Stock Repurchase Program, the Company is authorized to repurchase up to $150 million of its issued and outstanding common stock over a three-year period, expiring December 15, 2023. In 2020, no shares were repurchased under the 2020 Stock Repurchase Program.
For further information related to our stock repurchase program, see Item 5, "Market for the Company’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities," and Note 15, "Equity" to the consolidated financial statements included in this Report.
Restructuring
Manufacturing Footprint Rationalization
On September 23, 2019, the Company committed to a restructuring plan to improve the Company’s manufacturing productivity and rationalize its footprint. Under this plan, the Company will relocate and consolidate certain existing automotive manufacturing and, as a result, reduce the number of plants by two. On March 20, 2020, the Company announced the initial phase of this restructuring plan, which includes the consolidation of all North American electronics manufacturing to Celaya, Mexico. This will result in the closure of the Burlington, Canada facility, and the transfer of electronics manufacturing from Acuña, Mexico. The closure of the Burlington, Canada facility is expected to be completed mid-year 2021. During the second quarter of 2020, due to circumstances arising from the COVID-19 pandemic, management adjusted the plan to proactively manage its cash position. Adjustments to the plan have resulted in changes to the estimated number of employee separations and total costs to execute the plan. On December 10, 2020, the Company announced the consolidation of our electronics manufacturing in Asia to Bantian, Shenzhen, China, which will result in the closure of our Longgang, Shenzhen, China facility that is expected to be completed by the end of 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized restructuring expense of $(0.8) million for employee separation costs, $0.7 million for accelerated depreciation and $0.3 million for other costs. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recognized restructuring expense of $4.9 million for employee separation costs, and $2.1 million of accelerated depreciation and fixed asset impairment. The Company has recorded approximately $7.1 million of restructuring expenses since the inception of this program.
Under the revised restructuring plan, the Company expects to incur total costs of between $16 million and $19 million, of which between $13 million and $16 million are expected to be cash expenditures. The total expected costs include employee separation costs of between $6.5 million and $7.5 million, capital expenditures of between $3.5 million and $4.5 million and non-cash expenses for accelerated depreciation and impairment of fixed assets of approximately $3 million. The Company also expects to incur other transition costs including recruiting, relocation, and machinery and equipment move and set up costs of between $3 million and $4 million. The actions under this plan are expected to be substantially completed by the end of 2021. The actual timing, costs and savings of the plan may differ materially from the Company’s current expectations and estimates.
GPT and CSZ-IC Restructuring
During 2019, the Company completed its plan to eliminate non-core areas of investment through the divestitures of Cincinnati Sub-Zero industrial chamber business (“CSZ-IC”) and Gentherm Global Power Technologies (“GPT”). Costs directly associated with the divestiture process were classified as Restructuring expense. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recognized $0.3 million of employee separation costs and $1.0 million of other related costs.
Other Restructuring Activities
As part of the Company’s continued efforts to optimize its cost structure, the Company has undertaken several discrete restructuring actions. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recognized $5.4 million and $2.9 million of employee separation costs, respectively, and $0.2 million and $1.4 million of other related costs, respectively. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recognized $0.4 million of asset impairment loss. These restructuring expenses were primarily associated with restructuring actions focused on optimizing our manufacturing and engineering footprint and the reduction of global overhead costs. The Company will continue to explore opportunities to improve its future profitability and competitiveness. These actions may result in the recognition of additional restructuring charges that could be material.
See Note 5, “Restructuring”, to our consolidated financial statements included in this Report for information about our restructuring activities.
Divestitures
Divestiture of CSZ-IC
On February 1, 2019, the Company completed the divestiture of CSZ-IC and the former Cincinnati Sub-Zero headquarters facility to Weiss Technik North America, Inc. for total cash proceeds of $47.5 million, including $2.5 million of cash proceeds placed into an escrow account for a period of up to one year as partial security for the Company’s obligations under the sale agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company resolved its remaining obligations under the sale agreement, and the amounts in escrow were released net of settlement for obligations under the sale agreement. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recognized a $4.3 million gain on sale, which is classified in Net loss on divestitures within the consolidated statements of income.
Divestiture of GPT
On October 1, 2019, the Company completed the divesture of GPT for a nominal amount. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recognized asset impairments and loss on sale totaling $27.1 million, consisting of $16.8 million of impairment on assets held for sale, $4.5 million related to impairment of an equity investment that met held for sale criteria during 2019 and $5.8 million of loss on sale, which includes $4.0 million related to the release of previously deferred foreign currency translation losses recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss and $1.5 million related to a loan to the buyer that was considered uncollectible. These impairment charges and loss on sale are classified in Impairment loss within the consolidated statements of income.
Acquisitions
Acquisition of Stihler Electronic GmbH (“Stihler”)
On April 1, 2019, Gentherm acquired Stihler, a leading developer and manufacturer of patient and blood temperature management systems, for a purchase price of $15.5 million, net of cash acquired and including $0.7 million of contingent consideration to be paid upon achievement of a milestone that was completed in September 2020, and paid in the fourth quarter of 2020. In addition, the purchase agreement included a contingent payment of $0.7 million to be paid if the selling shareholder remains employed by Stihler through December 2020. This was completed and the payment was recorded as a component of Selling, general and administrative expenses ratably over the service period. The results of operations of Stihler are reported within the Company’s Medical segment from the date of acquisition.
Reportable Segments
The Company has two reportable segments for financial reporting purposes: Automotive and Medical.
In 2018 and 2019, our Industrial reporting segment represented the combined results from our patient temperature management systems business (“Medical”), GPT (through its divestiture on October 1, 2019), CSZ-IC (through its divestiture on February 1, 2019) and non-automotive expenses from our advanced research and development division (through December 31, 2019). The operating
results from these businesses and division previously were presented together as one reporting segment because of their historical joint concentration on identifying new markets and product applications based on thermal management technologies.
In 2020, the Industrial reporting segment was renamed the Medical reporting segment to reflect the patient temperature management business as the focus and strategic direction of this segment. Also, during 2020, the advanced research and development costs not associated with the Medical segment were moved to the Automotive segment, as this organization primarily supports the Automotive related research and development activities following the divestitures of GPT and CSZ-IC.
See Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements for a description of our reportable segments as well as their proportional contribution to the Company’s reported product revenues and operating income. The financial information used by our chief operating decision maker to assess operating performance and allocate resources is based on these reportable segments.
Results of Operations Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
This section discusses our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 versus 2019. A detailed discussion of our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 can be found under “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation” in Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the SEC on February 20, 2020.
The results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, in thousands, were as follows:
Product revenues by product category, in thousands, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
(a)
Battery Performance Solutions (BPS) was renamed from Battery Thermal Management (BTM), to better represent our product offerings included within this product category.
Product Revenues
Below is a summary of our Product revenues, in thousands, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Product revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 6.0% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in product revenues is due to unfavorable volumes in our Automotive segment, partially offset by favorable foreign currency impacts, primarily related to the Euro, Chinese Renminbi and Korean Won. The decrease in product revenues included in Variance Due To Pricing/Other above is primarily attributable to the divestitures of CSZ-IC on February 1, 2019 and GPT on October 1, 2019, as well as decreases in customer pricing, partially offset by the acquisition of Stihler on April 1, 2019 and an increase in product revenue in our Medical segment.
Cost of Sales
Below is a summary of our Cost of sales and Gross margin, in thousands, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 5.6% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cost of sales is due to volumes decreases in our Automotive segment, operational performance improvements, and favorable foreign currency impacts, primarily attributable to the Mexican Peso and Ukrainian Hryvnia. The operational performance improvements are primarily attributable to a decrease in material costs, an increase in manufacturing productivity, fixed cost savings and, partially offset by increases in freight costs. The decrease in cost of sales is also due to the following items included in Variance Due To Other above:
▪
$10.2 million decrease attributable to divested businesses (CSZ-IC and GPT);
▪
$2.7 million decrease due to various government subsidy programs globally; and
▪
$2.8 million increase attributable to Medical, including impact of the acquisition of Stihler on April 1, 2019.
Net Research and Development Expenses
Below is a summary of our Net research and development expenses, in thousands, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 6.1% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net research and development expenses is primarily related to reduced project-related spending due to cost reduction initiatives, partially offset by lower reimbursements for project-related spending.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Below is a summary of our Selling, general and administrative expenses, in thousands, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 11.5% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses is primarily related to the impacts of divested businesses (CSZ-IC and GPT), the absence of CFO transition costs in 2020, as well as the impact of cost reduction initiatives and a reduction in travel expenses, partially offset by mark to market adjustments in cash settled stock appreciation rights.
Restructuring Expenses
Below is a summary of our Restructuring expenses, in thousands, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Restructuring expenses primarily relate to the Manufacturing Footprint Rationalization restructuring program and other discrete restructuring activities focused on optimizing our manufacturing and engineering footprint and the reduction of global overhead expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized expenses of $4.6 million for employee separation costs, $0.7 million of accelerated depreciation and asset impairment charges and $0.5 million of other related costs. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recognized expenses of $8.1 million for employee separation costs, $2.5 million of accelerated depreciation and asset impairment charges and $2.4 million of other related costs.
See Note 5, "Restructuring" of the consolidated financial statements included in this Report for additional information.
Interest Expense
Below is a summary of our Interest expense, in thousands, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
See Note 9, "Debt" of the consolidated financial statements included in this Report for additional information.
Foreign Currency (Loss) Gain
Below is a summary of our Foreign currency (loss) gain, in thousands, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Foreign currency loss for the year ended December 31, 2020, included net realized foreign currency gain of $2.2 million and unrealized net foreign currency loss of $7.6 million.
Foreign currency gain for the year ended December 31, 2019, included net realized foreign currency gain of $56 thousand and unrealized net foreign currency gain of $2.3 million.
Impairment Loss
Below is a summary of our Impairment loss, in thousands, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Impairment loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 includes the following:
▪
$16.7 million of impairment loss on assets held for sale (GPT); and
▪
$4.5 million of impairment loss for an equity investment that was sold in connection with the GPT sale.
Net Loss on Divestitures
Below is a summary of our Net loss on divestitures, in thousands, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net loss on divestitures for the year ended December 31, 2019 includes the following:
▪
$4.3 million of gain on sale of CSZ-IC; and
▪
$5.9 million of loss on sale of GPT, which includes $4.0 million related to the release of previously deferred foreign currency translation losses recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss.
Other Income
Below is a summary of our Other income, in thousands, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The increase in other income is primarily due to the gain on sale of certain patents from a non-core business in June 2020. See Note 7, “Goodwill and Other Intangibles” of the consolidated financial statements included in this Report for additional information.
Income Tax Expense
Below is a summary of our Income tax expense, in thousands, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Income tax expense was $21.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, on earnings before income tax of $81.6 million, representing an effective tax rate of 26.8%. The tax amount included the effect of the settlement and closure of multi-year international tax audits of $3.4 million. Adjusted for the audit impacts, the effective tax rate was 22.6%. The effective tax rate differed from the U.S. Federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the international provisions of the U.S. tax reform, such as global intangible low-tax income (“GILTI”).
Income tax expense was $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, on earnings before income tax of $59.2 million, representing an effective tax rate of 17.4%. The pre-tax earnings amount included the non-deductible impairment loss of $27.1 million. Adjusted for the impairment loss, the effective tax rate was 11.9% for 2019. The effective tax rate differed from the U.S. Federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to (1) the international provisions of the U.S. tax reform, such as GILTI and higher tax rate jurisdictions and (2) the revised valuation of certain deferred income tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and Cash Flows
The Company historically has funded its liquidity needs primarily through cash flows from operating activities and borrowings under its Amended Credit Agreement, as well as equity and other debt financings on a more limited basis. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, we were focused on a capital allocation strategy within our strategic plan that included a targeted debt-to-earnings leverage ratio and using a portion of our cash flow for Common Stock repurchases.
In light of the significant economic uncertainty and financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company took significant actions to address its liquidity. First, the Company has been prudently addressing its day-to-day operations, including reducing expenses, inventory levels and capital spending. In addition, effective May 1, 2020, the Company implemented base salary deferrals until September 30, 2020, including a 30-40% deferral among executives and a 20% deferral for other salaried employees, to control expenses and conserve cash, which deferral the Company terminated earlier than planned on September 30, 2020 due to the improved market and financial conditions. The Company also revised its non-employee director compensation program for directors elected at the 2020 annual meeting of shareholders, with all compensation being paid in restricted stock for one year.
Also, in March 2020, the Company increased its borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement by $169.5 million as a safeguard to increase its cash position and provide additional financial flexibility. The proceeds were used for working capital and for other general corporate purposes permitted by the Amended Credit Agreement. After the drawdown in March 2020 and through December 31, 2020, the Company repaid a net amount of $41.2 million of the amounts outstanding under the Amended Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, inclusive of the net new borrowings, $186.2 million was outstanding under the Amended Credit Agreement. In January 2021, the Company repaid an additional $80.0 million of the amounts outstanding under the Amended Credit Agreement. Borrowing availability is subject to, among other things, the Company’s compliance with the minimum Consolidated Interest Coverage Ratio and Consolidated Leverage Ratio as of the end of any fiscal quarter. Based upon consolidated EBITDA for the trailing twelve months calculated for purposes of the Consolidated Leverage Ratio, $288.8 million remained available as of December 31, 2020 for additional borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement subject to specified conditions that Gentherm currently satisfies.
Further, the Company suspended its stock repurchase program in the first quarter of 2020 to preserve liquidity. The Company repurchased $9.1 million of stock earlier in the first quarter of 2020 and did not make any repurchases under the program during the remainder of 2020. Upon expiration of the prior stock repurchase program on December 15, 2020, $74.2 million of availability remained under the program. On December 11, 2020, the Board of Directors authorized the 2020 Stock Repurchase Program to commence upon expiration of the prior program. Under the 2020 Stock Repurchase Program, the Company is authorized to repurchase up to $150 million of its issued and outstanding common stock over a three-year period, expiring December 15, 2023.
Based on the Company’s current operating plan and the foregoing actions, management believes cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020, together with cash flows from operating activities, and borrowing available under our Amended Credit Agreement, are sufficient to meet operating and capital expenditure needs, and to service debt, for at least the next 12 months. However, as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and our operations evolves, we may need to obtain alternative sources of capital, and we may finance additional liquidity needs in the future through one or more equity or debt offerings.
A continued worldwide disruption, including from additional waves of pandemic outbreaks, from the COVID-19 pandemic, and actions that lending institutions, our customers, consumers and governmental authorities may take in response, could materially affect our future access to sources of liquidity, and there can be no assurance that such capital will be available at all or on reasonable terms. Further, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic adversely affects our future financial performance and thus our cash flows will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including, but not limited to, the duration and spread of the pandemic, its severity, the effectiveness of actions to contain the virus or treat its impact and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions will resume. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience significant adverse impacts on our business, financial performance, financial condition, cash flows, liquidity and stock price for a lengthy period of time as a result of its global economic impact.
The following table represents our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments, in thousands:
Cash Flows From Operating Activities
We manage our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments to fund operating requirements and preserve liquidity to take advantage of future business opportunities. The following table compares the cash flows from operating activities earned during 2020 and 2019, in thousands:
Working Capital
The following table illustrates changes in working capital during 2020, in thousands:
The following table highlights significant transactions that contributed to the increase in cash experienced during the year ended December 31, 2020, in thousands:
Cash Flows From Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $18.2 million during 2020, reflecting purchases of property and equipment of $17.2 million and the acquisition of intangible assets of $3.1 million, partially offset by $2.1 million in proceeds from the sale of patents and property and equipment.
Cash Flows From Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $115.5 million during 2020, reflecting additional borrowings on the U.S. Revolving Note totaling $201.2 million partially offset by payments of principal on the U.S. Revolving Note totaling $91.4 million. Borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement mature on June 27, 2024. See Note 9, “Debt” of the consolidated financial statements included in this Report for additional information. Cash was also paid for the repurchase of Common Stock totaling $9.1 million and for cancellations of restricted stock awards totaling $1.1 million, partially offset by proceeds from the exercise of Common Stock options totaling $16.6 million.
Debt
Amended Credit Agreement
On June 27, 2019, the Company entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Amended Credit Agreement”) with a consortium of lenders and Bank of America, N.A. as administrative agent. The Amended Credit Agreement amended and restated in its entirety the prior Credit Agreement. The outstanding principal and interest of the U.S. Revolving Note under the prior Credit Agreement continued and constitute obligations under the Amended Credit Agreement.
The Amended Credit Agreement increased the U.S. Revolving Note from $350.0 million to $475.0 million and extended the maturity from March 17, 2021 to June 27, 2024. The Amended Credit Agreement also provides $15.0 million availability for the issuance of letters of credit and a maximum of $40.0 million for swing line borrowing. Any amount of the facility utilized for letters of credit or swing line loans outstanding will reduce the amount available under the Amended Credit Agreement. The Company had no outstanding letters of credit issued under the Amended Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The U.S. borrowers and guarantors participating in the Amended Credit Agreement also entered into a related amended and restated pledge and security agreement. The amended and restated pledge and security agreement grants a security interest to the lenders in substantially all of the personal property of the Company and its U.S. subsidiaries designated as borrowers to secure their respective obligations under the Amended Credit Agreement, including the stock and membership interests of specified subsidiaries (limited to 66% of the stock in the case of certain non-U.S. subsidiaries). In addition to the security obligations, all obligations under the Amended Credit Agreement are unconditionally guaranteed by certain of the Company’s subsidiaries. The Amended Credit Agreement restricts, among other things, the amount of dividend payments the Company can make to shareholders.
The Amended Credit Agreement contains covenants, that, among other things, (i) prohibit or limit the ability of the borrowers and any material subsidiary to incur additional indebtedness, create liens, pay dividends, make certain types of investments (including acquisitions), enter into certain types of transactions with affiliates, prepay other indebtedness, sell assets, merge with other companies or enter into certain other transactions outside the ordinary course of business, and (ii) require that Gentherm maintain a minimum Consolidated Interest Coverage Ratio and Consolidated Leverage Ratio (based on consolidated EBITDA for the applicable trailing 12-month period as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement) as of the end of any fiscal quarter. The Amended Credit Agreement also contains customary events of default. As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with the terms of the Amended Credit Agreement.
Under the Amended Credit Agreement, U.S. Dollar denominated loans bear interest at either a base rate (“Base Rate Loans”) or Eurocurrency rate (“Eurocurrency Rate Loans”), plus a margin (“Applicable Rate”). The rate for Base Rate Loans is equal to the highest of the Federal Funds Rate (0.09% at December 31, 2020) plus 0.50%, Bank of America’s prime rate (3.25% at December 31, 2020), or the Eurocurrency rate plus 1.00%. The rate for Eurocurrency Rate Loans denominated in U.S. Dollars is equal to the London Interbank Offered Rate (0.14% at December 31, 2020). All loans denominated in a currency other than the U.S. Dollar must be Eurocurrency Rate Loans. Interest is payable at least quarterly.
The Applicable Rate varies based on the Consolidated Leverage Ratio reported by the Company. As long as the Company is not in default of the terms and conditions of the Amended Credit Agreement, the lowest and highest possible Applicable Rate is 1.25% and 2.25%, respectively, for Eurocurrency Rate Loans and 0.25% and 1.25%, respectively, for Base Rate Loans.
In March 2020, the Company increased its borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement by $169.5 million as a safeguard to increase its cash position and provide additional financial flexibility due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The proceeds have been and will continue to be used for working capital and for other general corporate purposes permitted by the Amended Credit Agreement. After the drawdown in March 2020 and through December 31, 2020, the Company repaid a net amount of $41.2 million of the amounts outstanding under the Amended Credit Agreement. In January 2021, the Company repaid an additional $80.0 million of the amounts outstanding under the Amended Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, inclusive of the net new borrowings in 2020, $186.2 million was outstanding under the Amended Credit Agreement. Borrowing availability is subject to, among other things, the Company’s compliance with the minimum Consolidated Interest Coverage Ratio and Consolidated Leverage Ratio as of the end of any fiscal quarter. Based upon consolidated EBITDA for the trailing twelve months calculated for purposes of the Consolidated Leverage Ratio, $288.8 million remained available as of December 31, 2020 for additional borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement subject to specified conditions that Gentherm currently satisfies.
DEG Vietnam Loan
The Company also has a fixed interest rate loan with the German Investment Corporation (“DEG”), a subsidiary of KfW Banking Group, a Germany government-owned development bank. The fixed interest rate senior loan agreement with DEG was used to finance the construction and set up of the Vietnam production facility (“DEG Vietnam Loan”). The DEG Vietnam Loan is subject to semi-annual principal payments that began November 2017 and will end May 2023. Under the terms of the DEG Vietnam Loan, the Company must maintain a minimum Enhanced Equity Ratio, as defined by the DEG Vietnam Loan agreement, based on the financial statements of Gentherm’s wholly owned subsidiary, Gentherm Vietnam Co. Ltd. As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with all terms as outlined in the DEG Vietnam Loan.
The following table summarizes the Company’s debt at December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands).
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. These estimates and assumptions include, but are not limited to:
•
Product revenues;
•
Impairments of goodwill and other intangible assets;
•
Accrued warranty costs;
•
Income taxes;
•
Stock compensation; and
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized from agreements containing enforceable rights and obligations, when promised goods are delivered or services are completed. Taxes assessed by a governmental authority that are both imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction, that are collected by the Company from a customer, are excluded from revenue. Shipping and handling fees billed to customers are included in net sales, while costs of shipping and handling are included in cost of sales.
Automotive Revenues
The Company provides production parts to its customers under long-term supply agreements (“LTAs”). The duration of an LTA is generally consistent with the life cycle of a vehicle, however, an LTA does not reach the level of a performance obligation until Gentherm receives either a purchase order and/or a materials release from the customer for a specific number of parts at a specified price, at which point an enforceable contract exists. Revenue is recognized when control of the parts has transferred to the customer according to the terms of the contract, which typically occurs when the parts are shipped or delivered to the customer’s premises. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring parts.
Certain LTAs provide for annual price reductions over the production life of the vehicle. Agreements that are determined to provide customers with purchase option discounts that would not be received without entering into the contract are considered to contain a material right (for example, a discount given to a customer that is incremental to the range of discounts typically given to that class of customer). The material right represents a purchase option that provides the customer with the ability to purchase additional production parts at a set price in the future and is accounted for as a separate performance obligation. Under these circumstances, each transfer of production parts under the LTA requires allocation of the purchase price to the production part and the purchase option. As a practical alternative to estimating the standalone selling price of an option, the Company allocates transaction price to the purchase option by reference to the production part volumes expected to be ordered and the consideration expected to be received over the life of the vehicle program.
The production part’s relative standalone selling price observed under the LTA is subtracted from the total amount of consideration expected to be received in exchange for transferring of parts under the current contract and the difference is allocated to the purchase option. Revenue from options containing a material right is recognized when the amounts billed by the customer for production parts transferred, under the LTA, is less than the standalone selling price of those production parts.
Medical Revenues
Revenues from our patient temperature management business unit are generated from the sale of products and equipment. Our medical products and equipment focus on body and blood temperature management. The Company sells medical products and equipment primarily through distributor and group purchasing organization agreements. These agreements allow member participants to the distributor or group purchasing organization to make purchases at discounted prices negotiated by the distributor or group purchasing organization. A rebate is incurred at the point in time a member participant purchases product covered under these types of agreements. Rebates are accounted for as variable consideration, using an expected value, probability weighted approach, based on the level of sales to the distributor and the time lag between the initial sale and the rebate claim in determining the transaction price of a contract. Revenue is recognized at the point in time the medical products or equipment is transferred to the customer.
Impairments of Goodwill and Other Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually as of December 31 and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. In conducting our annual impairment assessment testing, we first perform a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. If not, no further goodwill impairment testing is performed. If it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount, or if we elect not to perform a qualitative assessment of a reporting unit, we then compare the fair value of the reporting unit to the related net book value. If the net book value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is measured and recognized.
The Company utilizes an income statement approach to estimate the fair value of a reporting unit and a market valuation approach to further support this analysis. The income statement approach is based on projected debt-free cash flow that is discounted to the present value using discount factors that consider the timing and risk of cash flows. We believe that this approach is appropriate because it provides a fair value estimate based on the reporting unit’s expected long-term operating cash flow performance. This approach also mitigates the impact of cyclical trends that occur in the industry. Fair value is estimated using internally developed forecasts, as well as commercial and discount rate assumptions. The discount rate used is the value-weighted average of our estimated cost of equity and of debt (“cost of capital”) derived using both known and estimated customary market metrics. Our weighted average cost of capital is adjusted to reflect a risk factor, if necessary. Other significant assumptions include terminal value growth rates, terminal value margin rates, future capital expenditures and changes in future working capital requirements. While there are inherent uncertainties related to the assumptions used and to management’s application of these assumptions to this analysis, we believe that the income statement approach provides a reasonable estimate of the fair value of a reporting unit.
The Company performs its indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment assessment annually as of December 31, and between annual assessments if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount.
Accrued Warranty Costs
The Company accrues warranty obligations for products sold based on management estimates of future failure rates and current claim cost experience, with support from the sales, engineering, quality and legal functions. While we believe our warranty reserve is adequate and that the judgment applied is appropriate, such estimates could differ materially from what will actually transpire in the future. The warranty policy is reviewed by management annually. Using historical information available to the Company, including claims already filed by customers, the warranty accrual is adjusted quarterly to reflect management’s best estimate of future claims.
Income Taxes
We record income tax expense using the liability method which specifies that deferred tax assets and liabilities be measured each year based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities at the applicable enacted tax rates. A valuation allowance is provided for deferred tax assets when management considers it more likely than not that the asset will not be realized. If future annual taxable income were to be significantly less than current and projected levels, there is a risk that certain of our deferred tax assets not already provided for by the valuation allowance would expire prior to utilization.
We recognize the financial statement benefit of a tax position only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more likely than not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more-likely-than-not threshold, the amount recognized in the financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority. We recognize interest and penalties related to income tax matters in income tax expense.
Stock Based Compensation
We account for grants of employee stock options, time-based restricted stock units and restricted stock as compensation expense based upon the fair value on the date of grant and such expense is recognized over the vesting condition, either based on a period of service or based on the performance of a specific achievement.
We also have granted restricted stock units measured based on either a target return on invested capital ratio (“ROIC”), as defined in the award agreement, for a specified fiscal year, or the Company’s common stock market price returning a target total shareholder return (“TSR”), as defined, during a specific three-year measurement period. Upon achievement of the performance measurement, performance-based restricted stock units (“PSUs”) cliff vest after three years. Under FASB ASC Topic 718, the provisions of the PSUs that vest upon the achievement of relative TSR are considered a market condition, and therefore the effect of that market condition is reflected in the grant date fair value for this portion of the award. A third party was engaged to complete a “Monte Carlo simulation” to account for the market condition. That simulation takes into account the beginning stock price of our
common stock, the expected volatilities for the TSR comparator group, the expected volatilities for the Company’s stock price, correlation coefficients, the expected risk-free rate of return and the expected dividend yield of the Company and the comparator group. The single grant-date fair value computed by this valuation method is recognized by the Company in accounting for the awards regardless of the actual future outcome of the relative TSR feature. The grant date fair value of the other PSUs and RSUs are calculated as the closing price of our common stock as quoted on Nasdaq on the grant date multiplied by the number of shares subject to the award. ROIC is considered a performance condition and the grant-date fair value for ROIC PSUs corresponds with management's expectation of the probable outcome of the performance condition as of the grant date.
Stock appreciation rights (“SARs”) are also an award type granted under our management incentive program and they are accounted for using the liability method since they are settled in cash, which requires mark-to-market adjustments based on the current trading price of Gentherm Common Stock to be recognized in statements of income.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a complete description of recent accounting standards which we have not yet been required to implement which may be applicable to our operations, as well as significant accounting standards that have been adopted during the year ended December 31, 2020, see Note 3, “New Accounting Pronouncements” to the consolidated financial statements included in this Report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are, in the opinion of management, reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our financial condition or results of operations.
Effects of Inflation
The automotive component supply industry is subject to inflationary pressures with respect to raw materials and labor, which have historically placed operational and financial burdens on the entire supply chain. Accordingly, the Company continues to take actions with its customers and suppliers to mitigate the impact of these inflationary pressures in the future. Actions to mitigate inflationary pressures with customers include collaboration on alternative product designs and material specifications, contractual price escalation clauses on specified materials and negotiated customer recoveries. Actions to mitigate inflationary pressures with suppliers include aggregation of purchase requirements to achieve optimal volume benefits, negotiation of cost-reductions and identification of more cost competitive suppliers. While these actions are designed to offset the impact of inflationary pressures, the Company cannot provide assurance that it will be successful in fully offsetting increased costs resulting from inflationary pressure.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our expected cash outflows resulting from financial contracts and commitments as of December 31, 2020. We have not included information on our recurring purchases of materials for use in our manufacturing operations. These amounts are generally consistent from year to year, closely reflect our levels of production and are not long-term in nature:
(1)
Long-term debt obligations do not include an amount payable for interest.
The Company does not have any outstanding capital lease agreements.