Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Executive Overview
We manage and report our operating results through two divisions, which are our reportable segments: Meal Preparation and Snacking & Beverages.
The following discussion and analysis presents the factors that had a material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. This should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes to those Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements. See Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks, and assumptions associated with these statements.
Recent Developments
Pasta Acquisition
On December 11, 2020, the Company completed the acquisition of the majority of the U.S. branded pasta portfolio as well as a manufacturing facility in St. Louis, Missouri of Riviana Foods, a subsidiary of Ebro Foods for a purchase price of approximately $239.2 million in cash, subject to customary purchase price adjustments. Ebro Foods is a Spanish-based multinational food group operating primarily in the pasta and rice sectors. The acquisition includes the following regional brands: Skinner, No Yolks, American Beauty, Creamette, San Giorgio, Prince, Light ‘n Fluffy, Mrs. Weiss’, Wacky Mac, P&R Procino-Rossi, and New Mill. The acquisition is expected to strengthen the Company's portfolio and expand its scale to better serve its national and regional customers. The transaction was funded from the Company’s existing cash resources. Refer to Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Debt Refinancing
On September 9, 2020, the Company completed its public offering the 2028 Notes. The Company used the net proceeds of $491.7 million (after deducting the underwriting discount and offering expenses) from the offering of the 2028 Notes to fund the redemption of all of the $375.9 million outstanding principal amount of the previously issued 2022 Notes, to pay transaction-related fees and expenses of the 2022 Notes redemption, and for general corporate purposes. Refer to Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
COVID-19
In December 2019, COVID-19 was first reported and subsequently characterized by the World Health Organization ("WHO") as a pandemic in March 2020. In an effort to reduce the global transmission of COVID-19, various policies and initiatives have been implemented by governments around the world, including orders to close businesses not deemed "essential", shelter-in-place orders enacted by state and local governments, and the practice of social distancing measures when engaging in essential activities.
Local, state, and national governments continue to emphasize the importance of the food supply during this pandemic and asked that food manufacturers and retailers remain open to meet the needs of our communities. Our number one priority continues to be the health and safety of our employees and others we may come in contact with as we serve our purpose of making high quality food and beverages affordable to all. We have taken numerous steps to keep our employees safe including increased sanitation stations, implementation of physical barriers and social distancing protocols at our manufacturing operations, masks and personal protective equipment for employees across our facilities, preventative temperature screenings across all manufacturing locations, incentives for employees, including supplemental pay and additional paid leave, and remote work arrangements for administrative support functions. Our cross-functional task force continues to monitor and coordinate the Company's response to COVID-19.
Consumers have modified their purchasing habits to more food-at-home in response to the pandemic. As a result, we have experienced favorable revenue and earnings impacts within our retail grocery business, which comprises approximately 80% of total net sales. These favorable impacts within our retail grocery channel more than offset the unfavorable impacts due to the prolonged weakness in demand within the food-away-from-home channel. To date, there have not been material disruptions to
our supply chain network, including the supply of our ingredients, packaging, or other sourced materials, though it is possible that more significant disruptions could occur if the duration and severity of COVID-19 continues to increase within North America or Italy. However, there have been production limitations as a result of a tighter labor market, and the COVID-19 environment has caused freight rates to increase during 2020 compared to 2019 due to tighter capacity and stronger demand in the trucking market with the higher shipping volume of products and groceries at-home. These trends have affected our ability to service certain categories.
With the vaccination programs just now beginning, we expect the consumption trends to continue to favor retail grocery as people continue to stay at home. As the vaccination rollout comes to an end, we believe consumers could shift to their historical consumption patterns.
Change in Segments
On January 1, 2020, the Company changed how it manages its business, allocates resources, and goes to market, which resulted in modifications to its organizational and segment structure. As a result, the Company reorganized from a three segment structure previously organized by product category (Baked Goods, Beverages, and Meal Solutions) to a two segment structure organized by market dynamics (Snacking & Beverages and Meal Preparation). All prior period information has been recast to reflect this change in reportable segments. Refer to Note 21 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Results of Operations
The following table presents certain information concerning our financial results, including information presented as a percentage of consolidated net sales:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Continuing Operations
Net Sales - Consolidated net sales increased 1.4% to $4,349.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $4,288.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in net sales from 2019 to 2020 was due to the following:
(1) Organic net sales is a Non-GAAP financial measure. Refer to the definition within the "Non-GAAP Measures" section.
Organic net sales increased 2.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 driven by:
•Volume/mix excluding SKU rationalization, divestitures, and acquisitions was favorable 2.7% year-over-year primarily due to distribution gains, new items, and increased retail demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which outpaced the impact of carryover distribution losses and decreased food-away-from-home demand.
•Pricing was flat during 2020 compared to 2019.
The year-over-year increase in organic net sales was partially offset by the divestiture of the two In-Store Bakery facilities, which was unfavorable 1.4%. The inclusion of the business from the pasta acquisition was favorable by 0.3%. Our efforts to simplify and rationalize low margin SKUs from our product portfolio was unfavorable 0.1% within our Snacking & Beverages segment and foreign exchange was unfavorable 0.1% year-over-year.
Gross Profit - Gross profit as a percentage of net sales was 18.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 18.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 0.2 percentage points. The decrease is primarily due to incremental costs incurred in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including increased production shifts, supplemental pay, protective equipment for employees, additional sanitation measures, and higher employee expenses. This was partially offset by higher operational throughput at our network of manufacturing and distribution facilities.
Total Operating Expenses - Total operating expenses as a percentage of net sales was 14.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 19.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 4.1 percentage points. The decrease is primarily attributable to 2019 non-recurring impairment charges of $88.0 million related to long-lived assets in the Cookies and Dry Dinners categories, within the Snacking & Beverages and Meal Preparation segments, respectively, and 2019 the non-recurring impairment charge of $41.1 million related to the sale of the Fridley, Minnesota and Lodi, California In-Store Bakery facilities. Additionally, there were lower restructuring expenses as the Company completed certain restructuring programs.
Total Other Expense - Total other expense decreased by $7.7 million to $132.0 million in 2020 compared to $139.7 million in 2019. The decrease is primarily due to lower non-cash mark-to-market expense from hedging activities, driven by foreign
currency contracts, interest rate swaps, and commodity contracts. The decrease was partially offset by unfavorable currency exchange rates between the U.S. and Canadian dollar during the respective periods, a loss on extinguishment of debt, and higher interest expense driven by the realized loss on swap contracts.
Income Taxes - Income tax benefit was recorded at an effective rate of (187.7)% in 2020 compared to 29.2% in 2019. The change in the Company’s effective tax rate year-over-year is primarily due to benefits recognized in 2020 related to the net operating loss carryback provisions of the CARES Act, a change in the amount of valuation allowance recorded against certain deferred tax assets, and the one-time tax benefit recognized in 2019 associated with the repatriation of the U.S. customer based intangibles formerly held by our Canadian subsidiaries.
Our effective tax rate may change from period to period based on recurring and non-recurring factors including the jurisdictional mix of earnings, enacted tax legislation, state income taxes, settlement of tax audits, and the expiration of the statute of limitations in relation to unrecognized tax benefits.
Discontinued Operations
Net loss from discontinued operations decreased $215.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease is primarily related to a non-recurring impairment charge recognized in 2019 related to long-lived assets in the Snacks division, a greater impairment charge related to the expected loss on disposal of the Ready-to-eat Cereal business recognized in 2019 compared to that recognized in 2020, and a non-recurring loss on the sale of the Snacks division recognized in 2019. Additionally, the Snacks division had a non-recurring operating loss in 2019. Refer to Note 7 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019 - Results by Segment
The change in net sales from the year ended December 31, 2019 to year ended December 31, 2020 was due to the following:
Meal Preparation
Net sales in the Meal Preparation segment increased $20.7 million or 0.8% in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in net sales was due to recent distribution gains and stronger retail demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which outpaced the impact of carryover distribution losses and decreased food-away-from-home demand. Additionally, the inclusion of the business from the pasta acquisition increased net sales. This was partially offset by unfavorable pricing due to the impact of pricing adjustments and unfavorable foreign currency. Organic net sales in the Meal Preparation segment increased 0.4% year-over-year.
Direct operating income as a percentage of net sales decreased 0.5 percentage points in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily due to COVID-19 increased operational costs primarily from labor shortages, unfavorable pricing, and higher freight costs due to reduced market capacity and an increase in spot market usage. These declines were partially offset by favorable SG&A as a result of continued discipline and favorable channel mix.
Snacking & Beverages
Net sales in the Snacking & Beverages segment increased $41.2 million or 2.6% in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in net sales was due to favorable volume/mix mostly from increased retail demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and favorable pricing, which outpaced the impact of carryover distribution losses and lower volume due to the divestiture of the two In-Store Bakery facilities. This was partially offset by efforts to simplify and rationalize low margin SKUs and unfavorable foreign currency. Organic net sales in the Snacking & Beverages segment increased 6.5% year-over-year.
Direct operating income as a percentage of net sales increased 2.2 percentage points in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase primarily resulted from productivity gains associated with higher operational throughput at our network of manufacturing and distribution facilities in response to the increased demand due to COVID-19. The increase was partially offset by higher freight costs due to reduced market capacity and an increase in spot market usage.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Continuing Operations
Net Sales - Consolidated net sales decreased 6.5% to $4,288.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $4,587.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The change in net sales from 2018 to 2019 was due to the following:
Organic net sales decreased 5.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019 driven by:
•Volume/mix was unfavorable 5.6% year-over-year across both segments primarily due to distribution lost as a result of pricing actions taken in 2018.
•Pricing was favorable 0.6% during 2019 compared to 2018 driven by pricing actions executed in 2019 to cover commodity, freight, and packaging inflation, partially offset by competitive pressure in Single serve hot beverages.
Our efforts to simplify and rationalize low margin SKUs from our product portfolio contributed 1.3% to the overall year-over-year decline in net sales, primarily within our Snacking & Beverages segment. The divestiture of the McCann's business in July 2018 and unfavorable foreign currency exchange each contributed 0.1% to the year-over-year decline in net sales.
Gross Profit - Gross profit as a percentage of net sales was 18.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 19.4% for the year ended December 31, 2018, a decrease of 0.8 percentage points. The decrease is primarily due to lower volumes and the related costs impacts, $11.4 million of expenses related to regulatory compliance with upcoming nutrition label requirements and $4.3 million related to the multiemployer pension plan withdrawal recognized in 2019. This is partially offset by lower expenses associated with our restructuring programs of $4.4 million in 2019 compared to $13.3 million in 2018.
Total Operating Expenses - Total operating expenses as a percentage of net sales was 19.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 17.6% for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of 1.4 percentage points. The increase is primarily due to non-cash impairment charges of $129.1 million related to the Cookies and Dry Dinners asset groups, within the Snacking & Beverages and Meal Preparation segments, respectively, and two In-Store Bakery facilities in 2019, and $13.4 million of acquisition, integration, divestiture and related gains mostly related to the divestiture of the McCann's business in 2018 compared to $0.6 million expense in 2019. This is partially offset by lower restructuring expenses of $99.3 million in 2019, compared to $149.1 million in 2018, lower freight costs due to increased market capacity and reduced spot market usage, and lower variable incentive compensation.
Total Other Expense - Total other expense decreased by $1.3 million to $139.7 million in 2019 compared to $141.0 million in 2018. The decrease was primarily due to favorable fluctuations in the currency exchange rates between the U.S. and Canadian dollar during the respective periods and lower interest expense. The lower interest expense reflects lower net debt compared to the prior year, partially offset by the year-over-year increase in the LIBOR interest rate. This decrease in total other expense is partially offset by unrealized losses of $47.0 million related to mark-to-market derivative contracts in 2019, compared to unrealized losses of $22.5 million in 2018.
Income Taxes - Income tax benefit was recorded at an effective rate of 29.2% in 2019 compared to 19.8% in 2018. The change in the Company’s effective tax rate year-over-year is primarily due to a one-time tax benefit in 2019 associated with the repatriation of the U.S. customer based intangibles formerly held by our Canadian subsidiaries, a change in the valuation allowance recorded against certain deferred tax assets, and a change in the amount of executive compensation that is non-deductible for tax purposes.
Our effective tax rate may change from period to period based on recurring and non-recurring factors including the jurisdictional mix of earnings, enacted tax legislation, state income taxes, settlement of tax audits, and the expiration of the statute of limitations in relation to unrecognized tax benefits.
Discontinued Operations
Net loss from discontinued operations increased $232.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The increase is primarily the result of the non-cash pre-tax loss on the divestiture of the Snacks division of $98.4 million and expected disposal loss on the RTE Cereal business recognized as an impairment charge of $74.5 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018 - Results by Segment
The change in net sales from the year ended December 31, 2018 to year ended December 31, 2019 was due to the following:
Meal Preparation
Net sales in the Meal Preparation segment decreased $190.9 million or 6.6% in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 due to unfavorable volume/mix primarily from lost distribution mostly in Pasta, Pickles, Powdered Creamers, and Single serve hot beverages, the continued impact of lower pricing on Single serve hot beverages due to competitive pressure, ongoing efforts to simplify and rationalize low margin SKUs, the divestiture of the McCann's business, and unfavorable foreign currency. These declines were partially offset by pricing actions taken to recover commodity, freight, and packaging inflation.
Direct operating income as a percentage of net sales decreased 0.4 percentage points in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This decrease is primarily due to lost distribution, the continued impact of lower pricing on Single serve hot beverages due to competitive pressure, and higher operating costs. These declines were partially offset by pricing actions taken in response to commodity, freight, and packaging inflation and lower freight costs due to increased market capacity and reduced spot market usage.
Snacking & Beverages
Net sales in the Snacking & Beverages segment decreased $108.0 million or 6.3% in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 due to unfavorable volume/mix primarily from lost distribution mostly in Broth, In-Store Bakery, Crackers and Bars, ongoing efforts to simplify and rationalize low margin SKUs, and unfavorable foreign currency. These declines were partially offset by pricing actions taken to recover commodity, freight, and packaging inflation.
Direct operating income as a percentage of net sales increased 1.5 percentage points in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase is primarily due to lower freight costs as a result of increased market capacity and reduced spot market usage, cost savings due to TreeHouse 2020 and Structure to Win initiatives, pricing actions taken to recover commodity, freight, and packaging inflation, and favorable mix due to the rationalization of low margin business. This was partially offset by lower volume.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow
Management assesses the Company’s liquidity in terms of its ability to generate cash to fund its operating, investing, and financing activities. The Company remains in a strong financial position, with resources available for reinvesting in existing businesses, conducting acquisitions, and managing its capital structure on a short and long-term basis. If additional borrowings are needed, approximately $727.1 million was available under the Revolving Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020. See Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our Revolving Credit Facility. We are in compliance with the terms of the Revolving Credit Facility and expect to meet foreseeable financial requirements.
COVID-19
At this time, COVID-19 has not had a material adverse impact on our operations, and we anticipate our current cash balances, cash flows from operations, and our available sources of liquidity will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements. We expect that the provisions included within the CARES Act will help offset incremental cash expenses incurred by the Company as we respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. Under the CARES Act, we deferred the payment of $22.8 million in payroll taxes as of December 31, 2020, which will be paid equally in the fourth quarters of 2021 and 2022. We filed a refund claim from the Internal Revenue Service of $73.5 million related to the net operating loss carryback provisions of the CARES Act for the 2019 federal tax loss and received $71.4 million in the fourth quarter of 2020. We will file an additional $14.1 million refund claim for the 2020 estimated federal tax loss. In addition, we are actively monitoring the collectability of all of our outstanding trade receivables, including those within our food-away-from-home channel, which comprises less than 10% of our revenue. Given the dynamic nature of COVID-19, we will continue to assess our liquidity needs while additionally managing our discretionary spending and investment strategies.
Notice of Partial Redemption of the 2024 Notes
On January 15, 2021 the Company, through Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee (the "Trustee"), issued a notice of redemption to redeem $200.0 million of its outstanding 6.000% Senior Notes due 2024 (the "2024 Notes"). The redemption of the 2024 Notes is expected to occur on February 16, 2021 (the "Redemption Date"). The 2024 Notes were issued under an indenture dated as of March 2, 2010, by and among the Company, the guarantors signatory thereto and the Trustee, as supplemented and amended (the "Indenture"). The Notes will be redeemed pursuant to Sections 3.01 and 3.02 of the Indenture at a redemption price equal to 101.50% of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes being redeemed (the "Redemption Price"), plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including the Redemption Date. The redemption of the 2024 Notes will be funded using the Company's available cash resources, and it is not subject to any conditions. On and after the Redemption Date, the Redemption Price will become due and payable upon each such Note to be redeemed and, unless the Company defaults in making such redemption payment, interest thereon will cease to accrue on and after that date.
The following table is derived from our Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows:
Operating Activities From Continuing Operations
Our cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations was $403.6 million in 2020 compared to $263.9 million in 2019, an increase of $139.7 million. The increase is primarily attributable to higher cash earnings and the cash benefits from the CARES Act.
Our cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations was $263.9 million in 2019 compared to $472.1 million in 2018, a decrease of $208.2 million. The decrease is primarily attributable to lower accounts payable and higher incentive
compensation payments partially offset by lower receivables due to the higher use of the Receivables Sales Program (refer to Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial statements for additional information). Accounts payable decreased largely due to the settlement of payables retained as part of the divestiture of the Snacks division.
The Company's working capital management emphasis continues to be focused on reducing inventory, driving faster collection of receivables, and extending vendor terms.
Investing Activities From Continuing Operations
Cash used in investing activities of continuing operations was $330.4 million in 2020 compared to $139.3 million in 2019, an increase in cash used of $191.1 million, driven by the pasta and refrigerated dough business acquisitions. This was partially offset by proceeds received from the sale of the In-Store Bakery facilities in 2020 and lower capital expenditures related to non-recurring manufacturing plant expansion projects in 2019 primarily at our Single serve hot beverage Dallas, Texas and Ready-to-drink beverage Cambridge, Maryland locations.
Cash used in investing activities of continuing operations was $139.3 million in 2019 compared to $142.4 million in 2018, a decrease in cash used of $3.1 million, driven by lower capital expenditures in 2019 compared to 2018, partially offset by the proceeds from the sale of the McCann's business in 2018.
Financing Activities From Continuing Operations
Net cash provided by financing activities of continuing operations was $74.0 million in 2020 compared to net cash used of $206.9 million in 2019, an increase in cash provided of $280.9 million. The increase is primarily attributable to early payments made on the Company's term loan during 2019, which did not recur in 2020, and debt refinancing activity during 2020. This debt refinancing resulted in an increase in cash due to the issuance of 2028 Notes which was partially offset by the redemption of the 2022 Notes. The increase in cash provided was partially offset by the common stock repurchases.
Net cash used in financing activities of continuing operations was $206.9 million in 2019 compared to $311.0 million in 2018, a decrease in cash used of $104.1 million. The decrease is primarily attributable to repurchases of the 2022 Notes and 2024 Notes (refer to Note 12) and common stock repurchases, which did not recur in 2019, partially offset by early payments of $200.0 million on the Company's term loans during 2019.
Cash Flows From Discontinued Operations
Our cash provided by discontinued operations was $11.1 million in 2020 compared to $115.0 million in 2019, a decrease in cash provided of $103.9 million. The decrease in cash flow during 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily attributable to non-recurring proceeds from the sale of the Snacks division in 2019 and non-recurring cash flows from operations from the Snacks division in 2019. This was partially offset by higher cash earnings from the RTE Cereal business and lower capital expenditures during 2020.
Our cash provided by discontinued operations was $115.0 million in 2019 compared to cash provided of $15.2 million in 2018, an increase in cash provided of $99.8 million. The increase in cash flow during 2019 compared to 2018 is primarily attributable to proceeds received from the sale of the Snacks division and lower inventory.
Free Cash Flow From Continuing Operations
In addition to measuring our cash flow generation and usage based upon the operating, investing, and financing classifications included in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, we also measure free cash flow from continuing operations (a Non-GAAP measure) which represents net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations less capital expenditures. We believe free cash flow is an important measure of operating performance because it provides management and investors a measure of cash generated from operations that is available for mandatory payment obligations and investment opportunities such as funding acquisitions, repaying debt, and repurchasing our common stock.
The following table reconciles cash flow provided by operating activities from continuing operations (a GAAP measure) to our free cash flow from continuing operations (a Non-GAAP measure):
Debt Obligations
At December 31, 2020, we had $453.4 million outstanding under Term Loan A, $672.6 million outstanding under Term Loan A-1, $602.9 million of the 2024 Notes outstanding, $500.0 million of the 2028 Notes outstanding, and $4.1 million of finance leases. In addition, at December 31, 2020, there were $22.9 million in letters of credit under the Revolving Credit Facility that were issued but undrawn.
Credit Agreement - On December 1, 2017, the Company entered into the Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the "Credit Agreement") which amends, restates, and replaces the Company’s prior credit agreement, dated as of February 1, 2016 (as amended from time to time prior to February 1, 2016, the "Prior Credit Agreement"). As amended, the senior unsecured credit facility includes a revolving credit facility (the "Revolving Credit Facility" or the "Revolver") and two term loans. The Credit Agreement (1) extended the maturity dates of the Revolving Credit Facility, Term Loan A, and Term Loan A-1, (2) resized the Revolver from $900 million to $750 million, (3) consolidated three term loans into two, (4) tightened pricing, and (5) modified the fee structure on the Revolving Credit Facility to now calculate based on the unused portion of the commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility rather than the total commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility.
On June 11, 2018, the Company entered into Amendment No. 1 (the "Amendment") to the Credit Agreement. Under the Amendment, among other things, (i) the leverage covenant threshold increased through fiscal year 2019, (ii) the Company and the other loan parties secured the obligations with liens on substantially all of their personal property, and (iii) such liens will be released upon the Company’s leverage ratio being less than or equal to 4.00 to 1.00 no earlier than the fiscal quarter ended on December 31, 2019. The material terms and conditions under the Credit Agreement are otherwise substantially consistent with those contained in the Credit Agreement prior to the Amendment. In connection with this Amendment, $0.6 million in lender fees will be amortized ratably through January 31, 2025 and $1.8 million of fees will be amortized ratably through February 1, 2023.
On August 26, 2019, the Company entered into Amendment No. 2 (the "Amendment") to the Credit Agreement. This Amendment permanently maintains the secured status of the credit facility and the maximum permitted leverage ratio at 4.5x. Absent the Amendment, the Credit Agreement was scheduled to return to unsecured status with a maximum permitted leverage ratio of 4.0x in the fourth quarter of 2019. The material terms and conditions under the Credit Agreement are otherwise substantially consistent with those contained in the Credit Agreement prior to the Amendment.
The Company’s average interest rate on debt outstanding under its Credit Agreement for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 2.27%. Including the impact of the interest rate swap agreements in effect as of December 31, 2020, the average rate increased to 3.86%.
Revolving Credit Facility - As of December 31, 2020, $727.1 million of the aggregate commitment of $750.0 million of the Revolving Credit Facility was available. Under the Credit Agreement, the Revolving Credit Facility matures on February 1, 2023. In addition, as of December 31, 2020, there were $22.9 million in letters of credit under the Revolving Credit Facility that were issued but undrawn, which have been included as a reduction to the calculation of available credit.
Interest is payable quarterly or, if earlier, at the end of the applicable interest period in arrears on any outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility. The interest rates applicable to the Revolving Credit Facility are based upon the Company’s consolidated net leverage ratio or the Company’s Corporate Credit Rating, whichever results in lower pricing, and are determined by either (i) LIBOR, plus a margin ranging from 1.20% to 1.70%, or (ii) a Base Rate (as defined in the Credit Agreement), plus a margin ranging from 0.20% to 0.70%. The unused fee on the Revolving Credit Facility is also based on the Company’s consolidated net leverage ratio or the Company’s Corporate Credit Rating, whichever results in lower pricing, and accrues at a rate ranging from 0.20% to 0.35%.
The Credit Agreement is fully and unconditionally, as well as jointly and severally, guaranteed by our 100% owned direct and indirect domestic subsidiaries: Bay Valley Foods, LLC; Sturm Foods, Inc.; S.T. Specialty Foods, Inc.; Associated Brands, Inc.; TreeHouse Foods Services, LLC; Protenergy Holdings, Inc.; Protenergy Natural Foods, Inc.; TreeHouse Private Brands, Inc.; American Italian Pasta Company.; Linette Quality Chocolates, Inc.; Ralcorp Frozen Bakery Products, Inc.; Cottage Bakery, Inc.; The Carriage House Companies, Inc. and certain other domestic subsidiaries that may become guarantors in the future, which are collectively known as the "Guarantor Subsidiaries." The Credit Agreement contains various financial and restrictive covenants and requires that the Company maintain a consolidated net leverage ratio of no greater than 4.50 to 1.0. The Credit Agreement also contains cross-default provisions which could result in the acceleration of payments in the event TreeHouse or the Guarantor Subsidiaries (i) fails to make a payment when due in respect of any indebtedness or guarantee having an aggregate principal amount greater than $75.0 million or (ii) fails to observe or perform any other agreement or condition related to such indebtedness or guarantee as a result of which the holder(s) of such debt are permitted to accelerate the payment of such debt.
Term Loan A - On December 1, 2017, the Company entered into a $500 million term loan which amended and extended the Company’s existing term A loan. The maturity date is January 31, 2025. The interest rates applicable to Term Loan A are based upon the Company’s consolidated net leverage ratio or the Company’s Corporate Credit Rating, whichever results in lower pricing, and are determined by either (i) LIBOR, plus a margin ranging from 1.675% to 2.175%, or (ii) a Base Rate (as defined in the Credit Agreement), plus a margin ranging from 0.675% to 1.175%. Principal amortization payments are due on a quarterly basis and interest is payable quarterly or, if earlier, at the end of the applicable interest period in arrears on any outstanding borrowings under Term Loan A. Term Loan A is subject to substantially the same covenants as the Revolving Credit Facility, and also has the same Guarantor Subsidiaries.
Term Loan A-1 - On December 1, 2017, the Company entered into a $900 million term loan which amended and extended the Company’s existing tranche A-1 and tranche A-2 term loans. The maturity date is February 1, 2023. The interest rates applicable to Term Loan A-1 are the same as those applicable to the Revolving Credit Facility (other than, for the avoidance of doubt, the unused fee). Principal amortization payments are due on a quarterly basis and interest is payable quarterly or, if earlier, at the end of the applicable interest period in arrears on any outstanding borrowing under Term Loan A-1. Term Loan A-1 is subject to substantially the same covenants as the Revolving Credit Facility, and has the same Guarantor Subsidiaries.
2022 Notes - The Company previously issued 2022 Notes. On August 26, 2020, the Company, through the trustee, issued a notice of redemption to redeem all of the $375.9 million outstanding principal of its 2022 Notes at a price of 100% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the redemption date (the "2022 Notes Redemption"). The 2022 Notes Redemption was completed on September 25, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred a loss on extinguishment of debt totaling $1.2 million representing the write-off of deferred financing costs.
2024 Notes - On January 29, 2016, the Company completed an exempt offering under Rule 144A and Regulation S of the Securities Act of the 2024 Notes. The net proceeds from the issuance of the 2024 Notes (approximately $760.7 million after deducting issuance costs, providing an effective interest rate of 6.23%) were used to fund a portion of the purchase price of the Private Brands Business. Interest is payable on February 15 and August 15 of each year. The payments began on August 15, 2016. The 2024 Notes will mature on February 15, 2024.
The Company may redeem some or all of the 2024 Notes upon not less than 30 nor more than 60 days' notice, at the applicable redemption prices described in the Indenture plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, up to but not including the redemption date. In the event of certain change of control events, as described in the Indenture, the Company may be required to purchase the 2024 Notes from the holders at a purchase price of 101% of the principal amount plus any accrued and unpaid interest.
2028 Notes - On September 9, 2020, the Company completed its public offering of $500 million aggregate principal amount of the 2028 Notes. The 2028 Notes pay interest at the rate of 4.000% per annum and mature on September 1, 2028. Interest is payable on the 2028 Notes on March 1 and September 1 of each year, beginning March 1, 2021.
The Company may redeem some or all of the 2028 Notes at any time prior to September 1, 2023 at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2028 Notes redeemed plus an applicable "make-whole" premium and accrued and unpaid interest to the redemption date. On or after September 1, 2023, the Company may redeem some or all of the 2028 Notes at redemption prices set forth in the Indenture, plus accrued and unpaid interest to the redemption date. In addition, at any time prior to September 1, 2023, the Company may redeem up to 40% of the 2028 Notes at a redemption price of 104.000% of the principal amount of the 2028 Notes redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to the redemption date, with the net cash proceeds of certain equity offerings. Subject to certain limitations, in the event of a change of control of the Company, the Company will be required to make an offer to purchase the 2028 Notes at a purchase price equal to 101% of the principal amount of the 2028 Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest to the date of purchase.
The Company issued the 2024 Notes and 2028 Notes pursuant to a single base Indenture among the Company, the Guarantor Subsidiaries, and the Trustee. The Indenture provides, among other things, that the 2024 Notes and 2028 Notes will be senior unsecured obligations of the Company. The Company’s payment obligations under the 2024 Notes and 2028 Notes are fully and unconditionally, as well as joint and severally, guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by the Guarantor Subsidiaries, in addition to any future domestic subsidiaries that guarantee or become borrowers under its credit facility or guarantee certain other indebtedness incurred by the Company or its restricted subsidiaries.
The Indenture governing the 2024 Notes and 2028 Notes contains customary event of default provisions (including, without limitation, defaults relating to the failure to pay at final maturity or the acceleration of certain other indebtedness). If an event of default occurs and is continuing, the trustee under the Indenture or holders of at least 25% in principal amount of such notes may declare the principal amount and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on all such notes to be due and payable. The Indenture also contains restrictive covenants that, among other things, limit the ability of the Company and the Guarantor Subsidiaries to: (i) incur additional indebtedness and issue certain preferred shares, (ii) make certain distributions, investments and other restricted payments, (iii) sell certain assets, (iv) agree to restrictions on the ability of restricted subsidiaries to make payments to the Company, (v) create liens, (vi) merge, consolidate or sell substantially all of the Company’s assets (vii) enter into certain transactions with affiliates, and (viii) engage in certain sale and leaseback transactions. The foregoing limitations are subject to exceptions as set forth in the Indenture. In addition, if in the future, the 2024 Notes or 2028 Notes have an investment grade credit rating by both Moody’s Investors Services, Inc. and Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services, certain of these covenants will, thereafter, no longer apply to the 2024 Notes or 2028 Notes for so long as the 2024 Notes or 2028 Notes are rated investment grade by the two rating agencies.
We are in compliance with all applicable financial debt covenants as of December 31, 2020.
Guarantor Summarized Financial Information
The 2024 Notes and 2028 Notes issued by TreeHouse Foods, Inc. are fully and unconditionally, as well as jointly and severally, guaranteed by our directly and indirectly owned domestic subsidiaries, which are collectively known as the "Guarantor Subsidiaries." The guarantees of the Guarantor Subsidiaries are subject to release in limited circumstances, only upon the occurrence of certain customary conditions. There are no significant restrictions on the ability of the parent company or any guarantor to obtain funds from its subsidiaries by dividend or loan.
The following tables present summarized financial information of TreeHouse Foods, Inc. and the Guarantor Subsidiaries on a combined basis. The combined summarized financial information eliminates intercompany balances and transactions among TreeHouse Foods, Inc. and the Guarantor Subsidiaries and equity in earnings and investments in any Guarantor Subsidiaries or Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries. The summarized financial information is provided in accordance with the reporting requirements of Rule 13-01 under SEC Regulation S-X for the issuer and Guarantor Subsidiaries.
The following is a description of the transactions between the combined TreeHouse Foods, Inc. and Guarantor Subsidiaries with Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries:
Known Trends and Uncertainties
The costs of raw materials, ingredients, packaging materials, fuel, and energy have been volatile in recent years and future changes in such costs may cause our results of operations and our operating margins to fluctuate significantly. We believe the overall food and beverage industry is facing significant inflation across several agricultural commodities, specifically oils (coconut, soybean, and palm), wheat, and oats. We manage the impact of cost increases, wherever possible, on commercially reasonable terms, by locking in prices on the quantities we expect are required to meet our production requirements. In addition, we offset the effect of increased costs by raising prices to our customers. However, for competitive reasons, we may not be able to pass along the full effect of increases in raw materials and other input costs as we incur them. Additionally, the Company expects to incur additional costs related to compliance with laws and regulations in food labeling, such as the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act and Bioengineered Labeling Declaration.
For additional discussion of the known trends and uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, see Part II, Item 7 - Recent Developments - COVID-19.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes the Company’s obligations and commitments to make future payments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Debt interest payments represent estimated future interest payments based on applicable interest rates at December 31, 2020.
(2)Purchase obligations primarily represent commitments to purchase minimum quantities of raw materials used in our production processes. We enter into these contracts from time to time in an effort to ensure a sufficient supply of raw
ingredients. In addition, we have contractual obligations to purchase various services that are a part of our production process.
(3)Benefit obligations consist of future payments related to pension and postretirement benefits as estimated by an actuarial valuation.
(4)Deferred compensation obligations have been allocated to payment periods based on existing payment plans for terminated employees and the estimated timing of distributions to current employees based on age.
(5)The unrecognized tax benefit liability recorded by the Company was $10.8 million at December 31, 2020. The timing of cash settlement, if any, cannot be reasonably estimated. The Company’s gross unrecognized tax benefit included in the tabular reconciliation (see Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information) was $10.7 million.
In addition to the commitments set forth in the above table, as of December 31, 2020, the Company had $22.9 million in letters of credit, the majority of which related to the Company’s workers’ compensation program.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any obligations that meet the definition of an off-balance sheet arrangement, other than letters of credit, which have or are reasonably likely to have a material effect on the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other Commitments and Contingencies
The Company also has selected levels of property and casualty risks, primarily related to employee health care, workers’ compensation claims, and other casualty losses, in addition to contingent liabilities related to the ordinary course of litigation, investigations, and tax audits.
See Note 19 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information about the Company’s commitments and contingent obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies
Critical accounting policies are defined as those most important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and results, and require the most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP with no need for the application of our judgment. In certain circumstances, however, the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to use our judgment to make certain estimates and assumptions. These estimates affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the Consolidated Financial Statements and the reported amounts of net sales and expenses during the reporting period. We have identified the policies described below as our critical accounting policies. See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed discussion of significant accounting policies.
Trade Allowances - We maintain an allowance for customer promotional programs, marketing co-op programs, and other sales and marketing expenses. This allowance is based on a combination of historical average program activity and specific customer program accruals, and can fluctuate due to the level of sales and marketing programs, and timing of deductions. This allowance was $39.6 million and $37.9 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Property, Plant, and Equipment and Other Finite Lived Assets - We evaluate property, plant, and equipment, operating lease right-of-use assets, and finite lived intangible assets for impairment when circumstances indicate that their carrying values may not be recoverable (a "triggering event"). Indicators of impairment include deteriorations in operating cash flows, the anticipated sale or disposal of an asset group, and other significant changes in business conditions.
Impairment charges are measured by comparing the carrying values of the asset groups to their estimated fair values. The fair value of these assets were based on expected future cash flows using Level 3 inputs under ASC 820. We can provide no assurance regarding the prospect of additional impairment charges in future periods.
Goodwill and Indefinite Lived Intangible Assets - Goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets totaled $2,201.1 million as of December 31, 2020, resulting primarily from acquisitions. Upon acquisition, the purchase price is first allocated to identifiable assets and liabilities, including but not limited to inventory, accounts payable, trademarks, and customer-related intangible assets, with any remaining purchase price recorded as goodwill. Goodwill and indefinite lived trademarks are not amortized.
The Company has three reporting units within its two reportable and operating segments.
The Company completed its annual goodwill and intangible asset impairment analysis as of December 31, 2020. Our assessment did not result in an impairment. Our analysis employed the use of an income approach, corroborated by the market approach. The Company believes the income approach is the most reliable indicator of the fair value of the reporting units. Significant assumptions used in the income approach include growth and discount rates, margins, and the Company’s weighted average cost of capital. We used historical performance and management estimates of future performance to determine margins and growth rates. The income approach utilizes projected cash flow estimates developed by the Company to determine fair value, which are unobservable, Level 3 inputs. Unobservable inputs are used to measure fair value to the extent that relevant observable inputs are not available. The Company developed our estimates using the best information available at the time. Discount rates selected for each reporting unit approximated the total Company discount rate. Our weighted average cost of capital included a review and assessment of market and capital structure assumptions. The Company's three reporting units all have fair values that the Company considers to be substantially in excess of their carrying values (between 68% and 122%). Considerable management judgment is necessary to evaluate the impact of operating changes and to estimate future cash flows. Assumptions used, such as forecasted growth rates and our cost of capital, are consistent with our internal projections and operating plans. Changes in our estimates or any of our other assumptions used in our analysis could result in a different conclusion.
We reviewed our indefinite lived intangible assets, which consist of trademarks totaling $22.4 million as of December 31, 2020, using the relief from royalty method. Significant assumptions include the royalty rates, growth, margins, and discount rates. Our assumptions were based on historical performance and management estimates of future performance, as well as available data on licenses of similar products. The Company’s policy is that indefinite lived assets must have a history of strong sales and cash flow performance that we expect to continue for the foreseeable future. When these criteria are no longer met, the Company changes the classification. Considerable management judgment is necessary to evaluate the impact of operating changes and to estimate future cash flows. The fair value of one of our trademarks with a book value of $16.4 million as of December 31, 2020 exceeds its book value by 12%. Based on our plans for this product line, we do not anticipate impairment of this trademark in the foreseeable future. However, if our revenue and profit expectations are not met or certain factors outside of our control, such as discount rates, change then this trademark could become impaired. Changes in our estimates or any of our other assumptions used in our analysis could result in a different conclusion.
Purchase Price Allocation - We record acquisitions using the purchase method of accounting. All of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at fair value as of the acquisition date. The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. The application of the purchase method of accounting for business combinations requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions in the determination of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, in order to properly allocate purchase price consideration between assets that are depreciated and amortized from goodwill. The fair value assigned to tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed are based on management’s estimates and assumptions, as well as other information compiled by management, including valuations that utilize customary valuation procedures and techniques. Significant assumptions and estimates include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future, the appropriate weighted-average cost of capital, and the cost savings expected to be derived from acquiring an asset. If the actual results differ from the estimates and judgments used in these estimates, the amounts recorded in the financial statements may be exposed to potential impairment of the intangible assets and goodwill, as discussed in the Goodwill and Indefinite Lived Intangible Assets critical accounting policies section.
Income Taxes - Deferred taxes are recognized for future tax effects of temporary differences between financial and income tax reporting using tax rates in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. We periodically estimate our probable tax obligations using historical experience in tax jurisdictions and informed judgments. There are inherent uncertainties related to the interpretations of tax regulations in the jurisdictions in which we operate. These judgments and estimates made at a point in time may change based on the outcome of tax audits and changes to, or further interpretations of, regulations. If such changes take place, there is a risk that our tax rate may increase or decrease in any period, which would impact our earnings. Future business results may affect deferred tax liabilities or the valuation of deferred tax assets over time.
Employee Benefit Plan Costs - We provide a range of benefits to our employees, including pension and postretirement benefits to our eligible employees and retirees. We record annual amounts relating to these plans based on calculations specified by GAAP, which include various actuarial assumptions, such as discount rates, assumed investment rates of return, compensation increases, employee turnover rates, and health care cost trend rates. We review our actuarial assumptions on an annual basis and make modifications to the assumptions based on current rates and trends when appropriate. As required by GAAP, the effect of such modifications is generally deferred and subsequently amortized over future periods. Different assumptions that we make could result in the recognition of different amounts of expense over different periods.
While a number of the key assumptions related to our qualified pension plans are long-term in nature, including assumed investment rates of return, compensation increases, employee turnover rates, and mortality rates, GAAP requires that our discount rate assumption be more heavily weighted to current market conditions. As such, our discount rate will likely change frequently. We used a discount rate to determine our estimated future benefit obligations of 2.50% at December 31, 2020. If the discount rate were one percent higher, the pension plan liability would have been approximately 10.8%, or $38.0 million, lower as of December 31, 2020. If the discount rate were one percent lower, the pension plan liability would have been approximately 13.2%, or $46.4 million, higher as of December 31, 2020.
See Note 17 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information regarding our employee pension and retirement benefit plans.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recent accounting pronouncements is provided in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Non-GAAP Measures
We have included in this report measures of financial performance that are not defined by GAAP ("Non-GAAP”). A non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of financial performance that excludes or includes amounts so as to be different than the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP in the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. We believe these measures provide useful information to the users of the financial statements as we also have included these measures in other communications and publications.
For each of these non-GAAP financial measures, we provide a reconciliation between the non-GAAP measure and the most directly comparable GAAP measure, an explanation of why management believes the non-GAAP measure provides useful information to financial statement users, and any additional purposes for which management uses the non-GAAP measure. This non-GAAP financial information is provided as additional information for the financial statement users and is not in accordance with, or an alternative to, GAAP. These non-GAAP measures may be different from similar measures used by other companies.
Organic Net Sales
Organic net sales is defined as net sales excluding the impacts of SKU rationalization, net sales associated with the pasta acquisition from Riviana Foods, foreign currency, and the net sales associated with the divestiture of the In-Store Bakery facilities, which closed on April 17, 2020. This information is provided in order to allow investors to make meaningful comparisons of the Company's sales between periods and to view the Company's business from the same perspective as Company management.
Adjusted Earnings Per Diluted Share From Continuing Operations, Adjusting for Certain Items Affecting Comparability
Adjusted earnings per diluted share from continuing operations ("adjusted diluted EPS") reflects adjustments to GAAP earnings (loss) per diluted share from continuing operations to identify items that, in management’s judgment, significantly affect the assessment of earnings results between periods. This information is provided in order to allow investors to make meaningful comparisons of the Company’s earnings performance between periods and to view the Company’s business from the same perspective as Company management. As the Company cannot predict the timing and amount of charges that include, but are not limited to, items such as acquisition, integration, divestiture, and related costs, mark-to-market adjustments on derivative contracts, foreign currency exchange impact on the re-measurement of intercompany notes, restructuring programs, impairment of assets, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and other items that may arise from time to time that would impact comparability, management does not consider these costs when evaluating the Company’s performance, when making decisions regarding the allocation of resources, in determining incentive compensation, or in determining earnings estimates.
The reconciliation of adjusted diluted EPS from continuing operations, excluding certain items affecting comparability, to the relevant GAAP measure of diluted EPS from continuing operations as presented in the Consolidated Statements of Operations, is as follows:
During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, the Company entered into transactions that affected the year-over-year comparison of its financial results that included the following:
(1) The Company’s restructuring and margin improvement activities are part of an enterprise-wide transformation to improve long-term profitability of the Company. During 2020, the Company incurred approximately $73.2 million in restructuring program costs versus $105.4 million in 2019 and $166.7 million in 2018. Refer to Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. Additionally, the Company recognized other items affecting comparability including recovery of insurance proceeds related to product recalls and related costs. During 2020, the Company recorded a $(0.4) million product recall reimbursement versus a $0.3 million expense in 2019.
(2) The Company’s derivative contracts are marked-to-market each period with the unrealized changes in fair value being recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. These are non-cash charges. As the contracts are settled, realized gains and losses are recognized. The mark-to-market impacts only are treated as Non-GAAP adjustments. Refer to Note 20 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
(3) During 2020, the Company incurred incremental expenses directly attributable to our response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which included supplemental pay to our front-line personnel, additional protective equipment for employees, and additional sanitation measures. These costs were approximately $53.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These costs were partially offset by an income tax benefit with interest income due to the enactment of the CARES Act of approximately $30.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(4) Acquisition, integration, divestiture, and related costs represents costs associated with completed and potential divestitures, completed and potential acquisitions, the related integration of the acquisitions, and gains or losses on the divestiture of a business. Refer to Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
(5) During 2020, the Company recognized a $9.0 million accrual related to a litigation matter challenging wage and hour practices at three former manufacturing facilities in California. Refer to Note 19 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details. During 2019, the Company recognized a $25.0 million accrual for a litigation matter related to allegations of
certain purported label misrepresentations as to the nature of its Grove Square coffee products. This matter was settled on April 21, 2020.
(6) Tax indemnification represents the non-cash write off of indemnification assets that were recorded in connection with acquisitions from prior years. These write-offs arose as a result of the related uncertain tax position being released due to the statute of limitation lapse or settlement with taxing authorities.
(7) During 2020, the Company incurred a loss on extinguishment of debt totaling $1.2 million representing the write-off of deferred financing costs. During 2018, the Company amended its Credit Agreement, resulting in third party costs to complete the transaction. The Company also completed the repurchase of certain of its outstanding debt in 2018. This repurchase activity and write-off of a portion of deferred financing costs resulted in a loss on extinguishment of debt. Refer to Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
(8) During 2020 and 2019, the Company incurred regulatory compliance costs related to upcoming changes in nutrition labeling requirements. These costs included both consulting services and inventory write-downs.
(9) Executive management transition includes costs related to the CFO transitions in 2020 and 2019 and the CEO transition in 2018. The CFO transition costs primarily relate to severance. The CEO transition costs primarily relate to accelerated stock-based compensation and modification accounting. Refer to Note 15 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details
(10) During 2019, the Company incurred $129.1 million of non-cash impairment charges related to the Cookies and Dry Dinners asset groups and to the expected disposal loss related to two In-Store Bakery facilities. The impairment charges related to the Cookies and Dry Dinners asset groups is comprised of non-cash impairment charges of $45.2 million of finite lived intangible asset impairment losses and $42.8 million of property, plant, and equipment impairment losses. The impairment related to the expected disposal loss on the In-Store Bakery facilities is $41.1 million. Refer to Note 7, Note 8, and Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
(11) During 2019, the Company executed a complete withdrawal from the Retail, Wholesale, and Department Store International Union and Industry Pension Fund. The Company settled the withdrawal in the fourth quarter of 2019 for $4.3 million.
(12) The Company has Canadian dollar denominated intercompany loans and incurred foreign currency gains and losses to re-measure the loans at the respective period ends. These charges are non-cash and the loans are eliminated in consolidation.
The tax impact on adjusting items is calculated based upon the tax laws and statutory tax rates applicable in the tax jurisdiction of the underlying non-GAAP adjustments.
Adjusted Net Income from Continuing Operations, Adjusted EBIT from Continuing Operations, Adjusted EBITDA from Continuing Operations, Adjusted Net Income Margin from Continuing Operations, Adjusted EBIT Margin from Continuing Operations, and Adjusted EBITDA Margin from Continuing Operations, Adjusting for Certain Items Affecting Comparability
Adjusted net income from continuing operations represents GAAP net income (loss) as reported in the Consolidated Statements of Operations adjusted for items that, in management’s judgment, significantly affect the assessment of earnings results between periods as outlined in the adjusted diluted EPS from continuing operations section above. This information is provided in order to allow investors to make meaningful comparisons of the Company’s earnings performance between periods and to view the Company’s business from the same perspective as Company management. This measure is also used as a component of the Board of Directors' measurement of the Company’s performance for incentive compensation purposes and is the basis of calculating the adjusted diluted EPS from continuing operations metric outlined above.
Adjusted EBIT from continuing operations represents adjusted net income from continuing operations before interest expense, interest income, and income tax expense. Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations represents adjusted net income from continuing operations before interest expense, interest income, income tax expense, and depreciation and amortization expense. Adjusted EBIT from continuing operations and adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations are performance measures commonly used by management to assess operating performance, and the Company believes they are commonly reported and widely used by investors and other interested parties as a measure of a company’s operating performance between periods.
Adjusted net income margin from continuing operations, adjusted EBIT margin from continuing operations, and adjusted EBITDA margin from continuing operations are calculated as the respective metric defined above as a percentage of net sales as reported in the Consolidated Statements of Operations adjusted for items that, in management’s judgment, significantly affect the assessment of earnings results between periods as outlined in the adjusted diluted EPS from continuing operations section above.
The following table reconciles the Company’s net income (loss) from continuing operations as presented in the Consolidated Statements of Operations, the relevant GAAP measure, to Adjusted net income from continuing operations, Adjusted EBIT from continuing operations, and Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018: