Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) summarizes the significant factors affecting the consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources of Target Hospitality Corp. and is intended to help the reader understand Target Hospitality Corp., our operations and our present business environment. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements and notes to those statements included in Part II, Item 8 within this Annual Report on Form 10-K. References to “we,” “us,” “our”, “Target Hospitality,” or “the Company” refer to Target Hospitality Corp. and its consolidated subsidiaries at and after March 15, 2019 and to Platinum Eagle Acquisition Corp., our legal predecessor, for all periods prior to March 15, 2019. For purposes of this section, references to “Algeco US Holdings LLC,” or “Target Parent” refers to Algeco US Holdings LLC and its consolidated subsidiaries for periods from and after December 22, 2017 through March 15, 2019 and Target Logistics Management, LLC (“Target” or TLM”) and its consolidated subsidiaries for periods prior to December 21, 2017. For purposes of this section, references to “Signor Parent” refers to Arrow Parent Corp. and its consolidated subsidiaries for the period from September 7, 2018 through March 15, 2019.
Executive Summary and Outlook
Target Hospitality Corp. is one of the largest vertically integrated specialty rental and hospitality services companies in the United States. The Company provides vertically integrated specialty rental and comprehensive hospitality services including: catering and food services, maintenance, housekeeping, grounds-keeping, security, health and recreation facilities, overall workforce community lodge management, concierge services and laundry service. As of December 31, 2020, our network included 26 communities to better serve our customers across the US.
COVID - 19 and Economic Update
The global outbreak of COVID-19 and the declaration of a pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020 presented new risks to the Company’s business. Further, in the first quarter of 2020, crude oil prices fell sharply, due to the spread of COVID-19 and actions by Saudi Arabia and Russia. Prior to March 2020, the Company’s results were largely in line with expectations and subsequent to March 2020, we began to experience a decline in revenues. Neither the Company’s ability to operate nor its supply chain have experienced material disruptions for the year ended 2020 and the Company continues to work with suppliers to ensure there is no service disruption or shortage of critical products at our communities. The situation surrounding COVID-19 remains fluid and the likelihood of an impact on us that could be material increases the longer the virus impacts activity levels in the locations in which we operate. In particular, a delay in wide distribution of a vaccine, or a lack of public acceptance of a vaccine, could lead people to continue to self-isolate and not participate in the economy at pre-pandemic levels for a prolonged period of time. Further, even if a vaccine is widely distributed and accepted, there can be no assurance that the vaccine will ultimately be successful in limiting or stopping the spread of COVID-19. The financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflect the reduced customer activity experienced over this period. However, during the second half of 2020, the Company did experience increases in demand for its hospitality and accommodation services, including demand for the Company’s Permian Basin accommodations as customer activity levels steadily increased from the lows experienced during the second quarter of 2020, during which time, we took significant steps to reduce our costs in response to the reduced demand, including reducing headcount, temporarily closing and consolidating several of our communities, salary reductions, and streamlining our support functions. However, as customer activity levels began increasing during the third quarter, we began re-opening several communities in July of 2020 as a result of increased customer demand. Additionally, the Company executed contract modifications with several customers in the oil and natural gas industry resulting in extended terms and reduced minimum contract commitments in 2020. These modifications utilize multi-year contract extensions to maintain contract value and provide the Company with greater visibility on long-term revenue and cash flow. This mutually beneficial approach balanced average daily rates with contract term and positions the Company to take advantage of a more balanced market. As a result of the continued uncertainty surrounding COVID-19, we cannot reasonably estimate with any degree of certainty the future impact COVID-19 may have on the Company’s results of operations, financial position, and liquidity. Nevertheless, we will maintain our commitment to service quality for our customers and continue to focus on
generating returns and cash flow. Refer to the section titled “Risk Factors” included in Part I Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion around COVID-19.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, key drivers of financial performance include:
● Decreased revenue of $95.9 million or 30% compared to the year ended 2019 due to reduced activity associated with the negative effects of oil price volatility, compounded by the aforementioned effects of COVID-19
● Decreased revenue in the Permian Basin segment by $102.3 million or 48% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of declines in utilization due to oil price volatility and impacts of COVID-19.
● Generated a net loss of approximately $27.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to net income of $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which is primarily attributable to the decrease in revenue.
● Generated consolidated Adjusted EBITDA of $78.5 million representing a decrease of $80.7 million or 50.7% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven primarily by the decrease in revenue.
In addition to the above, we generated positive cash flows from operations of approximately $46.8 million representing a decrease in cash flows from operations by $13.7 million or 22.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure. The GAAP measure most comparable to Adjusted EBITDA is Net income (loss). Please see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a definition and reconciliation to the most comparable GAAP measure.
Our proximity to customer activities influences occupancy and demand. We have built, own and operate the two largest specialty rental and hospitality services networks available to oil and gas customers operating in the Permian and Bakken Basins. Our broad network often results in us having communities that are the closest to our customers’ job sites, which reduces commute times and costs, and improves the overall safety of our customers’ workforce. Our communities provide customers with cost efficiencies, as they are able to jointly use our communities and related infrastructure (i.e., power, water, sewer and IT) services alongside other customers operating in the same vicinity. Demand for our services is dependent upon activity levels, particularly our customers’ capital spending on exploration for, development, production and transportation of oil and natural gas and government immigration housing programs.
Factors Affecting Results of Operations
We expect our business to continue to be affected by the key factors discussed below, as well as factors discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this report. Our expectations are based on assumptions made by us and information currently available to us. To the extent our underlying assumptions about, or interpretations of, available information prove to be incorrect, our actual results may vary materially from our expected results.
Public health threats or outbreaks of communicable diseases, including COVID-19, could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s operations and financial results.
The Company may face risks related to public health threats or outbreaks of communicable diseases, including COVID-19. A widespread healthcare crisis, such as an outbreak of a communicable disease, like COVID-19, could adversely affect the economy and the Company’s ability to conduct business for an indefinite period of time. This situation combined with the oil and gas price volatility discussed below has had, and could continue to, have a material adverse effect on the Company’s results of operations. Refer to section titled “Risk Factors” in Part I Item 1A of this annual report on Form 10-K for further information on this situation.
Supply and Demand for Oil and Gas
As a provider of vertically integrated specialty rental and hospitality services, we are not directly impacted by oil and gas price fluctuations. However, these price fluctuations indirectly influence our activities and results of operations because the exploration and production (“E&P”) workforce is directly affected by price fluctuations and the industry’s expansion
or contraction as a result of these fluctuations. Our occupancy volume depends on the size of the workforce within the oil and gas industry and the demand for labor. Oil and gas prices are volatile and influenced by numerous factors beyond our control, including the domestic and global supply of and demand for oil and gas. The commodities trading markets, as well as other supply and demand factors, may also influence the selling prices of oil and gas. As a result of the oil and gas price volatility experienced in early 2020, the Company temporarily closed and consolidated communities in the Permian and Bakken basins. However, these communities began re-opening in July 2020 as conditions started to improve. Additionally, this recent disruption in the oil and gas markets as well as the impact of COVID-19 has increased the risk of delayed customer payments and payment defaults associated with customer liquidity issues and bankruptcies leading to increased bad debt expense in the current period.
Availability and Cost of Capital
Capital markets conditions could affect our ability to access the debt and equity capital markets to the extent necessary to fund our future growth. Interest rates on future credit facilities and debt offerings could be higher than current levels, causing our financing costs to increase accordingly, and could limit our ability to raise funds, or increase the price of raising funds, in the capital markets and may limit our ability to expand.
Regulatory Compliance
We are subject to extensive federal, state, local, and foreign environmental, health and safety laws and regulations concerning matters such as air emissions, wastewater discharges, solid, and hazardous waste handling and disposal and the investigation and remediation of contamination. In addition, we may be subject, indirectly, to various statutes and regulations applicable to doing business with the U.S. government as a result of our contracts with U.S. government contractor clients. The risks of substantial costs, liabilities, and limitations on our operations related to compliance with these laws and regulations are an inherent part of our business, and future conditions may develop, arise, or be discovered that create substantial compliance or environmental remediation liabilities and costs.
Natural Disasters or Other Significant Disruption
An operational disruption in any of our facilities could negatively impact our financial results. The occurrence of a natural disaster, such as earthquake, tornado, severe weather including hail storms, flood, fire, or other unanticipated problems such as labor difficulties, equipment failure, capacity expansion difficulties or unscheduled maintenance could cause operational disruptions of varied duration. These types of disruptions could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations to varying degrees dependent upon the facility, the duration of the disruption, our ability to shift business to another facility or find alternative solutions.
Overview of Our Revenue and Operations
We derive the majority of our revenue from specialty rental accommodations and vertically integrated hospitality services. Approximately 58.8% of our revenue was earned from specialty rental with vertically integrated hospitality services, specifically lodging and related ancillary services, whereas the remaining 41.2% of revenues were earned through leasing of lodging facilities (23.5%) and construction fee income 17.7%) for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our services include temporary living accommodations, catering food services, maintenance, housekeeping, grounds-keeping, on-site security, workforce community management, and laundry services. Revenue is recognized in the period in which lodging and services are provided pursuant to the terms of contractual relationships with our customers. In certain of our contracts, rates may vary over the contract term, in these cases, revenue is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the contract term. We enter into arrangements with multiple deliverables for which arrangement consideration is allocated between lodging and services based on the relative estimated standalone selling price of each deliverable. The estimated price of lodging and services deliverables is based on the prices of lodging and services when sold separately or based upon the best estimate of selling price.
The Company originated a contract in 2013 with TC Energy Pipelines (“TCPL”) to construct, deliver, cater and manage all accommodations and hospitality services in conjunction with the planned construction of the Keystone XL pipeline project. During the construction phase of the contract, the Company recognizes revenue as costs are incurred in connection
with the project under the percentage of completion method of accounting as more fully discussed in Note 1 of the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 within this Annual Report on Form 10-K. One of these communities was completed and opened in September 2020 and subsequently closed in mid-December 2020. The revenue recognized on the community post construction for the year ended December 31, 2020, is recognized in services income along with our other revenue from specialty rental with vertically integrated hospitality services. In January 2021, the TCPL project was suspended due to the Keystone XL Presidential Permit being revoked, which is expected to significantly reduce construction and other revenue related to the project going forward.
The Company also originated a contract on March 1, 2019 with a customer to construct, deliver, cater and manage all accommodations and hospitality services in conjunction with the construction of an accommodation facility in the Permian Basin. During the construction phase of the contract, the Company recognized revenue as costs are incurred in connection with the project under the percentage of completion method of accounting as more fully discussed in Note 1 of the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II Item 8, within this Annual Report on this Form 10-K. The construction phase of this contract was substantially completed in August 2019 with additional expansions through March 31, 2020.
Key Indicators of Financial Performance
Our management uses a variety of financial and operating metrics to analyze our performance. We view these metrics as significant factors in assessing our operating results and profitability and intend to review these measurements frequently for consistency and trend analysis. We primarily review the following profit and loss information when assessing our performance.
Revenue
We analyze our revenues by comparing actual revenues to our internal budgets and projections for a given period and to prior periods to assess our performance. We believe that revenues are a meaningful indicator of the demand and pricing for our services. Key drivers to change in revenues may include average utilization of existing beds, levels of development activity in the Permian and Bakken basins, and the consumer price index impacting government contracts.
Adjusted Gross Profit
We analyze our adjusted gross profit, which is a Non-GAAP measure, which we define as revenues less cost of sales, excluding impairment and depreciation of specialty rental assets to measure our financial performance. Please see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a definition and reconciliation to the most comparable GAAP measure. We believe adjusted gross profit is a meaningful metric because it provides insight on financial performance of our revenue streams without consideration of company overhead. Additionally, using adjusted gross profit gives us insight on factors impacting cost of sales, such as efficiencies of our direct labor and material costs. When analyzing adjusted gross profit, we compare actual adjusted gross profit to our budgets and internal projections and to prior period results for a given period in order to assess our performance.
We also use Non-GAAP measures such as EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Discretionary cash flows to evaluate the operating performance of our business. For a more in-depth discussion of the Non-GAAP measures, please refer to the "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" section.
Segments
We have identified four reportable business segments: the Permian Basin, the Bakken Basin, Government, and TCPL Keystone:
Permian Basin
The Permian Basin segment reflects our facilities and operations in the Permian Basin region and includes our 19 communities located across Texas and New Mexico.
Bakken Basin
The Bakken Basin segment reflects our facilities and operations in the Bakken Basin region and includes our 4 communities in North Dakota.
Government
The government segment (“Government”) includes the facilities and operations of the family residential center and the related support communities in Dilley, Texas (the “South Texas Family Residential Center”) provided under a lease and services agreement with CoreCivic (“CoreCivic”).
TCPL Keystone
The TCPL Keystone segment reflects initial preparatory work and plans for facilities and services provided in connection with the TC Energy Keystone pipeline project.
All Other
Our other facilities and operations which do not meet the criteria to be a separate reportable segment are consolidated and reported as “All Other” which represents the facilities and operations of one community in the Anadarko basin of Oklahoma, and the catering and other services provided to communities and other workforce accommodation facilities for the oil, gas and mining industries not owned by us.
Key Factors Impacting the Comparability of Results
The historical results of operations for the periods presented may not be comparable, either to each other or to our future results of operations, for the reasons described below:
COVID-19 and Oil and Gas Price Volatility
The COVID-19 pandemic and the disruption in the oil and gas industry has had, and continues to have, a material adverse effect on our business and results of operations. The financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflect the reduced activity in the Permian and Bakken basins resulting from the negative effects of the oil and gas price volatility compounded by the effects of COVID-19 as these disruptions have created significant challenges for our energy end-market customers. This has driven a significant reduction in our utilization in these segments during the year ended December 31, 2020 and has also impacted our energy end-market customers’ liquidity, resulting in increased bad debt expense during 2020.
Acquisitions
On September 7, 2018, Arrow Bidco purchased 100% of the membership interests of Signor. Signor’s results of operations are not directly comparable to the historical results of operations as Signor’s operating results are only included from the period from September 7, 2018. The acquisition of Signor further expanded our presence in the Texas Permian Basin, adding over 4,000 beds.
On June 19, 2019, TLM entered into the Superior Purchase Agreement with the Superior Sellers, and certain other parties named therein, pursuant to which TLM acquired substantially all of the assets in connection with the subject seller communities. This acquisition further expanded our presence in the Texas Permian Basin, adding 575 rooms. Prior to the acquisition, TLM was providing management and catering services to the Superior Sellers, which was terminated upon the closing of the acquisition.
On July 1, 2019, TLM purchased a 168-room community from ProPetro Services, Inc. On July 1, 2019, in connection with the purchase of this community, TLM and ProPetro entered into an amendment to its existing Network Lease and
Services Agreement resulting in ProPetro leasing from the Company an additional 166 rooms per night for one year subject to three one-year extension options. The extension options were not exercised and resulted in the Company earning a termination fee of approximately $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The ProPetro acquisition further expanded the Company’s presence in the Permian Basin.
Business Combination Costs
We have incurred approximately $38.1 million in incremental costs related to the Business Combination that have been recognized as selling, general, and administrative expenses in the audited consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended December 31, 2019. These costs include $8.0 million in transaction expenses relating to the consummation of the Business Combination. Additionally, certain members of the Company’s management and employees received bonus payments as a result of the Business Combination being consummated in the aggregate amount of $28.5 million. Finally, as part of the Business Combination being consummated, we recorded $1.6 million of compensation expense for the full loan forgiveness of certain executive members of management which has been recognized as a non-cash expense within the consolidated financial statements.
Public Company Costs
As part of becoming a public company in March 2019, we will continue to incur recurring expenses as a publicly traded company, including costs associated with the employment of additional personnel, compliance under the Exchange Act, annual and quarterly reports to common shareholders, registrar and transfer agent fees, national stock exchange fees, legal fees, audit fees, incremental director and officer liability insurance costs and director and officer compensation.
Results of Operations
The period to period comparisons of our results of operations have been prepared using the historical periods included in our audited consolidated financial statements. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this document.
Consolidated Results of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Total Revenue. Total revenue was $225.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $321.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, and consisted of $132.4 million of services income, $53.0 million of specialty rental income and $39.8 million of construction fee income. Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of $242.8 million of services income, $59.8 million of specialty rental income and $18.5 million of construction fee income.
Services income consists primarily of specialty rental and vertically integrated hospitality services and comprehensive hospitality services including catering, food services, maintenance, housekeeping, grounds-keeping, security, overall workforce community management services, health and recreation facilities, concierge services and laundry service. The main driver of the decline in services income revenue year over year was the reduction of customer activity in the Permian Basin and the temporary closure of communities in the Bakken Basin in May 2020, due to the effects of oil price volatility and COVID-19. However, as customer activity levels began increasing during the third quarter of 2020, we began re-opening several communities in July of 2020 as a result of increased customer demand.
Construction fee income consists primarily of revenue from the construction phase of the TCPL contract as well as the other contract originated on March 1, 2019 as previously mentioned. Specialty rental income consists primarily of revenues from renting rooms at facilities leased or owned.
Specialty rental income decreased as a result of a contract modification for one of our energy end-market customers, which resulted in the contract no longer being treated as a lease for accounting purposes and as such, the revenue associated is now being reported within services income. In addition, a contract modification in the Government segment in September 2020 resulted in a decrease in non-cash deferred revenue amortization driven by extending the contract termination date from September 2021 to September 2026 discussed in the segment results. Termination of the ProPetro lease as previously mentioned also contributed to this decrease. Such decreases were partially offset by community expansions in the Permian segment that came online later in 2019.
The decrease in services and specialty rental income was partially offset by an increase in construction fee income, which was due to an increase in activity related to the construction of TC Energy Corporation’s Keystone XL Pipeline project compared to the same period in 2019. This project was suspended in January 2021 due to the Keystone XL Presidential Permit being revoked, which is expected to significantly reduce construction fee income going forward.
Cost of services. Cost of services was $109.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $120.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in services costs is primarily due to the decrease in costs in the Permian and Bakken basins of $30.4 million driven by a decrease in utilization and closure of camps as previously mentioned and the decrease in costs in the Government segment of $1.9 million as occupancy declined from 45% in 2019 to 17% in 2020. This decrease was partially offset with an increase of approximately $19.9 million in costs associated with the increase in activity on TC Energy Corporation’s Keystone XL Pipeline project.
Specialty rental costs. Specialty rental costs were approximately $8.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $10.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in specialty rental costs is due to the termination of the ProPetro lease and a modification of a contract for one of our energy end-market customers, which resulted in all such costs and related revenue now being recognized in services income and costs, as it no longer meets the definition of a lease. This decrease was partially offset as a result of community expansions that came online later in 2019.
Depreciation of specialty rental assets. Depreciation of specialty rental assets was $50.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $43.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in depreciation expense is mainly due to an increase in assets placed into service as part of the capital expenditure program in 2019 as well as 2019 acquisitions of Pro Petro and Superior resulting in a full year’s worth of depreciation for these assets in 2020.
Selling, general and administrative. Selling, general and administrative was $38.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $76.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expense was primarily driven by business combination and other transaction costs in 2019 of $39.5
million which were not incurred in 2020. The remaining change in selling, general and administrative expense was driven by decreased travel and entertainment expenses, public company costs, including legal and professional fees, severance, sales commissions (driven by a decrease in utilization), and labor. These decreases were partially offset by increases in bad debt expense, insurance, new system implementation cost, non-cash amortization expense, and non-cash stock compensation expense driven by the granting of stock compensation in September of 2019, as well as March, April and May of 2020. Total compensation cost related to nonvested awards not yet recognized as of December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $5.6 million and is expected to be recognized over a weighted average remaining term of between 2.59 to 2.8 years.
Other depreciation and amortization. Other depreciation and amortization expense was $15.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $15.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 The increase in other depreciation and amortization expense is due primarily to an increase in depreciation expense associated with an increase in depreciable capital expenditures as well as an increase in customer related intangible amortization stemming from the Superior acquisition that occurred in June 2019 as 2020 reflected a full year of amortization.
Other expense (income), net. Other expense (income), net was ($0.7) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in other expense (income), net is primarily attributable to a loss incurred during the year ended December 31, 2019 on sales of land parcels in November 2019 for approximately $6.9 million.
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net was $40.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to interest expense, net of $33.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in interest expense is attributable to increased interest expense related to the New ABL Facility and the 2024 Senior Secured Notes, which were originated on March 15, 2019, as compared to the affiliate debt that was outstanding for the period prior to March 15, 2019. Both the New ABL Facility and the 2024 Senior Secured Notes were outstanding for all twelve months of 2020 resulting in more interest expense in 2020. This increase was offset slightly by a reduction of both the average outstanding balance and the interest rate on the New ABL Facility.
Income tax expense (benefit). Income tax expense (benefit) was ($8.5) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in income tax expense is primarily attributable to the decrease in income before taxes, resulting from a loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 driven by the impact of the oil and gas price volatility and COVID-19 as previously discussed.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For discussion of the comparison of our operating results for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, please read the “Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018” section located in the Management Discussion & Analysis section in our 2019 Annual Report on From 10-K filed on March 13, 2020 and is incorporated herein by reference.
Segment Results
The following table sets forth our selected results of operations for each of our reportable segments for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Note: Adjusted gross profit for the chief operating decision maker’s (“CODM”) analysis includes the services and rental costs recognized in the financial statements and excludes depreciation on specialty rental assets and loss on impairment. Average daily rate is calculated based on specialty rental income and services income received over the period indicated, divided by utilized bed nights.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Government
Revenue for the Government segment was $63.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $67.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Adjusted gross profit for the Government segment was $47.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $49.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenue and adjusted gross profit decreased as a result of lower non-cash deferred revenue amortization in 2020 driven by a contract extension modification executed in September 2020, which extended the term through September 2026 compared to the previous term of September 2021. This extended the period over which the unamortized deferred revenue is spread, which reduced 2020 amortization by approximately $3.4 million compared to 2019. As a result of extending the amortization period for the deferred revenue associated with the amended agreement over the extended term of the agreement, we expect non-cash revenue associated to decrease by approximately $3 million per quarter, from $3.4 million to $0.4 million. This decrease was partially offset by cost savings driven by lower occupancy year-over-year, which contributed to adjusted gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 as the revenue on this arrangement is relatively fixed through the term.
Permian Basin
Revenue for the Permian Basin segment was $112.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $214.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Adjusted gross profit for the Permian Basin segment was $51.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $128.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The decrease in revenue of $102.3 million and decrease in adjusted gross profit of $76.9 million is primarily attributable to the decline in utilization in the Permian Basin due to oil and gas price volatility and impacts of COVID-19.
Bakken Basin
Revenue for the Bakken Basin segment was $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $20.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Adjusted gross profit for the Bakken Basin segment was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The decrease in revenue of $14.0 million and decrease in adjusted gross profit of $8.4 million was primarily driven by the temporary closure of communities in the Bakken Basin in early May due to oil price volatility and impacts of COVID-19. However, as customer activity levels began increasing during the third quarter, we began re-opening several communities in July of 2020 as a result of increased customer demand.
TCPL Keystone
Revenue for the TCPL Keystone segment was $41.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $15.7 million and $23.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Adjusted gross profit for the TCPL Keystone segment was $8.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $3.1 million and $4.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The increase in revenue and adjusted gross profit in 2020 compared to 2019 and 2018, respectively, was driven by an increase in construction related activity associated primarily with two communities, one of which opened in September 2020 (but closed in mid-December 2020). The majority of this revenue increase relates to construction related activity to build out the communities for potential future operations and is reported within construction fee income whereas only approximately $2.2 million of the 2020 revenue increase from both 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to services income for the previously discussed community that opened in September 2020. We anticipate revenue in this segment to decrease prospectively as a result of the project being suspended in January 2021 as previously mentioned.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For discussion of the comparison of our operating results for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, please read the “Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018” section located in the Management Discussion & Analysis section in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed on March 13, 2020 and is incorporated herein by reference.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Historically, our primary sources of liquidity have been capital contributions from our owners and cash flow from operations. We depend on cash flow from operations, cash on hand and borrowings under our New ABL Facility to finance our acquisition strategy, working capital needs, and capital expenditures. We currently believe that our cash on hand, along with these sources of funds will provide sufficient liquidity to fund debt service requirements, support our growth strategy, lease obligations, contingent liabilities and working capital investments for at least the next 12 months. However, we
cannot assure you that we will be able to obtain future debt or equity financings adequate for our future cash requirements on commercially reasonable terms or at all.
If our cash flows and capital resources are insufficient, we may be forced to reduce or delay additional acquisitions, future investments and capital expenditures, and seek additional capital. Significant delays in our ability to finance planned acquisitions or capital expenditures may materially and adversely affect our future revenue prospects. We may from time to time seek to purchase our debt securities for cash or other consideration in open market purchases, privately-negotiated transactions, exchange offers or otherwise. Any such transactions will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors.
For additional discussion of risks related to our liquidity and capital resources, including the impact of COVID-19 as well as the impact of declining oil and gas prices, refer to the section titled “Risk Factors” in Part I Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Capital Requirements
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $9.1 million in capital expenditures. Our total annual 2020 capital spending included growth projects to increase community capacity. However, in response to anticipated lower utilization levels resulting from the impact of oil price volatility and COVID-19, as previously discussed, the Company reduced its anticipated 2020 capital expenditures by 50%. As we pursue growth, we monitor which capital resources, including equity and debt financings, are available to us to meet our future financial obligations, planned capital expenditure activities and liquidity requirements. However, future cash flows are subject to a number of variables, including the ability to maintain existing contracts, obtain new contracts and manage our operating expenses. The failure to achieve anticipated revenue and cash flows from operations could result in a reduction in future capital spending. We cannot assure you that operations and other needed capital will be available on acceptable terms or at all. In the event we make additional acquisitions and the amount of capital required is greater than the amount we have available for acquisitions at that time, we could be required to reduce the expected level of capital expenditures or seek additional capital. We cannot assure you that needed capital will be available on acceptable terms or at all.
The following table sets forth general information derived from our audited consolidated statements of cash flows:
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Cash flows provided by operating activities. Net cash provided by operating activities was $46.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $60.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Prior period cash from operating activities included a transaction bonus of $28.5 million paid out in March 2019 in connection with the closing of the Business Combination, which was fully funded by a capital contribution included in cash flows from financing activities. The current period also included an increase in cash outflow for interest of approximately $12 million driven by an increase in debt obligations originated with the closing of the Business Combination. After factoring out the effects of these items, the current period is down by approximately $30 million when compared to 2019 driven primarily by a decline in revenue resulting from the negative impacts of the oil and gas price volatility and COVID-19.
Cash flows used in investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $112.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily related to the decrease in discretionary capital expenditures and acquisition activity in 2020 compared to 2019.
Cash flows provided by financing activities. Net cash flows provided by (used in) financing activities was ($35.7) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $46.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cash from financing activities primarily reflects the decrease in cash received from the Business Combination and issuance of the 2024 Senior Secured Notes that occurred in March 2019.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For discussion of the comparison of our operating results for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, please read the “Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018” section located in the Management Discussion & Analysis section in the our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed on March 13, 2020 and is incorporated herein by reference.
Indebtedness
The Company’s capital lease and other financing obligations as of December 31, 2020 consisted of $0.9 million of capital leases and $2.9 million related to insurance financing obligations. In December 2019, the Company entered into a lease for certain equipment with a lease term expiring November 2022 and an effective interest rate of 4.3%. The Company’s lease relates to commercial-use vehicles. In November 2020, the Company entered into an insurance financing arrangement in an amount of approximately $3.3 million at an interest rate of 3.84%. The insurance financing arrangement requires 9 monthly payments of approximately $0.37 million that began on December 1, 2020.
New ABL Facility
On the Closing Date, in connection with the closing of the Business Combination, Topaz, Arrow Bidco, Target, Signor and each of their domestic subsidiaries entered into an ABL credit agreement that provides for a senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility in the aggregate principal amount of up to $125 million (the “New ABL Facility”). Approximately $40 million of proceeds from the New ABL Facility were used to finance a portion of the consideration payable and fees and expenses incurred in connection with the Business Combination. Additionally, $30 million was drawn on the New ABL Facility during June 2019 to fund the Superior acquisition and an additional $10 million was drawn in the fourth quarter of 2019 to fund non-routine expenditures. During the year ended December 31, 2020, $32 million of the amounts drawn previously were repaid. The maturity date of the New ABL Facility is September 15, 2023. Refer to Note 12 of the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements located in Part II, Item 8 within this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on the New ABL Facility.
Senior Secured Notes
In connection with the closing of the Business Combination, Arrow Bidco issued $340 million in aggregate principal amount of 9.50% senior secured notes due March 15, 2024 (the “2024 Senior Secured Notes” or “Notes”) under an indenture dated March 15, 2019 (the “Indenture”). The Indenture was entered into by and among Arrow Bidco, the guarantors named therein (the “Note Guarantors”), and Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, as trustee and as collateral agent. Interest is payable semi-annually on September 15 and March 15 beginning September 15, 2019. Refer to Note 12 of the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements located in Part II, Item 8 within this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion of the 2024 Senior Secured Notes.
Contractual Obligations
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into various contractual obligations for varying terms and amounts. The table below presents our significant contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Pursuant to our 2024 Senior Secured Notes, we will incur and pay interest expense at 9.50% of the face value of $340.0 million annually, or $32.3 million. Over the remaining term of the Notes, interest payments total $113.1 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Commitments and Contingencies
We lease certain land, community units, and real estate under non-cancelable operating leases, the terms of which vary and generally contain renewal options. Total rent expense under these leases is recognized ratably over the initial term of the lease. Any difference between the rent payment and the straight-line expense is recorded as a liability.
Rent expense included in services costs in the audited consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss) for cancelable and non-cancelable leases was $5.6 million, $12.5 million, and $4.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Rent expense included in selling, general, and administrative expenses in the audited consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss) for cancelable and non-cancelable leases was $0.5 million, $0.6 million and $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Future minimum lease payments at December 31, 2020 by year and in the aggregate for each of the next five years, under non-cancelable operating leases are as follows:
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“US GAAP”). For a discussion of the critical accounting policies and estimates that we use in the preparation of our audited consolidated financial statements, including assumptions and estimates used to test goodwill and other
intangible assets for impairment, refer to Note 1 of the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income Taxes. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for certain future deductible or taxable temporary differences expected to be reported in our income tax returns. These deferred tax assets and liabilities are computed using the tax rates that are expected to apply in the periods when the related future deductible or taxable temporary difference is expected to be settled or realized. In the case of deferred tax assets, the future realization of the deferred tax assets are determined with consideration to historical profitability, projected future taxable income, the reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, and tax planning strategies. After consideration of all these factors, we recognize deferred tax assets when we believe that it is more likely than not that we will realize them. The Company’s deferred tax assets include a significant amount of tax loss carryforwards. Realization is dependent on generating sufficient taxable income prior to expiration of the loss carryforwards. Although realization is not assured, the Company believes it is more likely than not that all of the deferred tax asset will be realized. A significant positive evidence factor that we consider in the recognition of deferred tax assets is a positive earnings history and cumulative income position. The Company has had a stable earning history prior to the impacts of COVID-19 and the oil and gas price volatility as experienced during 2020 and has not lost any tax attributes in the past. The amount of the deferred tax asset considered realizable, however, could be reduced if estimates of future taxable income during the carryforward period are reduced. Refer to Note 14 - Income Taxes included in the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 within this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on our deferred tax assets and liabilities.
Principles of Consolidation
Refer to Note 1 of the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 within this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of principles of consolidation.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 1 of the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 within this Annual Report on Form 10-K for our assessment of recently issued and adopted accounting standards.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We have included Adjusted gross profit, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Discretionary cash flows which are measurements not calculated in accordance with US GAAP, in the discussion of our financial results because they are key metrics used by management to assess financial performance. Our business is capital-intensive and these additional metrics allow management to further evaluate our operating performance.
Target Hospitality defines Adjusted gross profit, as gross profit plus depreciation of specialty rental assets and loss on impairment.
Target Hospitality defines EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest expense and loss on extinguishment of debt, income tax expense (benefit), depreciation of specialty rental assets, and other depreciation and amortization.
Adjusted EBITDA reflects the following further adjustments to EBITDA to exclude certain non-cash items and the effect of what management considers transactions or events not related to its core business operations:
● Other expense (income), net: Other expense (income), net includes losses from the sale of certain land parcels, consulting expenses related to certain projects, financing costs not classified as interest expense, gains and losses on disposals of property, plant, and equipment, involuntary asset conversions, COVID-19 related expenses, and other immaterial non-cash charges. Results for 2018 relate primarily to the gain on involuntary conversion and a recharge of management fees from Target Parent discussed in this Form 10-K.
● Restructuring costs: Target Parent incurred certain costs associated with restructuring plans designed to streamline operations and reduce costs.
● Currency (gains) losses, net: Foreign currency transaction gains or losses.
● Transaction bonus amounts: Target Parent paid certain transaction bonuses to certain executives and employees related to the closing of the Business Combination. As discussed in Note 3 of our notes to our consolidated financial statements located in Part II, Item 8 within this Annual Report on Form 10-K, these bonuses were fully funded by a cash contribution from Algeco Seller in March of 2019.
● Transaction expenses: Target Hospitality incurred certain transaction costs, including legal and professional fees, associated primarily with the Business Combination as well as other transactions unrelated to the Company’s core business operations. Such amounts related to the Business Combination were funded by proceeds from the Business Combination.
● Acquisition-related expenses: Target Hospitality incurred certain transaction costs associated with the acquisition of Superior and Signor.
● Officer loan expense: Non-cash charge associated with loans to certain executive officers of the Company that were forgiven and recognized as selling, general, and administrative expense upon consummation of the Business Combination. Such amounts are not expected to recur in the future.
● Target Parent selling, general and administrative costs: Target Parent incurred certain costs in the form of legal and professional fees as well as transaction bonus amounts, primarily associated with a restructuring transaction that originated in 2017.
● Stock-based compensation: Non-cash charges associated with stock-based compensation expense, which has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense in our business and an important part of our compensation strategy
● Other adjustments: System implementation costs, including primarily non-cash amortization of capitalized system implementation costs, claim settlement, business development, accounting standard implementation costs and certain severance costs.
● Impairment loss: Loss on impairment due to write-downs of non-strategic asset groups in the Permian, Bakken and Canadian operations of the business. We view impairment charges as accelerated depreciation, and depreciation is excluded from EBITDA.
We define Discretionary cash flows as cash flows from operations less maintenance capital expenditures for specialty rental assets.
EBITDA reflects net income (loss) excluding the impact of interest expense and loss on extinguishment of debt, provision for income taxes, depreciation, and amortization. We believe that EBITDA is a meaningful indicator of operating performance because we use it to measure our ability to service debt, fund capital expenditures, and expand our business. We also use EBITDA, as do analysts, lenders, investors, and others, to evaluate companies because it excludes certain items that can vary widely across different industries or among companies within the same industry. For example, interest expense can be dependent on a company’s capital structure, debt levels, and credit ratings. Accordingly, the impact of interest expense on earnings can vary significantly among companies. The tax positions of companies can also vary because of their differing abilities to take advantage of tax benefits and because of the tax policies of the jurisdictions in which they operate. As a result, effective tax rates and provision for income taxes can vary considerably among companies. EBITDA also excludes depreciation and amortization expense, because companies utilize productive assets of different ages and use different methods of both acquiring and depreciating productive assets. These differences can result in
considerable variability in the relative costs of productive assets and the depreciation and amortization expense among companies.
Target Hospitality also believes that Adjusted EBITDA is a meaningful indicator of operating performance. Our Adjusted EBITDA reflects adjustments to exclude the effects of additional items, including certain items, that are not reflective of the ongoing operating results of Target Hospitality. In addition, to derive Adjusted EBITDA, we exclude gains or losses on the sale of depreciable assets and impairment losses because including them in EBITDA is inconsistent with reporting the ongoing performance of our remaining assets. Additionally, the gain or loss on sale of depreciable assets and impairment losses represents either accelerated depreciation or excess depreciation in previous periods, and depreciation is excluded from EBITDA.
Target Hospitality also presents Discretionary cash flows because we believe it provides useful information regarding our business as more fully described below. Discretionary cash flows indicate the amount of cash available after maintenance capital expenditures for specialty rental assets for, among other things, investments in our existing business.
Adjusted gross profit, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Discretionary cash flows are not measurements of Target Hospitality’s financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered as alternatives to gross profit, net income (loss) or other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP, or as alternatives to cash flow from operating activities as measures of Target Hospitality’s liquidity. Adjusted gross profit, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Discretionary cash flows should not be considered as discretionary cash available to Target Hospitality to reinvest in the growth of our business or as measures of cash that is available to it to meet our obligations. In addition, the measurement of Adjusted gross profit, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Discretionary cash flows may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Target Hospitality’s management believe that Adjusted gross profit, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Discretionary cash flows provide useful information to investors about Target Hospitality and its financial condition and results of operations for the following reasons: (i) they are among the measures used by Target Hospitality’s management team to evaluate its operating performance; (ii) they are among the measures used by Target Hospitality’s management team to make day-to-day operating decisions, (iii) they are frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties as a common performance measure to compare results across companies in Target Hospitality’s industry.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Target Hospitality’s consolidated gross profit to Adjusted gross profit:
The following table presents a reconciliation of Target Hospitality’s consolidated net income (loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA:
The following table presents a reconciliation of Target Hospitality’s Net cash provided by operating activities to Discretionary cash flows: