Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The objective of management's discussion and analysis is to provide material information relevant to the assessment of the financial condition and results of operations of the Company including an evaluation of the amounts and certainty of cash flows from operations and from outside sources. This discussion and analysis focuses specifically on material events and uncertainties known to management that are reasonably likely to cause reported financial information not to be necessarily indicative of future operating results or of future financial condition. This includes descriptions and amounts of matters that have had a material impact on reported operations, as well as matters that are reasonably likely based on management’s assessment to have a material impact on future operations. This discussion and analysis covers the financial statements and other statistical data that the Company believes will enhance the understanding of the Company’s financial condition, cash flows and other changes in financial condition and results of operations. This discussion and analysis will provide a view of the Company from management’s perspective.
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 is qualified by reference to and should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated and combined financial statements and the related notes included herein. The discussion and analysis below are based on comparisons between our historical financial data for different periods and include certain forward-looking statements about our business, operations and financial performance. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties, assumptions and other factors described in the section "Item 1A - Risk Factors." Our actual results may differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, those forward-looking statements. See "Forward-Looking Statements."
All references to "we", "us", "our", "the Company", "Trean", or similar terms refer to (i) Trean, BIC and their subsidiaries before the consummation of the reorganization transactions, and (ii) to Trean Insurance Group, Inc. and its subsidiaries after such reorganization transactions, unless the context otherwise requires.
The Company defines increases or decreases greater than 200% as "NM" or not meaningful.
Overview
We are a provider of products and services to the specialty insurance market. We underwrite specialty casualty insurance products both through our Program Partners and also through our Owned MGAs. We also provide our Program Partners with a variety of services, including issuing carrier services, claims administration and reinsurance brokerage, from which we generate recurring fee-based revenues.
We have one reportable segment. We provide our insurance products and services to our Program Partners and Owned MGAs focused on specialty lines. We target a diversified portfolio of small to medium programs, typically with less than $30 million of premiums, that focus on niche segments of the specialty casualty insurance market and that we believe have strong underwriting track records.
Initial Public Offering and Reorganization
On July 20, 2020, Trean Insurance Group, Inc. closed the sale of 10,714,286 shares of its common stock in its IPO, comprised of 7,142,857 shares issued and sold by Trean Insurance Group, Inc. and 3,571,429 shares sold by selling stockholders. On July 22, 2020, Trean Insurance Group, Inc. closed the sale of an additional 1,207,142 shares by certain selling stockholders in the IPO pursuant to the exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares to cover over-allotments. The aggregate proceeds to the Company from all shares sold by the Company in the IPO were approximately $107,142 and the aggregate IPO proceeds from all shares sold by the selling stockholders in the IPO were approximately $71,678. The shares began trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market on July 16, 2020 under the symbol "TIG".
Prior to the completion of the above IPO, the Company effected the following reorganization transactions: (i) each of Trean and BIC contributed all of their respective assets and liabilities to Trean Insurance Group, Inc., a newly formed direct subsidiary of BIC, in exchange for shares of common stock in Trean Insurance Group, Inc. and (ii) upon the completion of the transfers by Trean and BIC, Trean and BIC were dissolved and distributed in-kind common shares to the pre-IPO unitholders.
In conjunction with the IPO and corporate restructuring, the Company made a payment to Altaris Capital Partners, LLC in connection with the termination of the Company's consulting and advisory agreements as well as paid bonuses to employees and pre-IPO unitholders for the successful completion of the IPO. The aggregate amount of these payments totaled $11,054 and is included in other expenses on the consolidated statement of operations.
Acquisition of Compstar
Effective July 15, 2020, Trean Compstar Holdings LLC purchased the remaining 55% ownership interest in Compstar, a holding company, along with its wholly owned subsidiary Compstar Insurance Services, a managing general agent, by issuing 6,613,606 shares of the Company’s common stock with a market price of $15 per share on the date of acquisition. Prior to the acquisition date, the Company held a 45% ownership interest in Compstar and accounted for its investment under the equity method. As of the acquisition date, the fair value attributable to the Company’s previous equity interest was $81,167 and the carrying value was $11,321. As a result, the Company recorded a gain of $69,846 from the remeasurement of its previous equity interest, which is included in gain on revaluation of Compstar investment on the consolidated statement of operations. The fair value of the Company’s previous equity interest was revalued on the acquisition date using the market price of the shares issued as consideration for the acquisition.
Acquisition of 7710
Effective October 1, 2020, Benchmark Holding Company acquired 100% ownership of 7710 Insurance Company as well as its associated program manager and agency, 7710 Service Company, LLC and Creekwood Insurance Agency, LLC for a purchase price of $12,140. 7710 Insurance Company underwrites workers' compensation primarily for emergency services, including firefighters and emergency medical services (EMS). 7710 Insurance Company focuses on reducing costs and claims through the implementation of a propriety safety preparedness and loss control program, created and staffed by experienced firefighters and EMS professionals.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Impact
We have undertaken a number of measures to manage the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our business and continue to monitor how it may impact our premium revenue, loss experience and loss expense, liquidity, and our regulatory capital and surplus, and operations.
Workforce Operations
We took several actions to protect the health of the public and our employees and to comply with directives and advice of governmental authorities. We responded by developing a Preparedness Plan that outlined both corporate-wide and location-specific modifications to offices. This multi-faceted plan included elements such as restricting business travel and transitioning from an office-based company to primarily a remote working culture. As most of our employees already had secure remote working connections, we took additional measures to ensure all employees who wanted or needed to work remotely were able to do so securely with limited connectivity disruption. We also provided our employees with education and training with respect to cybersecurity issues that may arise relating to COVID-19 and working remotely in conjunction with the goal of serving the operational needs of a remote workforce and continuing to serve our customers. We implemented safeguards for employees who play critical roles to ensure operational reliability and established protocols for employees who interact directly with the public. As state, city and county guidelines progress, we have implemented new health and safety in-office procedures to prepare for transitioning our workforce back to working in our offices on a limited basis.
Premium Revenue, Claims and Losses
We did not experience a material impact to our premium revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Less than 20.0% of our business falls under hospitality, healthcare and education, where the majority of layoffs in response to the pandemic have occurred so far. Gross written premiums increased by 17.7% and gross earned premiums have increased by 8.6% during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily driven by the increase in gross written premiums. Because over 70% of our gross written premiums are related to workers’ compensation insurance, we expect that future revenue trends could be impacted by higher unemployment rates as businesses slowly restart or if unemployment levels continue to trend high in future reporting periods. However, a significant portion of our workers’ compensation premiums are pay-as-you-go programs, which reduces our downside risk from future premium audits or refunds.
We also did not experience a material impact in our reported claims or incurred losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Losses and LAE increased $6,113, or 13.7%, to $50,774 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $44,661 for the year ended December 31, 2019, with the increase primarily attributable to the growth in earned premiums during the period. In addition, our loss ratio decreased to 46.8% during the year ended December 31, 2020 from 51.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Investment Portfolio
With respect to our investment portfolio, we seek to hold a high-quality, diversified portfolio of investments, which are primarily in fixed maturity and available-for-sale investments and as such, our investment portfolio has limited exposure to the recent equity market volatility. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we experienced a net increase of $6,218 in the fair value of our investment portfolio due to unrealized gains on the value of our fixed maturity investments and have not seen a significant increase in gross or aged unrealized losses with respect to our fixed maturity investments. We believe that any decline in the fair value of individual fixed maturity investments within our portfolio during 2020 was due to the disruption in the global financial markets associated with COVID-19 as opposed to underlying issues with our investment portfolio. While we experienced an improvement in our unrealized investment positions as of the end of December 2020, if there were to be continued equity and debt financial market volatility as a result of the pandemic or otherwise, which in turn could create mark-to-market investment valuation decreases, we expect there could be additional or increased unrealized losses recorded in future reporting periods. However, given the conservative nature of our investment portfolio, we expect that any adverse impact on the value of our investment portfolio, as it relates to COVID-19, will be temporary, and we do not expect a long-term negative impact on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
Other Concerns
Adverse events such as health-related concerns about working in our offices, the inability to travel, the potential impact on our business partners and customers, and other matters affecting the general work and business environment could harm our business and delay the implementation of our business strategy. We cannot anticipate all the ways in which the current global health crisis and financial market conditions could adversely impact our business in the future.
Significant Components of Results of Operations
Gross written premiums: Gross written premiums are the amounts received or to be received for insurance policies written or assumed by us during a specific period of time without reduction for general and administrative expenses (including policy acquisition costs), reinsurance costs or other deductions. The volume of our gross written premiums in any given period is generally influenced by:
•addition and retention of Program Partners;
•new business submissions to our Program Partners;
•binding of new business submissions into policies;
•renewals of existing policies; and
•average size and premium rate of bound policies.
Gross earned premiums: Gross earned premiums are the earned portion of gross written premiums. We earn insurance premiums on a pro rata basis over the term of the policy. Our insurance policies generally have a term of one year.
Ceded earned premiums: Ceded earned premiums are the amount of gross earned premiums ceded to reinsurers. We enter into reinsurance contracts to limit our maximum losses and diversify our exposure and provide statutory surplus relief. The volume of our ceded earned premiums is affected by the level of our gross earned premiums and any decision we make to increase or decrease limits, retention levels and co-participations.
Net earned premiums: Net earned premiums represent the earned portion of our gross written premiums, less that portion of our gross written premiums that is earned and ceded to third-party reinsurers, including our Program Partners and professional reinsurers, under our reinsurance agreements.
Net investment income: We earn investment income on our portfolio of cash and invested assets. Our cash and invested assets are primarily comprised of fixed maturities, including other investments and short-term investments. Our net investment income includes interest income on our invested assets, which is net of the income earned on our reinsurance agreements, which are held for the benefit of our Program Partners, as well as unrealized gains and losses on our equity portfolio.
Net realized capital gains/losses: Net realized capital gains/losses are a function of the difference between the amount received by us on the sale of a security and the security’s recorded value as well as any "other-than-temporary impairments" relating to fixed maturity investments recognized in earnings.
Other revenue: Other revenue includes brokerage, third-party administrative, management and consulting fees, which are commonly based on written premiums.
Loss and loss adjustment expenses: Losses and LAE are net of reinsurance and include claims paid, estimates of future claim payments, changes in those estimates from prior reporting periods and costs associated with investigating, defending and servicing claims. In general, our losses and LAE are affected by:
•frequency of claims associated with the particular types of insurance contacts that we write;
•trends in the average size of losses incurred on a particular type of business;
•mix of business written by us;
•changes in the legal or regulatory environment related to the business we write;
•trends in legal defense costs;
•wage inflation; and
•inflation in medical costs
Losses and LAE are based on an actuarial analysis of the estimated losses, including losses incurred during the period and changes in estimates from prior periods. Losses and LAE may be paid out over a period of years.
General and administrative expenses: General and administrative expenses include policy acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses. Policy acquisition costs are principally comprised of the commissions we pay our brokers and program managers, net of ceding commissions we receive on business ceded under our reinsurance contracts. Policy acquisition costs that are directly related to the successful acquisition or reinsurance of those policies are deferred. The amortization of such policy acquisition costs is charged to expense in proportion to premium earned over the policy life. Other general and administrative expenses include employee salaries and benefits, corporate insurance costs, technology costs, office rent and professional services fees such as legal, accounting and actuarial services.
Intangible asset amortization: Intangible asset amortization consists of expenses incurred related to the amortization of intangible assets recorded as a result of business acquisitions and consists of trade names, customer lists and relationships and non-compete agreements.
Noncash stock compensation: Noncash stock compensation include expenses related to the fair value and issuance of restricted stock units and stock options.
Interest expense: Interest expense consists primarily of interest paid on (i) our term loan facility and (ii) the preferred capital securities issued by the Trust (See "Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources - Debt and Credit Agreements").
Other income: Other income consists primarily of sublease revenue and other miscellaneous income items.
Equity earnings in affiliates, net of tax: Equity earnings in affiliates, net of tax includes the Company's share of earnings from equity method investments.
Key Metrics
We discuss certain key financial and operating metrics, described below, which provide useful information about our business and the operational factors underlying our financial performance.
Underwriting income is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as income before taxes excluding net investment income, investment revaluation gains, net realized capital gains or losses, IPO-related expenses, litigation settlements, intangible asset amortization, noncash stock compensation, other revenue, interest expense and other income and expenses. See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" for a reconciliation of underwriting income to income before taxes in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted net income is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as net income excluding the impact of certain items, including the consummation of the reorganization transactions in connection with our IPO, litigation settlements, noncash intangible asset amortization and stock compensation, other expenses or gains or losses that we believe do not reflect our core operating performance, which items may have a disproportionate effect in a given period, affecting comparability of our results across periods. See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" for a reconciliation of adjusted net income to net income in accordance with GAAP.
Loss ratio, expressed as a percentage, is the ratio of losses and LAE to net earned premiums.
Expense ratio, expressed as a percentage, is the ratio of general and administrative expenses to net earned premiums.
Combined ratio is the sum of the loss ratio and the expense ratio. A combined ratio under 100% generally indicates an underwriting profit. A combined ratio over 100% generally indicates an underwriting loss.
Return on equity is net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending stockholders' equity during the period.
Adjusted return on equity is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as adjusted net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending stockholders' equity during the period. See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" for a reconciliation of adjusted return on equity to return on equity in accordance with GAAP.
Tangible stockholders' equity is defined as stockholders' equity less goodwill and other intangible assets.
Return on tangible equity is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending tangible stockholders' equity during the period. See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" for a reconciliation of return on tangible equity to return on equity in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted return on tangible equity is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as adjusted net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending tangible stockholders' equity during the period. See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" for a reconciliation of adjusted return on tangible equity to return on tangible equity in accordance with GAAP.
Results of Operations
This section of Form 10-K generally discusses fiscal year 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of fiscal year 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in the Company's Registration Statement on Form S-1/A (File Number 333-239291) filed with the SEC on July 13, 2020.
Consolidated Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to December 31, 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1) the Company defines increases or decreases greater than 200% as "NM" or not meaningful.
(1) This metric represents a non-GAAP financial measure. See 'Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures' for a reconciliation of this metric to the applicable GAAP metric.
Gross written premiums: Gross written premiums increased $72,848, or 17.7%, to $484,249 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $411,401 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to the addition of new Program Partners throughout the fiscal year, the growth in our existing program partner business and the acquisition of 7710 in the fourth quarter. The changes in gross written premiums were most notably due to the following lines of business:
•workers' compensation, which represented 76.2% of our gross written premiums for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased by $28,506, or 8.4%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019; and
•all other non-workers' compensation liability, which represented 23.8% of our gross written premiums for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased $44,342, or 62.5%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gross earned premiums: Gross earned premiums increased $34,231, or 8.6%, to $432,034 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $397,803 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is driven by the increase in gross written premiums, partially offset by the increase in gross unearned premiums of $38,617, which is driven by the addition of new Program Partners during the current fiscal year whose premiums are largely unearned as of December 31, 2020. Gross earned premiums as a percentage of gross written premiums decreased to 89.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 96.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Ceded earned premiums: Ceded earned premiums increased $12,242, or 3.9%, to $323,567 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $311,325 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in ceded earned premiums is primarily due to the addition of new Program Partners during the current fiscal year whose premiums are largely ceded. The total ceded earned premiums as a percentage of gross earned premiums remained relatively consistent at 74.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 78.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net earned premiums: Net earned premiums increased $21,989, or 25.4%, to $108,467 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $86,478 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is due primarily due to the increase in gross written and earned premiums described above, partially offset by the increase in ceded earned premiums over the year ended December 31, 2019.
The table below shows the total premiums earned on a gross and net basis for the respective annual periods:
(1) the Company defines increases or decreases greater than 200% as "NM" or not meaningful.
Net investment income: Net investment income increased $2,079, or 33.3%, to $8,324 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $6,245 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to the fair value re-measurement and common stock investment reclassification of the Company's investment in TRI, which was previously classified as an equity method investment, which resulted in an unrealized gain of $2,000.
Net realized capital gains: Net realized capital gains increased $2,698 to $3,365 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $667 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to the recording of a $3,115 realized gain on the sale of a portion of the Company's investment in TRI during the first quarter of 2020, offset by the bargain purchase gain recorded in connection with the acquisition of FCCIC during the first quarter of 2019 of $634.
Other revenue: Other revenue increased $2,979, or 32.6%, to $12,104 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $9,125 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily driven by an increase in brokerage revenue of $3,166 due to the addition of new Program Partners and increases in actual and estimated premiums on reinsurance contracts.
Losses and loss adjustment expenses: Losses and LAE increased $6,113, or 13.7%, to $50,774 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $44,661 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to the growth in earned premiums during the period partially offset by favorable development in the Company's prior years' loss reserves during the year ended December 31, 2020 versus the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company's loss ratio decreased to 46.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 51.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of favorable development in the Company's prior years' loss reserves during the year ended December 31, 2019.
General and administrative expenses: General and administrative expenses increased $17,709, or 84.5%, to $38,668 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $20,959 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This change resulted in an increase in the Company's expense ratio to 35.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 24.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is attributable to (i) an increase in net agent commissions of $6,802 due to various one-time accrual true-ups totaling $4,164 related to profit sharing, ceding commissions and deferred acquisition costs as well as a $2,638 increase due to higher commissions resulting from an increase in gross written premiums coupled with a lower offsetting effect of ceding commission as the Company retained a larger percentage of its gross written premiums during the year; (ii) an increase in salaries and benefits of $5,601, of which $3,926 directly resulted from acquisitions made in 2020 and a general increase in workforce; (iii) an increase in professional service expense of $2,905, driven by an increase of $2,365 related to the Company's new public status and post-IPO readiness efforts as well as increased legal and consulting expenses; (iv) additional rent and office-related expenses totaling $1,516 due to the addition of new office locations, rent increases and an increase in insurance expense; and (v) additional IT software and systems costs totaling $1,078 relating to new software implementation, an increased workforce and additional expenses incurred to accommodate a remote workforce due to COVID-19. These increases were partially offset by a net reduction in general and administrative expenses of $407 related to a reduction in travel as a result of COVID-19.
Other expenses: Other expenses were $13,427 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which includes (i) a payment to Altaris Capital Partners, LLC in connection with the termination of the Company's consulting and advisory agreement totaling $7,639; (ii) IPO bonuses paid to employees and pre-IPO unitholders of $3,415; (iii) an arbitration settlement, including associated legal fees, totaling $1,572; and (iv) an executive severance accrual of $801.
Intangible asset amortization: Intangible asset amortization increased $2,527 to $2,573 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $46 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is driven by the addition of intangible assets acquired as a result of the purchase of the remaining equity interest of Compstar in the third quarter and acquisition of 7710 in the fourth quarter.
Noncash stock compensation: Noncash stock compensation was $506 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Expenses incurred during the period related to restricted stock units and stock options granted under the Company's 2020 Omnibus Plan in fiscal 2020.
Income tax expense: Income tax expense was $6,825 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which resulted in an effective tax rate of 7.2%, compared to $7,074 for the year ended December 31, 2019, which resulted in an effective tax rate of 20.3%. The decrease in the effective tax rate from the statutory rate of 21% is due primarily to the non-tax impact of the gain recorded on the revaluation of the Company's original 45% investment in Compstar, offset by certain IPO-related expenses not deductible for tax purposes and the impact of state taxes.
Equity earnings in affiliates, net of tax: Equity earnings in affiliates, net of tax decreased $1,225 to $2,333 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3,558 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is due to (i) the reduction in the Company's share of earnings in Compstar of $679 as a result of the acquisition of the remaining ownership interest in during the third quarter and (ii) the reduction in the Company's share of earnings in TRI of $552, which is no longer carried as an equity method investment due to the sale of a portion of the Company's investment in TRI during the first quarter of 2020.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Underwriting income
We define underwriting income as income before taxes excluding net investment income, investment revaluation gains, net realized capital gains or losses, IPO-related expenses, intangible asset amortization, noncash stock compensation, interest expense other revenue and other income and expenses. Underwriting income represents the pre-tax profitability of our underwriting operations and allows us to evaluate our underwriting performance without regard to investment income, IPO-related expenses, intangible asset amortization, noncash stock compensation, interest expense, other revenue and other income and expenses. We use this metric because we believe it gives our management and other users of our financial information useful insight into our underwriting business performance by adjusting for these expenses and sources of income. Underwriting income should not be viewed as a substitute for net income calculated in accordance with GAAP, and other companies may define underwriting income differently.
(1) the Company defines increases or decreases greater than 200% as "NM" or not meaningful.
Adjusted net income
We define adjusted net income as net income excluding the impact of certain items, including the consummation of the reorganization transactions in connection with our IPO, noncash intangible asset amortization and stock compensation, other expenses and gains or losses that we believe do not reflect our core operating performance, which items may have a disproportionate effect in a given period, affecting comparability of our results across periods. We calculate the tax impact only on adjustments that would be included in calculating our income tax expense using the effective tax rate at the end of each period. We use adjusted net income as an internal performance measure in the management of our operations because we believe it gives our management and other users of our financial information useful insight into our results of operations and our underlying business performance by eliminating the effects of these items. Adjusted net income should not be viewed as a substitute for net income calculated in accordance with GAAP, and other companies may define adjusted net income differently.
(1) the Company defines increases or decreases greater than 200% as "NM" or not meaningful.
Adjusted return on equity
We define adjusted return on equity as adjusted net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending stockholders' equity during the period. We use adjusted return on equity as an internal performance measure in the management of our operations because we believe it gives our management and other users of our financial information useful insight into our results of operations and our underlying business performance by adjusting for items that we believe do not reflect our core operating performance and that may diminish comparability across periods. Adjusted return on equity should not be viewed as a substitute for return on equity calculated in accordance with GAAP, and other companies may define adjusted return on equity differently.
Return on tangible equity and adjusted return on tangible equity
We define tangible stockholders' equity as stockholders' equity less goodwill and other intangible assets. We define return on tangible equity as net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending tangible stockholders' equity during the period. We define adjusted return on tangible equity as adjusted net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending tangible stockholders' equity during the period. We regularly evaluate acquisition opportunities and have historically made acquisitions that affect stockholders' equity. We use return on tangible equity and adjusted return on tangible equity as internal performance measures in the management of our operations because we believe they give our management and other users of our financial information useful insight into our results of operations and our underlying business performance by adjusting for the effects of acquisitions on our stockholders' equity and, in the case of adjusted return on tangible equity, by adjusting for the items that we believe do not reflect our core operating performance and that may diminish comparability across periods. Return on tangible equity and adjusted return on tangible equity should not be viewed as a substitute for return on equity or return on tangible equity, respectively, calculated in accordance with GAAP, and other companies may define return on tangible equity and adjusted return on tangible equity differently.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Funds
We are organized as a holding company with our operations conducted through our subsidiaries, including our wholly owned insurance subsidiaries: Benchmark, which is domiciled in Kansas and commercially domiciled in California; ALIC, which is domiciled in Utah; and 7710, which is domiciled in South Carolina. Accordingly, the holding company may receive cash through (i) loans from banks, (ii) draws on a revolving loan agreement, (iii) issuance of equity and debt securities, (iv) corporate service fees from our operating subsidiaries, (v) payments from our subsidiaries pursuant to our consolidated tax allocation agreement and other transactions and (vi) dividends from our non-insurance subsidiaries and, subject to certain limitations discussed below, dividends from our insurance subsidiaries. We also may use the proceeds from these sources to contribute funds to the insurance subsidiaries in order to support premium growth, reduce our reliance on reinsurance, pay taxes and for other general business purposes.
State insurance laws restrict the ability of insurance companies to declare stockholder dividends without prior regulatory approval. State insurance regulators require insurance companies to maintain specified levels of statutory capital and surplus.
Under Kansas and California law, dividends payable from Benchmark without the prior approval of the applicable insurance commissioner must not exceed the greater of (i) 10% of Benchmark’s surplus as shown on the last statutory financial statement on file with the Kansas Insurance Department and the California Department of Insurance, respectively, or (ii) 100% of net income during the applicable twelve-month period (not including realized capital gains). Dividends shall not include pro rata distributions of any class of Benchmark's own securities.
Under Utah law, dividends payable from ALIC without the prior approval of the applicable insurance commissioner must not exceed the lesser of (i) 10% of ALIC’s surplus as shown on the last statutory financial statement on file with the Utah Insurance Department (ii) 100% of net income during the applicable twelve- month period (not including realized capital gains).
Under South Carolina law, dividends payable from 7710 without the prior approval of the applicable insurance commissioner are limited to the following during the preceding twelve months: (a) when paid from other than earned surplus must not exceed the lesser of: (i) 10% of 7710's surplus as regards policyholders as shown in 7710’s most recent annual statement; or (ii) the net income, not including net realized capital gains or losses as shown in the 7710's most recent annual statement; or (b) when paid from earned surplus must not exceed the greater of: (i) 10% of 7710's surplus as regards policyholders as shown in 7710’s most recent annual statement; or (ii) the net income, not including net realized capital gains or losses as shown in the 7710's most recent annual statement.
The maximum amount of dividends the insurance subsidiaries can pay us during 2020 without regulatory approval is $23.9 million. Insurance regulators have broad powers to ensure that statutory surplus remains at adequate levels, and there is no assurance that dividends of the maximum amount calculated under any applicable formula would be permitted. In the future, state insurance regulatory authorities that have jurisdiction over the payment of dividends by the insurance subsidiaries may adopt statutory provisions more restrictive than those currently in effect.
Our insurance subsidiaries are also required by state law to maintain a minimum level of policyholder's surplus. Kansas, Utah and South Carolina utilize a risk-based capital requirement as promulgated by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners. Such requirements are designed to identify the various business risks (e.g., investment risk, underwriting profitability risk, etc.) of insurance companies and their subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the total adjusted capital of our insurance subsidiaries was in excess of their respective prescribed risk-based capital requirements.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $153,149 in cash and cash equivalents, compared to $74,268 as of December 31, 2019.
Management believes that we have sufficient liquidity available to meet our operating cash needs and obligations and committed capital expenditures for the next 12 months.
Cash Flows
Our most significant source of cash is from premiums received from insureds, net of the related commission amount for the policies. Our most significant cash outflow is for claims that arise when a policyholder incurs an insured loss. Because the payment of claims occurs after the receipt of the premium, often years later, we invest the cash in various investment securities that generally earn interest and dividends. The table below summarizes our net cash flows.
Operating Activities: Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $50,012 compared to $52,173 for the same period in 2019. The $2,161 decrease in cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 is driven by a decrease in cash related to (i) an increase in net income of $59,484, offset by a non-cash gain on the revaluation of Compstar of $69,846 (ii) unpaid loss and loss adjustment expense of $16,889; (iii) premiums and other receivables of $13,722; (iv) prepaid reinsurance premiums of $13,640; and (v) reinsurance premiums payable of $8,999. This decrease is partially offset by an increase in cash related to (i) unearned premiums of $37,655; (ii) reinsurance recoverables of $19,024; and (iii) funds held under reinsurance agreements of $5,230.
Investing Activities: Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $20,246 compared to $23,943 for the same period in 2019. The $3,697 decrease in cash used in investing activities is driven by (i) an increase of $11,891 net cash received in the acquisition of Compstar and (ii) $3,000 received from the sale of TRI in 2020. This increase in cash is partially offset by (i) by an increase in the net cash used in the purchase and sale of investments of $6,097 and (ii) an increase in cash used in the acquisition of subsidiaries of $5,038.
Financing Activities: Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $51,400 compared to net cash used of $8,125 for the same period in 2019. The increase in cash provided by financing activities of $59,525 is driven by $99,643 of net cash proceeds received from the Company's IPO. This increase is partially offset by distributions paid to members prior to the Company's IPO of $18,675, cash paid for deferred offering costs of $5,839, cash used in the buyback of redeemable preferred stock $3,200 and principal payments on the Company's debt, net of incremental principal received in the refinance of debt, of $12,443.
Debt and Credit Agreements
First Horizon Credit Agreement
In April 2018, Trean Corporation and Trean Compstar entered into a credit agreement with First Horizon Bank (formerly, First Tennessee Bank National Association) (the 2018 First Horizon Credit Agreement), which included a term loan facility totaling $27.5 million and a revolving credit facility of $3.0 million.
On July 16, 2020, the Company entered into a new Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement with First Horizon Bank which, among other things, extended the Company's credit facility for a period of five years through May 26, 2025 and increased its term loan facility by $11,707 resulting in a total term loan debt amount of $33,000 and a revolving credit facility of $2,000. The loan has a variable interest rate of 3-month LIBOR plus 3.50%, which was 4.72% as of December 31, 2020 and 6.33% as of December 31, 2019 (under the 2018 First Horizon Credit Agreement). The outstanding principal balance of the loan is to be repaid in quarterly installments that escalate from approximately $206 to $825 until March 2025. All equity securities of the subsidiaries of Trean Insurance Group, Inc. (other than Benchmark Holding Company and its subsidiaries) will be pledged as collateral.
In addition, and in conjunction with, the execution of the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, the Company made dividend distribution payments to Trean members totaling $18,154 in May 2020.
2006 Subordinated Notes
In June 2006, the Trust issued 7,500 shares of preferred capital securities to Bear Stearns Securities Corp. and 232 common securities to Trean Corporation. The proceeds of such issuances were invested by the Trust in $7,732 aggregate principal amount of the Subordinated Notes. The Subordinated Notes represents the sole assets of the Trust. On October 7, 2020, Trean Corp redeemed all of the Subordinated Notes for a total payoff amounts of $7,807. The interest rate was a fixed rate of 9.167% until July 7, 2011, at which time a variable interest rate of 3-month LIBOR (1.99% as of December 31, 2019, respectively) plus 3.50% is in effect. The interest rate totaled 5.49% as of December 31, 2019, respectively.
Oak Street Loan
In conjunction with the acquisition of Compstar, the Company acquired a loan from Oak Street Funding with a total principle of $19,740. After the completion of the acquisition, the Company paid this loan off in full.
PPP Loans
In conjunction with the acquisition of Compstar, the Company acquired a Federal Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) Loan with a principal balance of $325. The PPP Loan was forgiven on November 6, 2020. In conjunction with the acquisition of 7710, the Company acquired a PPP Loan with a principal balance of $269. The PPP Loan was forgiven on November 12, 2020.
Reinsurance
We use reinsurance to convert underwriting risk to credit risk, protect the balance sheet, reduce earnings volatility and increase overall premium writing capacity. We utilize both quota share and excess of loss reinsurance to achieve these goals. Quota share reinsurance involves the proportional sharing of premiums and losses. Under excess of loss reinsurance, losses in excess of a retention level are paid by the reinsurer, subject to a limit.
Quota share reinsurance
We utilize quota share reinsurance to: (i) cede premium to Program Partners (non-professional reinsurers) to transfer underwriting risk and align incentives, and (ii) cede premium to professional reinsurers to increase the amount of gross premiums we can write while managing net premiums written leverage appropriately based on its capital base, A.M. Best rating and risk appetite. It is a core pillar of the Company's underwriting philosophy that Program Partners retain a significant portion of the underwriting risk of their program. We believe this best aligns interests, attracts higher quality programs and leads to better underwriting results.
Excess of loss and catastrophe reinsurance
We purchase excess of loss and catastrophe reinsurance from professional reinsurers to protect against catastrophic, large loss and/or unforeseen extreme loss activity that could otherwise negatively impact the Company’s profitability and capital base. The majority of our exposure to catastrophe risk stems from the workers’ compensation premium we retain net of premiums ceded to Program Partners and professional reinsurers. Potential catastrophic events include earthquake, terrorism or another event that could cause more than one covered employee working at the same location to be injured in the event. This catastrophic exposure is generally ameliorated by the type of accounts we underwrite. Due to our focus on small- to mid-sized accounts (i.e., few employees per policy and location), we generally do not have concentrated employee counts at single locations that can serve as the basis for a catastrophic loss. The limited catastrophic risk that does exist is ceded to large, professional reinsurers through excess of loss reinsurance contracts.
Ratings
We have a financial strength rating of "A" (Excellent) from A.M. Best. A.M. Best assigns 16 ratings to insurance companies, which currently range from "A++" (Superior) to "S" (Rating Suspended). "A" (Excellent) is the third highest rating issued by A.M. Best. The "A" (Excellent) rating is assigned to insurers that have, in A.M. Best’s opinion, an excellent ability to meet their ongoing obligations to policyholders. This rating is intended to provide an independent opinion of an insurer’s ability to meet its obligation to policyholders and is not an evaluation directed at investors. See also "Risk factors - Risks related to our business and industry - A downgrade in the A.M. Best financial strength ratings of our insurance company subsidiaries may negatively affect our business."
The financial strength ratings assigned by A.M. Best have an impact on the ability of the insurance companies to attract and retain agents and brokers and on the risk profiles of the submissions for insurance that the insurance companies receive. The "A" (Excellent) rating obtained by us is consistent with our business plan and allows us to actively pursue relationships with the agents and brokers identified in our marketing plan.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table illustrates our contractual obligations and commercial commitments by due date as of as of December 31, 2020:
Financial condition
Stockholders' Equity
As of December 31, 2020, total stockholders' equity was $410,107, compared to $141,615 as of December 31, 2019, an increase of $268,492. The increase in stockholders' equity over the period was driven primarily by the $99,204 in common shares issued for the acquisition of Compstar; the $93,139 in proceeds from common stock sold in the Company's IPO, net of offering costs; and $95,475 of comprehensive income. These increases were partially offset by distributions to members totaling $19,819 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We had $1,739 of unrecognized stock compensation as of December 31, 2020 related to non-vested stock compensation granted. The Company recognized $506 of stock compensation during the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, we recognized approximately $197 of expense related to pre-IPO membership unit awards for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Investment Portfolio
Our invested asset portfolio consists of fixed maturities, equity securities, other investments and short-term investments. The majority of the investment portfolio was comprised of fixed maturity securities of $405,604 at December 31, 2020, that were classified as available-for-sale. Available-for-sale investments are carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses on these securities, net of applicable taxes, reported as a separate component of accumulated other comprehensive income.
Our investment portfolio objectives are to maintain liquidity, facilitating financial strength and stability and ensuring regulatory and legal compliance. Our investment portfolio consists of available-for-sale fixed maturities and other equity investments, all of which are carried at fair value. We seek to hold a high-quality portfolio of investments that is managed by a professional investment advisory management firm in accordance with the Company's investment policy and routinely reviewed by our management team. Our investments, however, are subject to general economic conditions and market risks as well as risks inherent to particular securities. The Company's investment portfolio has the following objectives:
•Meet insurance regulatory requirements with respect to investments under the applicable insurance laws;
•Maintain an appropriate level of liquidity to satisfy the cash requirements of current operations and long-term obligations;
•Adjust investment risk to offset or complement insurance risk based on our total corporate risk tolerance; and
•Realize the highest possible levels of investment income, while generating superior after-tax total rates of return.
The composition of our investment portfolio is shown in the following table as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
The following table shows the percentage of the total estimated fair value of our fixed maturity securities as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 by credit rating category, using the lower of ratings assigned by Moody's Investor Service or S&P.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The consolidated financial statements included in this annual report include amounts based on the use of estimates and judgments of management. The Company's accounting policies are described in the Notes to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements. We identified the accounting estimates which are critical to the understanding of our financial position and results of operations. Critical accounting estimates are defined as those estimates that are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require us to exercise significant judgment. We use significant judgment concerning future results and developments in applying these critical accounting estimates and in preparing our consolidated financial statements. These judgments and estimates affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of our material contingent assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ materially from the estimates and assumptions used in preparing the consolidated financial statements. We evaluate our estimates regularly using information that we believe to be relevant.
Unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses
The Company estimates the liability for the expected ultimate cost of unpaid loss and LAE as of the balance sheet date. Our reserves for unpaid loss and LAE represent the cost of all reported loss and LAE expenses as well as those that have been incurred but not yet reported. The estimated losses and LAE are regularly reviewed and adjusted as necessary based on historical experience and as the Company obtains new information.
We categorize our reserves for unpaid loss and LAE into two types: case reserves and incurred but not yet reported (IBNR). We establish our case reserves based on claims information reported to us through our claims administrator. Our case reserves include an estimate of the ultimate losses from the claims including administrative costs associated with the
settlement of the claim. Our claims department uses their knowledge of the specific claim along with internal and external experts, including underwriters and independent actuaries, to estimate the expected ultimate losses.
In addition to case reserves, we establish a reserve for IBNR. With the assistance of an independent actuarial firm, we estimate the total loss and LAE related to IBNR which is comprised of: (a) future payments on claims that existed as of the balance sheet date but had not yet been reported to us; (b) a reserve for the additional development on claims that have been reported to us; and (c) a provision for additional payments on closed claims that may reopen. These estimates are based on historical information, industry information and estimates of trends that may impact the ultimate frequency and severity of IBNR claims.
In order to limit the Company's maximum losses and diversify its exposure, we cede a portion of our obligations for losses and LAE through reinsurance treaties with third party reinsurers. The amount of reinsurance that will be recoverable on our losses and LAE includes both the reinsurance recoverables on our excess of loss reinsurance contracts as well as reinsurance recoverables under our quota share contracts.
Our loss reserves, including the main components of such reserves, were as follows:
The process of estimating the reserves for unpaid loss and LAE expenses requires a high degree of judgment. Estimates are prepared using several generally accepted actuarial methodologies for estimating loss reserves including, but not limited to, the incurred development method, paid development method, incurred Bornhuetter-Ferguson method, hindsight IBNR/case reserve ratios, and loss ratio method. The methods used vary based on the line of business and the Partner Program or general agency that generated the business. Considering each of the alternative ultimate estimates, we determine the appropriate estimate of ultimate loss for each line of business and Program Partner.
Reinsurance recoverables
Reinsurance recoverables represent the portion of our unpaid loss and LAE that are ceded to third party reinsurers. The ceding of insurance does not relieve the Company of its primary liability to policyholders. We are required to pay claims even if a reinsurer fails to pay the Company under the terms of a reinsurance contract. We calculate the amounts recoverable from reinsurers based on our estimates of the underlying loss and LAE expenses as well as the terms and conditions of the reinsurance contracts.
Investment fair value measurements
Our investments in fixed maturity securities are classified as available-for-sale and are reported at fair value with unrealized gains and losses reported as a component of other comprehensive income, net of deferred taxes. Our investments in equity securities are reported at fair value with unrealized gains and losses reported as net investment income in the Consolidated and Combined Statement of Operations. In determining the fair value of investments, we utilize a hierarchy based on the quality of inputs used to measure the fair value. The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as follows:
Level 1: Fair values primarily based on unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the Company has the ability to access at the measurement date.
Level 2: Fair values primarily based on observable inputs, other than quoted prices included in Level 1, or based on prices for similar assets and liabilities.
Level 3: Fair values primarily based on valuations derived when one or more of the significant inputs are unobservable. With little or no observable market, the determination of fair value uses considerable judgment and represents the Company’s best estimate of an amount that could be realized in a market exchange for the asset or liability.
We utilize a third-party pricing service to assist us with the valuation of our investments. The fair value of our available-for-sale fixed maturity and equity securities are based on quoted market prices, where available. These fair values are obtained primarily from our third-party pricing service, which generally include Level 1 or Level 2 inputs. Inputs often used in the valuation methodologies include, but are not limited to, transaction data, yield, quality, coupon rate, maturity, issue type, trading characteristics and market activity.
The Company regularly reviews its investment portfolio to determine if other-than-temporary impairment exists for any fixed maturity securities. An investment is impaired when the fair value of the investment declines to an amount less than the cost or amortized cost of that investment. If a security is impaired, the Company bifurcates the impairment into (a) the amount of impairment related to credit loss and (b) the amount of impairment related to other factors. The amount of impairment related to credit loss is recorded as an impairment loss and is included in net income. The impairment related to all other factors is recorded as a reduction in the fair value of the security and is included in accumulated other comprehensive income.
Goodwill and intangible asset valuation
We prepare an impairment analysis for goodwill and other intangible assets. In evaluating for impairment, we identify whether events or circumstances have occurred that may impact the carrying value of these assets and make assumptions regarding future events such as cash flows and profitability. If the carrying amount of the assets are deemed to be not recoverable, the Company records an impairment loss. Differences in the assumptions of recoverability and actual results could materially impact the carrying amount of these assets and our operating results.
Business combinations
The Company strategically identifies opportunities to grow through acquisition. Such business combinations include the identification and valuation of certain assets acquired and liabilities assumed including the valuation of goodwill and intangible assets. Valuations are determined using a market participant assumption and generally include the following valuation approaches:
The Cost Approach is based on replacement value using the acquired company's balance sheet as the basis for valuing the business or individual assets. Under this approach, the appraiser must determine the potential value that is attainable from the sale of all assets or individual assets less the repayment of any associated debt. Separate valuations are performed for each item on the balance sheet and all tangible and intangible assets and liabilities are adjusted to their respective values.
The Income Approach measures the value of an ownership interest in a company or asset as the present value of the future economic benefits of ownership. The future ownership benefits may be represented by the expected earnings or cash flow of a company or asset over an investment period. The expected earnings or cash flow are then converted to their net present value using a rate of return suitable for the risks associated with realizing those future benefits.
The Market Approach asserts that the value of property of any kind is equal to the cost of obtaining an equally desired substitute. Under this approach, the appraisal is based on transactions of assets similar to the subject asset. Value multiples from these transactions are applied to the subject asset's data to arrive at the asset's value.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.