ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is provided as a supplement to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes to help provide an understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition, and results of operations. The following should be read in conjunction with Item 1 “Business,” Item 1A “Risk Factors,” Item 2 “Properties,” and Item 8 “Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. Such forward-looking statements include those that express plans, anticipation, intent, contingency, goals, targets or future development and/or otherwise are not statements of historical fact. See Item 1 at the beginning of this Annual Report.
General Development of Business
We are a global leading provider of integrated, digitally-enabled asset performance assurance and optimization solutions. We deploy conventional to highly specialized inspection, condition assessment, maintenance and repair services that result in greater safety, reliability and operational efficiency for our clients’ most critical assets. We conduct operations in three segments: Inspection and Heat Treating (“IHT”), Mechanical Services (“MS”) and Quest Integrity. Through the capabilities and resources in these three segments, we believe that we are uniquely qualified to provide integrated solutions involving: inspection to assess condition; engineering assessment to determine fitness for purpose in the context of industry standards and regulatory codes; and mechanical services to repair, rerate or replace based upon the client’s election. In addition, we are capable of escalating with the client’s needs, as dictated by the severity of the damage found and the related operating conditions, from standard services to some of the most advanced services and integrated asset integrity and reliability management solutions available in the industry. We also believe that we are unique in our ability to provide services in three distinct client demand profiles: (i) turnaround or project services, (ii) call-out services and (iii) nested or run-and-maintain services.
IHT provides conventional and advanced non-destructive testing (“NDT”) services primarily for the process, pipeline and power sectors, pipeline integrity management services, and field heat treating services, as well as associated engineering and condition assessment services. These services can be offered while facilities are running (on-stream), during facility turnarounds or during new construction or expansion activities.
MS provides solutions designed to serve clients’ unique needs during both the operational (onstream) and off-line states of their assets. Our onstream services include our range of standard to custom-engineered leak repair and composite solutions; emissions control and compliance; hot tapping and line stopping; and on-line valve insertion solutions, which are delivered while assets are in an operational condition, which maximizes client production time. Asset shutdowns can be planned, such as a turnaround maintenance event, or unplanned, such as those due to component failure or equipment breakdowns. Our specialty maintenance, turnaround and outage services are designed to minimize client downtime and are primarily delivered while assets are off-line and often through the use of cross-certified technicians, whose multi-craft capabilities deliver the production needed to achieve tight time schedules. These critical services include on-site field machining; bolted-joint integrity; vapor barrier plug testing; and valve management solutions.
Quest Integrity provides integrity and reliability management solutions for the process, pipeline and power sectors. These solutions encompass three broadly-defined disciplines: (1) highly specialized in-line inspection services for historically unpiggable process piping and pipelines using proprietary in-line inspection tools and analytical software; (2) advanced engineering and condition assessment services through a multi-disciplined engineering team and related lab support; and (3) advanced digital imaging including remote digital video imaging, laser scanning and laser profilometry-enabled reformer care services.
We market our services to companies in a diverse array of heavy industries, which include:
•Energy (refining, power, renewables, nuclear and liquefied natural gas);
•Manufacturing and Process (chemical, petrochemical, pulp and paper industries, manufacturing, automotive and mining);
•Midstream and Others (valves, terminals and storage, pipeline and offshore oil and gas);
•Public Infrastructure (amusement parks, bridges, ports, construction and building, roads, dams and railways); and
•Aerospace and Defense.
In January 2021, we announced a strategic reorganization. The new streamlined structure supports our global operations with greater focus on further improving operational and financial performance through three new operating groups: Inspection and Heat Treating Group (the “IHT Group”), Mechanical & Onstream Services group (the “MOS Group”) and Asset Integrity & Digital (the “AID Group”). The IHT Group, which is included in the IHT segment, is dedicated to growing its stable nested footprint as regulatory compliance requirements increase, expanding turnaround activity, and diversifying its end markets globally, such as through increased investment in the Aerospace business line. The MOS Group, which is included in the MS segment, continues to target turnarounds and capital projects, and improve performance, efficiency, and longevity of aging critical assets. The MOS Group is primed to grow with the industry recovery led by the high demand of maintenance and call-out work. The AID Group, which is included in our Quest Integrity segment, will focus on expanding mechanical and pipeline integrity, risk-based inspection, remote visual inspection, and digital platform. The AID Group will also optimize our research and development activities, including product and technology development. These changes had no effect on our reportable segments.
Significant Factors Impacting Results and Recent Developments
Our revenues, gross margins and other results of operations can be influenced by a variety of factors in any given period, including those described in Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements above and Part 1, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” included in this report have caused fluctuations in our results in the past and are expected to cause fluctuations in our results in the future. Additional information with respect to certain factors are described below.
COVID-19 Pandemic and Market Conditions Update. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 as a pandemic, which continues to spread throughout the United States and the rest of the world. Over the past year, the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic repercussions created significant volatility and uncertainty in domestic and international markets including in the markets in which we operate and, as a result, certain clients have responded with capital spending budget cuts, cost cutting measures, personnel layoffs, limited facility access, and facility closures among other actions.
Though the impact of COVID-19 and the decline in crude oil prices on our operations has varied by geographic conditions, the applicable government mandates have adversely affected our workforce and operations, as well as the operations of our clients, suppliers and contractors. The ultimate duration and impact on our global operations remains unclear. We expect that our results of operations in future periods may continue to be adversely impacted due to the factors noted above. To successfully navigate through this unprecedented period, we have continued to focus on the following key priorities:
• the safety of our employees and business continuity;
• decisive and aggressive actions taken to reduce costs, preserve capacity and manage margins to align our business with the near-term decrease in demand for our services; and
• our end market revenue diversification strategy.
To respond to the economic downturn resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and the drop in oil prices, we initiated a cost reduction and efficiency program during the second quarter of 2020. All named executive officers have voluntarily taken temporary salary reductions ranging from 15% to 20% of their base salary. In addition, we instituted a reduction for certain other salaried employees, at lower percentages, and suspended our voluntary match under the executive deferred compensation retirement plan and our 401(k) plan. Further, our board of directors voluntarily agreed to a 20% reduction of their cash compensation. These reductions continue into 2021.
Under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), we are qualified to defer the employer portion of social security taxes incurred through the end of calendar 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we have deferred employer payroll taxes of $14.2 million with approximately half of the deferral due in each of 2021 and 2022. We may defer additional future employer payroll taxes under the CARES Act. Additionally, other governments in jurisdictions where we operate passed legislation to provide employers with relief programs, which include wage subsidy grants, deferral of certain payroll related expenses and tax payments and other benefits. We elected to treat qualified government subsidies from Canada and other governments as offsets to the related expenses. As a result, we recognized $9.9 million and $2.4 million as a reduction to operating expenses and selling, general and administrative expenses, respectively, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we also deferred certain payroll related expenses and tax payments of $4.6 million under other foreign government programs which will be due in 2021 and 2022.
Goodwill Impairment. As discussed in Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements further below, we recognized a non-cash goodwill impairment charge during the three months ended March 31, 2020 of $191.8 million for the IHT operating segment. These charges were a result of an interim goodwill impairment test that was triggered as a result of certain impairment indicators that were present during the quarter, primarily the decline in operating results experienced during the first quarter of 2020 due to COVID-19, lower oil prices and related impacts on the IHT operating segment.
Results of Operations
The following is a comparison of our results of operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 and for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth the components of revenue and operating income (loss) from our operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
_________________
1 Includes goodwill impairment charge of $191.8 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
2 NM - Not meaningful.
Revenues. Total revenues declined $310.8 million or 26.7% from the same period in the prior year. Excluding the unfavorable impact of $2.3 million due to foreign currency exchange rate changes, total revenues decreased by $308.5 million, IHT revenues decreased by $137.9 million, MS revenues decreased by $141.5 million and Quest Integrity revenues decreased by $29.1 million. Decreased activity levels in IHT, MS and Quest Integrity were primarily due to volumes being negatively impacted by the outbreak of COVID-19 and the oversupplied oil market causing certain clients to temporarily close facilities and/or curtail operations, resulting in the postponement of client projects and lower demand for our services. Within the oil and gas industry, we expect refining utilization rates to gradually recover through 2021. Without the COVID-19 pandemic effects, we would typically benefit for a period of 12 to 18 months following a refining utilization rate drop, however, current market dynamics have delayed the demand growth for our products and services. The unfavorable impacts of foreign exchange rate changes are primarily due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar relative to the foreign currencies to which we have exposure during this period.
Operating loss. Overall operating loss was $217.4 million, compared to an operating loss of $2.1 million in the prior year. The increase in operating loss was primarily attributable to a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $191.8 million during the first quarter of 2020, which was triggered by the existence of impairment indicators, including the decline in our forecasts as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related decline in market conditions in our IHT operating segment.
Operating loss for the current year includes net expenses totaling $205.2 million that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating activities, while the same period in the prior year included $23.3 million of such items.
______________________
1 Consists primarily of professional fees and other costs for assessment of corporate and support cost structures. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, includes $3.2 million and $12.3 million, respectively, associated with the OneTEAM program (exclusive of restructuring costs).
2 For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, primarily relates to accrued costs due to international legal and internal control review matters. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, primarily relates to accrued costs due to the resolution of a legal matter.
3 For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and twelve months ended December 31, 2019, includes $3.4 million and $1.7 million of severance charges associated with the OneTEAM program, including international restructuring under the OneTEAM program. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, $2.5 million in other severance charges were due to the impact of COVID-19.
4 Amount represents the insurance deductible amount for hurricane damage incurred during the period.
Excluding the impact of non-core expenses, the overall decrease in operating income is primarily attributable to our MS and Quest Integrity segments, which experienced a decrease in operating income of $26.4 million and $11.8 million, respectively. The lower operating income in MS and Quest Integrity reflects lower activity levels due to a decline in market conditions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the decline in oil prices. These movements were partially offset by a decrease in corporate and shared support service expenses of $10.5 million, which was driven primarily by lower payroll and noncash compensation expenses.
Other (income) expense, net. Other expense, net increased $1.8 million, or 252%, from the same period in the prior year, primarily from foreign currency transaction losses in the current year compared to the prior year. Foreign currency transaction losses in the current year period reflect the effects of fluctuations in the U.S. Dollar relative to the foreign currencies to which we have exposure. Other expense, net also include certain components of our net periodic pension cost (credit).
Loss on debt extinguishment and modification. In December 2020, we entered into lending arrangements, repaid all amounts outstanding under our prior credit facility (the “Credit Facility”) and retired $136.9 million par value of our 5.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2023 (the “Notes”). In connection with these transactions, we recognized a loss of $2.2 million, comprised of approximately $4.4 million in unamortized debt issuance costs on the Credit Facility and expenses associated with
the extinguishment of the Notes, partially offset by a $2.2 million gain on extinguishment of the Notes. See further discussion of our debt in Note 10. Long-term debt, derivatives and letters of credit to our consolidated financial statements included in this report. The write-off of debt issuance costs of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was associated with a reduction in capacity of the revolving portion of the Credit Facility in July 2019.
Taxes. The benefit for income tax was $14.7 million on the pre-tax loss from continuing operations of $251.9 million in the current year compared to the benefit for income tax of $0.4 million on pre-tax loss from continuing operations of $32.9 million in the prior year. The effective tax rate was a benefit of 5.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and a benefit of 1.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019.The higher effective rate benefit in 2020 is primarily attributable to the tax benefit related to the goodwill impairment loss taken during the year, a portion of which is not deductible for tax purposes, and tax benefits recorded as a result of certain provisions within the CARES Act, enacted on March 27, 2020. The rate was also positively impacted by a decrease in valuation allowance on the expected realizability of the Company’s deferred tax assets for net operating loss carryforwards in certain foreign jurisdictions in which the Company operates. These benefits were offset by an increase in valuation allowance on the expected realizability of the Company’s deferred tax assets for federal and state tax net operating loss carryforwards. The CARES Act was enacted as a stimulus package to mitigate the negative financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy. A provision in the CARES Act allows for the carryback of net operating losses generated in certain tax years, which were previously only allowed to be carried forward, to recover income taxes paid at a higher statutory tax rate than the rate under current law. A tax benefit in the amount of $7.3 million was recorded during the year related to the carryback of net operating losses.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
The following table sets forth the components of revenue and operating income (loss) from our operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands):
Revenues. Total revenues declined $83.6 million or 6.7% from the same period in the prior year. Excluding the unfavorable impact of $11.8 million due to foreign currency exchange rate changes, total revenues decreased by $71.8 million, IHT revenues decreased by $101.7 million, MS revenues increased by $10.9 million and Quest Integrity revenues increased by $19.0 million. The unfavorable impacts of foreign exchange rate changes are primarily due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar relative to the Euro, the British Pound, the Canadian dollar and the Australian dollar. Decreased activity levels in IHT were associated with volume declines due to regional competitive pressures along the U.S. Gulf Coast, deliberate market share loss due to a continued focus on pricing discipline, Canadian end-market challenges and some weather related impacts. Also contributing to the decrease was the loss of revenue from certain under-performing businesses in IHT that closed down in late 2018. For MS, revenue increased primarily due to higher on-stream services. Within Quest Integrity, the increase in revenue is primarily the result of higher demand for Quest Integrity’s proprietary services and tools as well as growth from certain geographic expansion.
Operating income (loss). Overall operating loss was $2.1 million, compared to an operating loss of $39.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2018. The overall decrease in operating loss is primarily attributable to the MS segment, which experienced an increase in operating income of $49.1 million. Additionally, operating income for Quest Integrity increased by
$8.6 million. Partially offsetting these improvements was the decrease in operating income in IHT of $13.2 million and the increase in corporate and shared support service expenses of $7.6 million.
Operating income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2019 included net expenses totaling $23.3 million that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating activities, while the same period in the prior year included $33.9 million of such items, as detailed by segment in the table below (in thousands):
______________________
1Consists primarily of professional fees and other costs for assessment of corporate and support cost structures, acquired business integration, natural disaster costs and transition/severance costs associated with certain executive leadership changes. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, includes $12.3 million and $15.5 million, respectively, associated with the OneTEAM program (exclusive of restructuring costs).
2For the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, primarily relates to accrued costs due to resolutions of certain legal matters. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2018, relates to intellectual property legal defense costs associated with Quest Integrity.
3Relates to restructuring costs incurred associated with the OneTEAM program. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Excluding the impact of these identified items in both periods, operating loss changed favorably by $26.2 million, consisting of increased operating income in MS and Quest Integrity of $45.2 million and $8.3 million, respectively, partially offset by decreased operating income in IHT of $17.1 million and an increase in corporate and shared support services expenses of $10.2 million. The higher operating income in MS is primarily due to improvements in project execution pricing and cost. Additionally, MS incurred $12.4 million of amortization expense in 2018 due to the accelerated amortization of the Furmanite trade name intangible asset. Management determined that, as a result of initiatives to consolidate branding, the useful life of Furmanite trade name intangible asset was not expected to extend beyond December 31, 2018. We accounted for the change in useful life prospectively effective January 1, 2018 and amortized the remaining balance over 2018, which resulted in the incremental amortization expense in 2018. Within Quest Integrity, the higher operating income reflects both higher activity levels and a favorable project mix. The lower operating income in IHT reflects lower activity levels due to a decline in market conditions. The operating loss increase in corporate and shared support services was driven by corporate cost increases in technology expenses, labor costs and conclusion of certain legal settlements offset by lower non-cash compensation costs.
Interest expense. Interest expense decreased from $30.9 million in the prior year to $29.7 million in the current year. The decrease is primarily due to a lower overall debt balances outstanding.
Loss on debt extinguishment and modification. The write-off of debt issuance costs of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was associated with a reduction in capacity of the revolving portion of the Credit Facility in July 2019.
Loss on convertible debt embedded derivative. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2018, we recorded a loss of $24.8 million associated with the increase in fair value of our convertible debt embedded derivative liability. The loss recognized during this period is primarily attributable to the increase in our stock price during the period. As discussed further in Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements, in accordance with ASC 815-15, we recorded a loss to adjust the embedded derivative liability to its fair value as of May 17, 2018 and then reclassified the balance of $45.4 million to stockholders’ equity in the second quarter of 2018. As a result of this reclassification, the embedded derivative liability is no longer marked to fair value each period.
Other (income) expense, net. Non-operating results include foreign currency transaction losses of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to foreign currency transaction losses of $1.7 million in the same period last year. The foreign currency transaction losses in both periods reflect the effects of fluctuations in the U.S. Dollar relative to the currencies to which we have exposure, including but not limited to, the Brazilian Real, British Pound, Canadian Dollar, Euro, Australian Dollar, New Zealand Dollar, Norwegian Kroner, Malaysian Ringgit, Mexican Peso and Singapore Dollar. Non-operating results also include certain components of our net periodic pension cost (credit).
Taxes. The benefit for income tax was $0.4 million on the pre-tax loss from continuing operations of $32.9 million in the current year compared to the benefit for income tax of $31.1 million on pre-tax loss from continuing operations of $94.2 million in the prior year. The effective tax rate was a benefit of 1.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019 and a benefit of 33.0% for the year ended December 31, 2018. The lower effective rate benefit in 2019 is primarily attributable to an increase in valuation allowance on the expected realizability of our deferred tax assets for federal, foreign and state tax net operating loss carryforwards.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Reconciliations
We use supplemental non-GAAP financial measures which are derived from the consolidated financial information including adjusted net income (loss); adjusted net income (loss) per diluted share, earnings before interest and taxes (“EBIT”); adjusted EBIT (defined below); adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“adjusted EBITDA”) and free cash flow to supplement financial information presented on a GAAP basis.
We define adjusted net income (loss), adjusted net income (loss) per diluted share and adjusted EBIT to exclude the following items: costs associated with our OneTEAM program, non-routine legal costs and settlements, restructuring charges, certain severance charges, goodwill impairment charges, loss on debt extinguishment and certain other items that we believe are not indicative of core operating activities. Beginning in the third quarter of 2020, we have modified our presentation of non-GAAP financial measures to reconcile net income (loss) to consolidated adjusted EBIT and EBITDA. Consolidated adjusted EBIT, as defined by us, excludes the costs excluded from adjusted net income (loss) as well as income tax expense (benefit), interest charges, foreign currency (gain) loss, and items of other (income) expense. Consolidated adjusted EBITDA further excludes from consolidated adjusted EBIT depreciation, amortization and non-cash share-based compensation costs. Segment adjusted EBIT is equal to segment operating income (loss) excluding costs associated with our OneTEAM program, non-routine legal costs and settlements, restructuring charges, goodwill impairment charges and certain other items as determined by management. Segment adjusted EBITDA further excludes from segment adjusted EBIT depreciation, amortization, and non-cash share-based compensation costs. Consolidated adjusted EBITDA margin is defined as consolidated adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue. Free cash flow is defined as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities minus capital expenditures.
Management believes these non-GAAP financial measures are useful to both management and investors in their analysis of our financial position and results of operations. In particular, adjusted net income (loss), adjusted net income (loss) per diluted share, consolidated adjusted EBIT, and consolidated adjusted EBITDA are meaningful measures of performance which are commonly used by industry analysts, investors, lenders and rating agencies to analyze operating performance in our industry, perform analytical comparisons, benchmark performance between periods, and measure our performance against externally communicated targets. Our segment adjusted EBIT and segment adjusted EBITDA is also used as a basis for the Chief Operating Decision Maker to evaluate the performance of our reportable segments. Free cash flow is used by our management and investors to analyze our ability to service and repay debt and return value directly to stakeholders.
Non-GAAP measures have important limitations as analytical tools, because they exclude some, but not all, items that affect net earnings and operating income. These measures should not be considered substitutes for their most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures and should be read only in conjunction with financial information presented on a GAAP basis. Further, our non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies who may calculate non-GAAP financial measures differently, limiting the usefulness of those measures for comparative purposes. The liquidity measure of free cash flow does not represent a precise calculation of residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures. Reconciliations of each non-GAAP financial measure to its most directly comparable GAAP financial measure are presented below.
The following tables set forth the reconciliation of Adjusted Net Income (Loss), EBIT and EBITDA to their most comparable GAAP financial measurements:
____________________________________
1 For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, includes $0.6 million and $3.2 million, respectively, associated with the OneTEAM program (exclusive of restructuring costs). For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019, includes $2.5 million and $12.3 million, respectively, associated with the OneTEAM program (exclusive of restructuring costs).
2 For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, primarily relates to costs associated with international legal and internal control review matters. For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019, primarily relates to resolution of a legal matter.
3 For the three months ended December 31, 2020, there were no severance charges associated with the OneTEAM program and for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, $3.4 million, are severance charges associated with the OneTEAM program. For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, $0.9 million and $2.5 million respectively, in severance charges were due to the impact of COVID-19. For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019, severance charges are associated with the OneTEAM program.
4 Amount represents the insurance deductible for hurricane damage incurred for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
5 Represents the tax effect of the adjustments at an assumed marginal tax rate of 21% for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 except for the adjustment of the goodwill impairment charge for which the actual tax impact was used.
6 Represents pension expense (credit) for the U.K. pension plan based on the difference between the expected return on plan assets and the cost of the discounted pension liability. The pension plan has had no new participants added since the plan was frozen in 1994 and accruals for future benefits ceased in connection with a plan curtailment in 2013.
7 Represents foreign currency gain/loss. For prior periods, includes other nominal fees.
___________________
1 Relates to severance charges incurred associated with the OneTEAM program, including international restructuring under the OneTEAM program for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Also includes severance charges due to the impact of COVID-19 for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
2 Amount represents the insurance deductible for hurricane damage incurred for the three months and twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
3 Represents pension expense (credit) for the U.K. pension plan based on the difference between the expected return on plan assets and the cost of the discounted pension liability. The pension plan has had no new participants added since the plan was frozen in 1994 and accruals for future benefits ceased in connection with a plan curtailment in 2013.
4 For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, includes $0.6 million and $3.2 million, respectively, associated with the OneTEAM program (exclusive of restructuring costs). For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019, includes $2.5 million and $12.3 million, respectively, associated with the OneTEAM program (exclusive of restructuring costs).
5 For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, primarily relates to costs associated with international legal and internal control review matters. For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019, primarily relates to resolution of a legal matter.
6 Represents foreign currency gain/loss. For prior periods, includes other nominal fees.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Financing for our operations consists primarily of our ABL Facility (defined below) and cash flows attributable to our operations, which we believe are sufficient to satisfy our anticipated cash requirements for our existing operations for at least the next twelve months. Our long-term liquidity needs primarily relate to debt service requirements. From time to time, we may experience periods of weakness in the industries in which we operate, with activity levels below historical levels. These conditions, depending on their duration and severity, have the potential to adversely impact our operating cash flows. Since the oil and gas market downturn and outbreak of COVID-19 in the United States beginning in March 2020, we have maintained a continuous process of actively managing our strategy, operations and resources to changing market conditions. We have implemented workforce furloughs, reduced personnel compensation, reduced headcount, eliminated all non-essential costs, lowered capital expenditure budgets by more than 30% and reviewed all business operations within the evolving market conditions amongst other initiatives. Additionally, when the COVID-19 pandemic and oil and gas industry downturn depressed commodity prices beginning in March 2020, our active management actions helped ensure adequate available liquidity resources for the foreseeable future. We intend to continue managing the business to the new market realities to ensure our access to capital remains sufficient. We periodically explore alternative financing to improve our balance sheet and liquidity or in the event that existing liquidity sources are no longer sufficient for our capital requirements. Any such financing could be on substantially different and more onerous terms than those of our ABL Facility, including with respect to interest rates, financial and other covenants and required collateral, and could include an equity component, which would be dilutive to our shareholders. However, there can be no assurance that such financing would be available on terms acceptable to us, if at all. From time to time, we may also seek to retire, repurchase or exchange our Notes in open market purchases or privately negotiated transactions dependent upon market conditions, liquidity, and contractual obligations and other factors.
ABL Facility. On December 18, 2020, we entered into an asset-based credit agreement (the “ABL Facility”) led by Citibank, N.A., as agent, which provides for available borrowings up to $150 million. The ABL Facility matures and all outstanding amounts become due and payable on December 18, 2024. However, if our Notes, which mature on August 1, 2023, have an aggregate principal amount of $50 million or more outstanding 120 days prior to their maturity date (the “Trigger Date”), or if there are Notes in an aggregate principal amount of less than $50 million outstanding and we do not have sufficient availability of more than 20% under the ABL Facility on the Trigger Date, the ABL Facility will terminate on the Trigger Date. The ABL Facility includes a $50 million sublimit for letters of credit issuance and $35 million sublimit for swingline borrowings. Additionally, subject to certain conditions, including obtaining additional commitments, the ABL Facility may be increased by an amount not to exceed $50 million.
Our obligations under the ABL Facility are guaranteed by certain of our direct and indirect subsidiaries, as set forth in the ABL Facility agreement. The ABL Facility is secured on a first priority basis by, among other things, our accounts receivable, deposit accounts, securities accounts and inventory, including those of our direct and indirect subsidiary guarantors, and on a second priority basis by substantially all other assets of our direct and indirect subsidiary guarantors. Borrowing availability under the ABL Facility is based on a percentage of the value of accounts receivable and inventory, reduced for certain reserves.
Borrowings under the ABL Facility bear interest through maturity at a variable rate based upon, at our option, an annual rate of either a base rate (“Base Rate”) or a LIBOR rate, plus an applicable margin. The Base Rate is defined as a fluctuating interest rate equal to the greatest of (i) the federal funds rate plus 0.50%, (ii) Citibank, N.A.’s prime rate, and (iii) the one-month LIBOR rate plus 1.00%. Depending on the amount of average excess availability, the applicable margin is between 1.75% to 2.25% for Base Rate borrowings with a 1.75% Base Rate floor and between 2.75% and 3.25% for LIBOR rate borrowings with a 0.75% LIBOR rate floor. Interest is payable either (i) monthly for Base Rate borrowings or (ii) the last day of the interest period for LIBOR rate borrowings, as set forth in the ABL Facility agreement. The fee for undrawn amounts ranges from 0.375% to 0.5%, depending on usage and are due quarterly.
The ABL Facility contains customary conditions to borrowings, events of default and covenants, including, but not limited to, covenants that restrict our ability to sell assets, makes changes to the nature of our business, engage in mergers and acquisitions, incur, assume or permit to exist additional indebtedness and guarantees, create or permit to exist liens, pay dividends, issue equity instruments, make distribution or redeem or repurchase capital stock. In the event that our excess availability is less than the greater of (i) $15.0 million and (ii) 10.00% of the lesser of (1) the current borrowing base and (2) the commitments under the ABL Facility then in effect, a consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 1.00 to 1.00 must be
maintained. Upon the occurrence of certain events of default, an additional 2.0% interest maybe required on the outstanding loans under the ABL Facility.
At December 31, 2020, we had $24.6 million of cash on hand and approximately $59.5 million of available borrowing capacity under the ABL Facility. Direct and incremental costs associated with the issuance of the ABL Facility were approximately $3.3 million and were capitalized as debt issuance costs. These costs are being amortized on a straight-line basis over the term of the ABL Facility.
Atlantic Park Term Loan. On December 18, 2020, we also entered into a credit agreement with Atlantic Park Strategic Capital Fund, L.P., as agent, and APSC Holdco II, L.P. (“APSC”), as lender, pursuant to which we borrowed a $250.0 million term loan (the “Term Loan”). The Term Loan was issued with a 3% original issuance discount (“OID”), such that total proceeds received were $242.5 million. The Term Loan matures, and all outstanding amounts become due and payable on December 18, 2026. However, certain conditions could result in an earlier maturity, including if the Notes have an aggregate principal amount outstanding of $50 million or more on the Trigger Date, in which case the Term Loan will terminate on the Trigger Date. As set forth in the Term Loan agreement, the Term Loan is secured by substantially all assets, other than those secured on a first lien basis by the ABL Facility, and we may increase the Term Loan by an amount not to exceed $100 million.
The Term Loan bears interest through maturity at a variable rate based upon, at our option, an annual rate of either a Base rate or a LIBOR rate, plus an applicable margin. The Base rate is defined as a fluctuating interest rate equal to the greatest of (i) the federal funds rate plus 0.50%, (ii), the prime rate as specified in the Term Loan agreement, and (iii) one-month LIBOR rate plus 1.00%. The applicable margin is defined as a rate of 6.50% for Base rate borrowings with a 2.00% Base rate floor and 7.50% for LIBOR rate borrowings with a 1.00% LIBOR rate floor. Interest is payable either (i) monthly for Base rate borrowings or (ii) the last day of the interest period for LIBOR rate borrowings, as set forth in the Term Loan agreement. The loans under the Term Loan were issued with an original issue discount of 3.00%, and are, in whole or in part, prepayable any time and from time to time, at a prepayment premium (including a make whole during the first two years) specified in the Term Loan agreement (subject to certain exceptions), plus accrued and unpaid interest. The effective interest rate on the Term Loan at December 31, 2020 was 12.06%.
The Term Loan contains customary payment penalties, events of default and covenants, including but not limited to, covenants that restrict our ability to sell assets, make changes to the nature of our business, engage in mergers or acquisitions, incur additional indebtedness and guarantees, pay dividends, issue equity instruments and make distributions or redeem or repurchase capital stock.
Commencing with the fiscal quarter ending March 31, 2022, we are also required to maintain a net leverage ratio of less than or equal to 7.00 to 1.00, calculated quarterly on a trailing twelve-month basis. In addition, our capital expenditures may not exceed $33.0 million during any four fiscal quarter period, provided that this covenant will not apply if the total net leverage ratio is less than or equal to 4.00 to 1.00 at the end of the second and fourth quarter of each year.
Our ability to maintain compliance with the financial covenants is dependent upon our future operating performance and future financial condition, both of which are subject to various risks and uncertainties. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the decline in oil and gas end markets could have a significant adverse effect on our financial position and business condition, as well as our clients and suppliers. Additionally, these events may, among other factors, impact our ability to generate cash flows from operations, access the capital markets on acceptable terms or at all, and affect our future need or ability to borrow under our ABL Facility. In addition to our current sources of funding our business, the effects of such events may impact our liquidity or our need to revise our allocation or sources of capital, implement further cost reduction measures and/or change our business strategy. Although the COVID-19 pandemic and decline in the oil and gas end markets could have a broad range of effects on our liquidity sources, the effects will depend on future developments and cannot be predicted at this time.
In order to secure our casualty insurance programs, we are required to post letters of credit generally issued by a bank as collateral. A letter of credit commits the issuer to remit specified amounts to the holder, if the holder demonstrates that we failed to meet our obligations under the letter of credit. If this were to occur, we would be obligated to reimburse the issuer for any payments the issuer was required to remit to the holder of the letter of credit. We were contingently liable for outstanding stand-by letters of credit totaling $19.5 million at December 31, 2020 and $20.5 million at December 31, 2019. Outstanding letters of credit reduce amounts available under our ABL Facility and are considered as having been funded for purposes of calculating our financial covenants.
Use of Proceeds and Debt Issuance Costs. Direct and incremental costs associated with the issuance of the Term Loan were approximately $5.1 million and were capitalized as debt issuance costs. The debt issuance costs and the OID will be amortized using the effective interest method over the term of the Term Loan.
We used a portion of the proceeds from the Term Loan, totaling approximately $128.8 million, to repay all borrowings, including accrued interest, outstanding under our Credit Facility. The Credit Facility, which was comprised of a revolver and term loan, was retired. Unamortized costs associated with the Credit Facility were $2.2 million at time of repayment and were expensed as loss on debt extinguishment.
We retired $136.9 million par value of our Notes for $135.5 million, excluding accrued interest, using proceeds from the Term Loan and borrowings under the ABL Facility. ASC 470 requires that the fair value of consideration transferred at settlement be allocated between the debt component and equity component of the Notes. To determine the fair value of the debt component of the Notes, we measured the fair value of a similar debt instrument without an associated conversion feature. The remaining fair value was allocated to the equity component of the Notes. The amounts allocated to the debt and equity components were in accordance with ASC 470 and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). We determined the fair value of the retired Notes was $121.8 million at extinguishment, with the remaining consideration of $13.7 million allocated to the equity component. The carrying amount of the retired Notes at extinguishment, net of unamortized discount and debt issuance costs was $124.0 million. Therefore, in connection with the retirement of the Notes, we recognized a gain on extinguishment of $2.2 million. Additionally, we incurred approximately $2.6 million in third-party fees in connection with the retirement of the Notes, of which $2.2 million were expensed as loss on debt extinguishment and $0.4 million recorded as equity reacquisition costs.
Convertible Senior Notes. On July 31, 2017, we issued $230.0 million principal amount of senior unsecured 5.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2023 in a private offering to qualified institutional buyers (as defined in the Securities Act) pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act. As discussed above, in December 2020, we retired $136.9 million par value of the Notes, and as of December 31, 2020, the principal amount of Notes outstanding was $93.1 million.
The Notes bear interest at a rate of 5.0% per year, payable semiannually in arrears on February 1 and August 1 of each year, beginning on February 1, 2018. The Notes mature on August 1, 2023 unless repurchased, redeemed or converted in accordance with their terms prior to such date. The Notes are convertible at an initial conversion rate of 46.0829 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the Notes, which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $21.70 per share, which represents a conversion premium of 40% to the last reported sale price of $15.50 per share on the NYSE on July 25, 2017, the date the pricing of the Notes was completed. The conversion rate, and thus the conversion price, may be adjusted under certain circumstances as described in the indenture governing the Notes.
Holders may convert their Notes at their option prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding May 1, 2023, but only under the following circumstances:
•during any calendar quarter commencing after the calendar quarter ending on December 31, 2017 (and only during such calendar quarter), if the last reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on the last trading day of the immediately preceding calendar quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price on each applicable trading day;
•during the five business day period after any five consecutive trading day period (the “measurement period”) in which the trading price per $1,000 principal amount of Notes for each trading day of such measurement period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of our common stock and the conversion rate on such trading day;
•if we call any or all of the Notes for redemption, at any time prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding the redemption date; or;
•upon the occurrence of specified corporate events described in the indenture governing the Notes.
On or after May 1, 2023 until the close of business on the business day immediately preceding the maturity date, holders may, at their option, convert their Notes at any time, regardless of the foregoing circumstances.
As a result of the redemption and extinguishment of the Notes discussed above, the Notes are convertible into 4,291,705 shares of common stock. The Notes will be convertible into, subject to various conditions, cash or shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of common stock, in each case, at our election.
If holders elect to convert the Notes in connection with certain fundamental change transactions described in the indenture governing the Notes, we will, under certain circumstances described in the indenture governing the Notes, increase the conversion rate for the Notes so surrendered for conversion.
We may not redeem the Notes prior to August 5, 2021. We will have the option to redeem all or any portion of the Notes on or after August 5, 2021, if certain conditions are met (including that our common stock is trading at or above 130% of the conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive), including the trading day immediately preceding the date on which the Company provides notice of redemption, during any 30 consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which the Company provides notice of redemption) at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. Net proceeds received from the Offering were approximately $222.3 million after deducting discounts, commissions and expenses.
Cost Savings and Business Improvement Initiatives. In the fourth quarter of 2017, we engaged outside consultants to assess all aspects of our business for improvement and cost saving opportunities, including centralizing support/shared services. In the first quarter of 2018, we completed the design phase of the project, known as OneTEAM, for our domestic operations, and entered into the deployment phase in the second quarter of 2018. We incurred $3.2 million and $12.3 million of expenses during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, primarily related to professional fees associated with the OneTEAM project. Additionally, we incurred $3.4 million and $1.7 million of severance-related costs during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to the elimination of certain employee positions in conjunction with the OneTEAM project. We expect the program-related expenses to continue through the first quarter of 2021.
In the third quarter of 2019, we began the design phase of OneTEAM for our international operations (“OneTEAM International”) which was deployed in the fourth quarter of 2019. We incurred various additional expenses associated with the execution of OneTEAM International through 2020 with funding provided by our operating cash flows and lending arrangements. During the first quarter of 2020, in response to COVID-19 and the decline in oil and gas end markets, we expanded and accelerated the operations and center led pillars from the OneTEAM program in order to implement permanent cost savings and identify further opportunities to optimize our organization (“OneTEAM Tune-Up”).
We achieved OneTEAM and other cost reduction savings of $110 million dollars of savings for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, up from our previous estimate of $85 million to $95 million of permanent and temporary cost savings.
Cash and cash equivalents. Our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 totaled $24.6 million, of which $18.8 million was in foreign accounts, primarily in the U.K., Europe, Canada and Australia.
Cash flows attributable to our operating activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $52.8 million. Although we incurred a net loss of $237.2 million, the goodwill impairment of $192 million, the effect of depreciation and amortization of $45.9 million, a decrease in working capital of $37.8 million, non-cash compensation cost of $6.3 million, amortization of debt issuance costs and debt discount of $8.8 million and deferred income taxes of $4.0 million primarily due to net tax refunds, resulted in positive operating cash flow.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was $58.8 million. Although we incurred a net loss of $32.4 million, the effect of depreciation and amortization of $49.1 million, a decrease in working capital of $25.0 million, non-cash compensation cost of $10.1 million, amortization of debt issuance costs and debt discount of $7.7 million and deferred income taxes of $3.8 million primarily due to net tax refunds, resulted in positive operating cash flow.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash used in operating activities was $41.9 million. Although we incurred a net loss of $63.1 million, the effect of depreciation and amortization of $64.9 million, a non-cash loss on our convertible debt embedded derivative of $24.8 million, a decrease in working capital of $19.0 million, non-cash compensation cost of $12.3 million and a provision for credit losses of $11.7 million, partially offset by deferred tax benefits of $31.7 million, resulted in positive operating cash flow.
Cash flows attributable to our investing activities. As a response to the COVID-19 pandemic, oil and gas industry outlook, and in order to preserve liquidity, at this time we are limiting capital spending to critical client projects that offer the highest rate of return. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $18.3 million, consisting primarily of $20.0 million of capital expenditures.
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, net cash used in investing activities was $28.1 million and $25.0 million, respectively, consisting primarily of $29.0 million and $27.2 million, respectively, of capital expenditures. Capital expenditures can vary depending upon specific client needs that may arise unexpectedly.
Cash flows attributable to our financing activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities was $23.5 million, consisting primarily of $126.6 million net debt repayments under the Credit Facility, $135.5
million for partial extinguishment of convertible debt, $35.0 million of payments under the ABL facility, $9.1 million of term loan debt issuance costs, $2.4 million of debt extinguishment costs, and $1.0 million in withholding tax payments related to share-based compensation, partially offset by net borrowings on our Term Loan of $242.5 million and net borrowings on our ABL Credit Facility of $44.0 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in financing activities was $36.8 million, consisting primarily of $82.4 million net debt repayments under the revolving portion of our Credit Facility, $1.9 million in withholding tax payments related to share-based compensation, $0.4 million in contingent consideration payments and $1.5 million of Credit Facility debt issuance costs, partially offset by net borrowings on our Credit Facility term loan of $49.7 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash used in financing activities was $23.0 million, consisting primarily of $19.7 million net debt repayments under the revolving portion of our Credit Facility, $1.4 million in withholding tax payments related to share-based compensation, $1.1 million in contingent consideration payments and $0.9 million of Credit Facility debt issuance costs.
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash was a positive impact of $1.4 million. The positive impact in the current year is primarily attributable to favorable fluctuations in U.S. Dollar exchange rates with the Canadian Dollar, the Euro, the British Pound the Australian Dollar and Mexican Peso.
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, the effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash was a negative impact of $43.0 thousand and $2.1 million, respectively. The negative impact in both periods is primarily attributable to unfavorable fluctuations in U.S. Dollar exchange rates with the Canadian Dollar, Australian Dollar, the British Pound, the Euro and the Brazilian Real.
Critical Accounting Policies
The process of preparing financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires our management to make estimates and judgments. It is possible that materially different amounts could be recorded if these estimates and judgments change or if actual results differ from these estimates and judgments. We believe that the following critical accounting policies comprise the more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue from contracts with customers. The majority of our revenues are derived from providing services on a time and material basis and are short-term in nature. We account for revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
Revenue is recognized as (or when) the performance obligations are satisfied by transferring control over a service or product to the customer. As most of our contracts contain only one performance obligation, the allocation of a contract’s transaction price to multiple performance obligations is generally not applicable. For our time and materials contracts, we are generally able to elect the right-to-invoice practical expedient, which permits us to recognize revenue in the amount to which we have a right to invoice the customer if that amount corresponds directly with the value to the customer of our performance completed to date. For our fixed price contracts, we typically recognize revenue using the cost-to-cost method, which measures the extent of progress towards completion based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation. Under this method, revenue is recognized proportionately as costs are incurred. For contracts where control is transferred at a point in time, revenue is recognized at the time control of the asset is transferred to the customer, which is typically upon delivery and acceptance by the customer.
Certain contracts may also contain a combination of fixed and variable pricing elements. Generally, in contracts where the amount of consideration is variable, the amount is determinable each period based on our right to invoice the customer for services performed to date.
Goodwill. Goodwill represents the excess purchase price of acquired businesses over the fair values attributed to underlying net tangible assets and identifiable intangible assets. We test goodwill each year on December 1 for impairment at a reporting unit level. Goodwill is also tested for impairment whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. An assessment can be performed by first completing a qualitative assessment on none, some, or all of our reporting units. We can also bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting unit in any period and proceed directly to the quantitative impairment test, and then resume the qualitative assessment in any subsequent period. Qualitative indicators that may trigger the need for annual or interim quantitative impairment testing include, among other things, deterioration in macroeconomic conditions, declining financial performance, deterioration in the operational environment, or an expectation of selling or disposing of a portion of a reporting unit. Additionally, a significant change in business climate, a loss of a significant client, increased competition, a sustained decrease in share price, or a decrease in our market capitalization below book value may trigger the need for interim impairment testing of goodwill associated with one or more of our reporting units. If we believe that, as a result of our qualitative assessment, it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, the quantitative impairment test is required. The quantitative test involves comparing the fair value of each of our reporting units with its carrying amount, including goodwill.
During the first quarter of 2020, our assessment of qualitative indicators associated with our interim goodwill impairment test indicated an impairment existed as the carrying value of the IHT reporting unit exceeded its fair value. See Note 7 in the notes to consolidated financial statements for further details.
Income taxes. We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements. Under this method, we determine deferred tax assets and liabilities on the basis of the differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities by using enacted rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of the change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
We recognize deferred tax assets to the extent that we believe that these assets are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. If we determine that we would be unable to realize our deferred tax assets, we would make an adjustment to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance.
We establish reserves for uncertain tax positions when it is not more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon challenge. When facts and circumstances change, we adjust these reserves through our provision for income taxes. To the extent interest and penalties may be assessed by taxing authorities on any related underpayment of income tax, such amounts have been accrued and are classified as a component of income tax expense.
New Accounting Principles
For information about newly adopted accounting principles as well as information about new accounting principles pending adoption, see Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements.