Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
OVERVIEW
Introduction:
The Timken Company designs and manufactures a growing portfolio of engineered bearings and power transmission products. With more than a century of knowledge and innovation, the Company continuously improves the reliability and efficiency of global machinery and equipment to move the world forward. Timken posted $3.5 billion in sales in 2020 and employs more than 17,000 people globally, operating in 42 countries. The Company operates under two reportable segments: (1) Mobile Industries and (2) Process Industries. The following further describes these business segments:
•Mobile Industries serves OEM customers that manufacture off-highway equipment for the agricultural, mining and construction markets; on-highway vehicles including passenger cars, light trucks, and medium- and heavy-duty trucks; rail cars and locomotives; outdoor power equipment; rotorcraft and fixed-wing aircraft; and other mobile equipment. Beyond service parts sold to OEMs, aftermarket sales and services to individual end users, equipment owners, operators and maintenance shops are handled directly or through the Company's extensive network of authorized distributors.
•Process Industries serves OEM and end-user customers in industries that place heavy demands on the fixed operating equipment they make or use in heavy and other general industrial sectors. This includes metals, cement and aggregate production; power generation and renewable energy sources; oil and gas extraction and refining; pulp and paper and food processing; automation and robotics; and health and critical motion control equipment. Other applications include marine equipment, gear drives, cranes, hoists and conveyors. This segment also supports aftermarket sales and service needs through its global network of authorized industrial distributors and through the provision of services directly to end users.
Timken creates value by understanding customer needs and applying its know-how to serve a broad range of customers in attractive markets and industries across the globe. The Company’s business strengths include its product technology, end-market diversity, geographic reach and aftermarket mix. Timken collaborates with OEMs to improve equipment efficiency with its engineered products and captures subsequent equipment replacement cycles by selling largely through independent channels in the aftermarket. Timken focuses its international efforts and footprint in regions of the world where strong macroeconomic factors such as urbanization, infrastructure development and sustainability create demand for its products and services.
The Company's strategy has three primary elements:
Profitable Growth. The Company intends to expand into new and existing markets by leveraging its collective knowledge of metallurgy, friction management and power transmission to create value for Timken customers. Using a highly collaborative technical selling approach, the Company places particular emphasis on creating unique solutions for challenging and/or demanding applications. The Company intends to grow in attractive market sectors around the world, emphasizing those spaces that are highly fragmented, demand high service and value the reliability and efficiency offered by Timken products. The Company also targets applications that offer significant aftermarket demand, thereby providing product and services revenue throughout the equipment’s lifetime.
Operational Excellence. Timken operates with a relentless drive for exceptional results and a passion for superior execution. The Company embraces a continuous improvement culture that is charged with increasing efficiency, lowering costs, eliminating waste, encouraging organizational agility and building greater brand equity to fuel growth. This requires the Company’s ongoing commitment to attract, retain and develop the best talent across the world.
Capital Deployment to Drive Shareholder Value. The Company is intently focused on providing the highest returns for shareholders through its capital allocation framework, which includes: (1) investing in the core business through capital expenditures, research and development and other organic growth initiatives; (2) pursuing strategic acquisitions to broaden its portfolio and capabilities across diverse markets, with a focus on bearings, adjacent power transmission products and related services; (3) returning capital to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases; and (4) maintaining a strong balance sheet and sufficient liquidity. As part of this framework, the Company may also restructure, reposition or divest underperforming product lines or assets.
The following highlights some of the Company's more significant accomplishments in 2020:
•Sales to renewable energy customers grew by over 50% from 2019 through strong market growth and the benefit of outgrowth initiatives. Renewable energy became Timken’s largest individual end-market sector in 2020 at 12% of sales. The Company also announced over $75 million in capital investments to be made through early 2022 to increase the company’s renewable energy capabilities across its footprint.
•The Company reacted swiftly to the COVID-19 pandemic by taking decisive actions to (a) protect employees and other stakeholders while continuing to serve customers in essential industries and (b) reduce costs to mitigate the impact from lower revenue caused by the pandemic and improve the Company’s overall cost structure.
•Timken paid its 391st through 394th consecutive quarterly dividends during 2020, including a dividend of $0.29 per share during the fourth quarter, an increase of 4% from the prior quarter. 2020 marked the 7th consecutive year of annual dividend increases. The Company also repurchased 1.1 million shares of common stock in 2020.
•The Company completed the acquisition of the assets of Aurora Bearing Company (“Aurora”) in November 2020, which will enhance the Timken’s product portfolio and leadership position in engineered bearings. With annual sales of approximately $30 million in 2020, Aurora serves a diverse range of industrial sectors, including aerospace and defense, racing, off-highway equipment, and packing.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
2020 vs. 2019
Overview:
The decrease in net sales was primarily driven by lower organic volume revenue and the unfavorable impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes, partially offset by the benefit of acquisitions and positive pricing. The decrease in net income was primarily due to the impact of lower volume, the unfavorable impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes and higher restructuring and pension remeasurement charges. The decrease was partially offset by lower selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses, reflecting cost reduction initiatives, lower material and logistics costs, and the benefits from acquisitions and favorable price/mix.
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, Timken continued to operate and fill customer orders, and adjusted production as required by local government directives and to reflect changes in global demand. For most of the second quarter, the Company's operations were adversely impacted by lower global demand caused by the ongoing spread of COVID-19 around the world, which included various customer shut-downs and government imposed operating restrictions. During the second quarter, the Company took steps to reduce costs by implementing temporary salary reductions, work furloughs and other actions to align its costs with near-term demand expectations. During the third and fourth quarters, Timken was able to operate with no major restrictions, and production levels improved. Timken continued certain temporary cost reduction actions and expanded and accelerated certain structural cost reduction initiatives to align its costs with near-term demand expectations and to improve the profitability of the Company longer term.
Outlook:
The world continues to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company continues to adhere to mandates and other guidance from local governments and health authorities, including the World Health Organization and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Timken has implemented risk mitigation plans across the enterprise to protect employees and reduce the risk of spreading the virus, while continuing to operate where permitted and to the extent practicable. The Company’s main priority continues to be the health of its employees and others in the communities where it does business.
While the Company’s operations and financial results were adversely impacted during 2020 resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, operations had largely stabilized by the end of the year. The Company will continue to monitor, assess and manage the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. Timken’s outlook for 2021 assumes that COVID-19 conditions around the world will improve globally as the year progresses.
The Company expects 2021 full-year revenue to be up approximately 12% compared to 2020, primarily due to higher organic revenue across both the Mobile Industries and Process Industries segments, the impact from foreign currency exchange rates and the benefit of acquisitions. The Company's earnings are expected to be up approximately 20% in 2021 compared with 2020, primarily due to the impact of higher volume, partially offset by higher material costs and higher operating expenses to serve increased customer demand.
The Company expects to generate cash from operating activities of approximately $450 million in 2021, a decrease from 2020 of approximately $128 million, or 22%, as the Company anticipates working capital to be a use of cash in 2021 versus a source of cash in 2020. The Company expects capital expenditures to be approximately $150 million (approximately 3.8% of sales) in 2021, compared with $122 million in 2020.
THE STATEMENTS OF INCOME
Sales:
Net sales decreased in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to lower organic revenue (net of positive pricing) of $365 million and the unfavorable impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes of $32 million, partially offset by the benefit of acquisitions of $120 million. The lower organic revenue was primarily due to lower demand driven by the economic slowdown caused by the COVID-19 pandemic that impacted most market sectors, partially offset by growth in renewable energy market sector.
Gross Profit:
Gross profit decreased in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to the impact of lower volume of $168 million, the unfavorable impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes of $28 million and unfavorable manufacturing performance of $12 million. These items were partially offset by the net benefit of acquisitions of $39 million, lower material and logistics costs $28 million and favorable price/mix of $4 million. In addition, the Company recognized net insurance proceeds of $1 million in 2020 after incurring property losses of $8 million in 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses:
The decrease in selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses in 2020 compared with 2019 was primarily due to lower employee costs and related benefits and lower discretionary spending as the Company implemented cost reduction initiatives, including temporary salary reductions, work furloughs and permanent headcount reductions, to reduce costs to combat the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact lower demand, mainly during the second quarter of 2020. Performance-based compensation was also lower in 2020, compared to 2019.
Impairment and Restructuring Charges:
Impairment and restructuring charges of $21.2 million in 2020 were comprised primarily of severance and related benefits associated with initiatives to reduce headcount and right-size the Company's manufacturing footprint, including the planned closure of the Company's Indianapolis, Indiana chain plant and the reorganization of the Company's Canton, Ohio and Gaffney, South Carolina bearing facilities. In addition, the Company recognized severance and related benefits as it began to accelerate and expand cost reduction initiatives.
Impairment and restructuring charges of $6.8 million in 2019 were primarily due to severance and related benefits associated with a variety of initiatives to reduce headcount, as well as a goodwill impairment charge of $1.8 million for one of its reporting units.
Other Income (Expense):
The Company recognized non-service pension and other postretirement expense in 2020 primarily due to the recognition of net actuarial losses ("Mark-to-Market Charges"). In 2019, the Company recognized non-service pension and other postretirement income. The Mark-to-Market Charges in 2020 were primarily due to the impact of lower discount rates to measure the benefit obligations for pension and other postretirement plans and the impact of experience losses, partially offset by favorable asset returns. The Mark-to-Market Charges in 2019 were the result of higher than expected returns on plan asset and the impact of a reduction in contractual rates for the Medicare Advantage plans, driven by a law change that repealed the tax on Health Care Insurers after 2020, partially offset by lower discount rates to measure the benefit obligations for pension and other postretirement plans. In addition, there was higher amortization of prior service credit in the current year due to a plan amendment for the Company's postretirement benefit plans in the second half of 2019. Refer to Note 15 - Retirement Benefit Plans and Note 16 - Other Postretirement Benefit Plans in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
The change in other income in 2020, compared to 2019, was primarily due to foreign currency losses, net of hedging activity, recognized in 2020, compared to foreign currency gains, net of hedging activity, in 2019, more than offset by an acquisition-related gain in 2020. The acquisition-related gain represents a bargain purchase price gain on the acquisition of the assets of Aurora acquired on November 30, 2020. Refer to Note 3 - Acquisitions for more information.
Income Tax Expense:
The effective tax rate for 2020 was 26.2%, which was unfavorable compared to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%, primarily due to earnings in certain foreign jurisdictions where the effective tax rate was higher than 21%, unfavorable U.S. permanent differences and U.S. state and local income taxes.
The effective tax rate for 2019 was 20.7%, which was slightly favorable compared to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%, primarily due to the release of foreign valuation allowance against certain foreign deferred tax assets and the remeasurement of deferred tax balances to reflect the reduced India statutory rate. These impacts were partially offset by reductions in foreign jurisdictions where the effective tax rate was higher than 21%, additional discrete accruals for uncertain tax positions, U.S. state and local income taxes and withholding taxes recorded on planned dividend distributions.
The change in the effective rate for 2020 compared with 2019 was an increase of 5.5%. The increase was primarily due to the release of certain valuation allowances and the remeasurement of deferred tax balances to reflect the reduced India statutory tax rate during 2019. These items were partially offset by prior year discrete accruals for uncertain tax positions and withholding taxes recorded on planned dividend distributions during 2019.
Refer to Note 5 - Income Taxes in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the computation of the income tax expense in interim periods.
BUSINESS SEGMENTS
The Company's reportable segments are business units that serve different industry sectors. While the segments often operate using shared infrastructure, each reportable segment is managed to address specific customer needs in these diverse market sectors. The primary measurement used by management to measure the financial performance of each segment is earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ("EBITDA"). Refer to Note 4 - Segment Information in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the reconciliation of EBITDA by segment to consolidated income before income taxes.
The presentation of segment results below includes a reconciliation of the changes in net sales for each segment reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP to net sales adjusted to remove the effects of acquisitions completed in 2020 and 2019 and foreign currency exchange rate changes. The effects of acquisitions and foreign currency exchange rate changes on net sales are removed to allow investors and the Company to meaningfully evaluate the percentage change in net sales on a comparable basis from period to period.
The following items highlight the Company's acquisitions completed in 2020 and 2019 by segment based on the customers and underlying markets served:
•The Company acquired Aurora during the fourth quarter of 2020. Results for Aurora are reported in the Mobile Industries and Process Industries segments based on customers and underlying market sectors served.
•The Company acquired BEKA Lubrication ("BEKA") during the fourth quarter of 2019. The majority of the results for BEKA are reported in the Mobile Industries segment.
•The Company acquired The Diamond Chain Company ("Diamond Chain") during the second quarter of 2019. The majority of the results for Diamond Chain are reported in the Process Industries segment.
Mobile Industries Segment:
The Mobile Industries segment's net sales, excluding the effects of acquisitions and foreign currency exchange rate changes, decreased $277.3 million or 14.6% in 2020 compared with 2019, reflecting lower shipments across most market sectors, partially offset by higher pricing. EBITDA decreased in 2020 by $52.4 million or 18.4% compared with 2019, primarily due to the impact of lower volume and related manufacturing utilization, as well as the unfavorable impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes. These decreases were partially offset by the favorable impact of cost reduction initiatives and price/mix, lower material and logistics costs, and the favorable impact of acquisitions.
Process Industries Segment:
The Process Industries segment's net sales, excluding the effects of acquisitions and foreign currency exchange rate changes, decreased $87.5 million or 4.6% in 2020 compared with 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by lower demand across most industrial sectors, partially offset by increased demand in the renewable energy sector, as well as higher pricing. EBITDA decreased $23.7 million or 5.1% in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to the impact of lower demand, the impact of unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate changes and the unfavorable impact of price/mix, partially offset by the favorable impact of cost reduction initiatives, favorable manufacturing performance, lower material and logistics costs and the favorable impact of acquisitions.
Corporate:
Corporate expenses decreased in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to the favorable impact of cost reduction initiatives, lower performance-based compensation and lower transaction costs related to acquisitions.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS:
2019 vs. 2018
Overview:
The increase in net sales was primarily driven by the benefit of acquisitions, the impact of higher pricing and higher demand in the Process Industries segment, partially offset by the unfavorable impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes and lower shipments in the Mobile Industries segment. The increase in net income in 2019 compared with 2018 was primarily due to the net benefit of acquisitions, favorable price/mix and the impact of a lower tax rate driven by net discrete benefits, partially offset by the impact of lower volume, unfavorable currency and higher interest expense. Results for 2019 also benefited from pension and other postretirement plan remeasurement income compared to expense in 2018.
THE STATEMENTS OF INCOME
Sales:
Net sales increased in 2019 compared with 2018, primarily due to the benefit of acquisitions of $270 million and higher organic revenue of $11 million, partially offset by the unfavorable impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes of $72 million. The increase in organic revenue was driven primarily by improved demand in the Process Industries segment and the impact of positive pricing, partially offset by lower shipments in the Mobile Industries segment.
Gross Profit:
Gross profit increased in 2019 compared with 2018, primarily due to the benefit of acquisitions of $86 million, favorable price/mix of $51 million and lower material and logistics costs (including tariffs) of $5 million. These factors were partially offset by the impact of lower volume of $19 million, the unfavorable impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes of $15 million and property losses of $8 million.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses:
SG&A expenses in 2019 compared with 2018 was primarily due to SG&A expense from acquisitions of $45 million, partially offset by the favorable impact from changes in foreign currency exchange rates of $10 million.
Interest Expense and Income:
Interest expense increased in 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to higher average outstanding debt during the year, which was primarily used to fund acquisitions.
Other Income (Expense):
The increase in non-service pension and other postretirement income (expense) for 2019 compared with 2018 was primarily due to the recognition of Mark-to-Market Charges of $4.2 million in 2019 compared to actuarial losses of $22.1 million in 2018. The Mark-to-Market Charges were the result of higher than expected returns on plan assets and the impact of a reduction in contractual rates for Medicare Advantage plans, driven by a law change that repealed the tax on health care insurers after 2020, partially offset by lower discount rates to measure the benefit obligations for pension and other postretirement plans. Actuarial losses in 2018 were partially offset by the benefit of curtailment gains of $10.2 million for two of the U.S. pension plans.
Income Tax Expense:
The effective tax rate for 2019 was 20.7%, which was slightly favorable compared to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%, primarily due to the release of a foreign valuation allowance against certain foreign deferred tax assets and the remeasurement of deferred tax balances to reflect the reduced India statutory tax rate. These impacts were partially offset by earnings in foreign jurisdictions where the effective tax rate was higher than 21%, additional discrete accruals for uncertain tax positions, U.S. state and local income taxes and withholding taxes recorded on planned dividend distributions.
The effective tax rate for 2018 was 25.1%, which was unfavorable compared to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%, primarily due to earnings in certain foreign jurisdictions where the effective tax rate was higher than 21%, unfavorable U.S. permanent differences and U.S. state and local income taxes. These impacts were partially offset by reductions to the one-time net charge related to the taxation of unremitted foreign earnings and the remeasurement of U.S. deferred tax balances to reflect the new U.S. corporate income tax rate enacted with the Tax Cut and Jobs Act of 2017 ("U.S. Tax Reform").
The change in the effective rate for 2019 compared with 2018 was a decrease of 4.4%. The decrease was primarily due to the release of certain valuation allowances and the remeasurement of deferred tax balances to reflect the reduced India statutory tax rate. These impacts were partially offset by additional discrete accruals for uncertain tax positions and withholding taxes recorded on planned dividend distributions.
BUSINESS SEGMENTS
The presentation of segment results below includes a reconciliation of the changes in net sales for each segment reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP to net sales adjusted to remove the effects of acquisitions and divestitures completed in 2019 and 2018 and foreign currency exchange rate changes. The effects of acquisitions and foreign currency exchange rate changes on net sales are removed to allow investors and the Company to meaningfully evaluate the percentage change in net sales on a comparable basis from period to period.
The following items highlight the Company's acquisitions and divestitures completed in 2019 and 2018:
•The Company acquired BEKA during the fourth quarter of 2019. The majority of the results for BEKA are reported in the Mobile Industries segment.
•The Company acquired Diamond Chain during the second quarter of 2019. The majority of the results for Diamond Chain are reported in the Process Industries segment.
•The Company acquired ABC Bearings Limited ("ABC Bearings"), Apiary Investments Holding Limited ("Cone Drive"), and Rollon S.p.A. ("Rollon") during the third quarter of 2018. Substantially all of the results for ABC Bearings are reported in the Mobile Industries segment. Results for Cone Drive and Rollon are reported in the Mobile Industries and Process Industries segments based on customers and underlying markets served.
•The Company divested Groeneveld Information Technology Holding B.V. (the "ICT Business") on September 19, 2018. The Company acquired the ICT Business in 2017 as a part of the Groeneveld Group ("Groeneveld") acquisition. The ICT Business is separate from the Groeneveld lubrication solutions business and was considered non-core to the operations. Results for the ICT Business were reported in the Mobile Industries segment.
Mobile Industries Segment:
The Mobile Industries segment's net sales, excluding the effects of acquisitions, divestitures and foreign currency exchange rate changes, decreased $47.8 million or 2.5% in 2019 compared with 2018, reflecting lower shipments in
the off highway and heavy truck sectors, partially offset by growth in the aerospace and rail sectors, as well as higher pricing. EBITDA increased in 2019 by $12.7 million or 4.7% compared with 2018, primarily due to favorable price/mix, lower material and logistics costs, the net benefit of acquisitions, and lower SG&A expenses. These factors were partially offset by the impact of lower volume and related manufacturing utilization, as well as property losses and related expenses from flood damage at a Company facility in Tennessee and fire damage at a facility in China.
Process Industries Segment:
The Process Industries segment's net sales, excluding the effects of acquisitions and foreign currency exchange rate changes, increased $59.0 million or 3.5% in 2019 compared with 2018. The increase was primarily driven by growth in the renewable energy sector, as well as positive pricing. EBITDA increased $60.9 million or 15.0% in 2019 compared with 2018 primarily due to the net benefit of acquisitions, favorable price/mix and the impact of higher volume, partially offset by higher SG&A expenses.
Corporate:
Corporate expenses decreased in 2019 compared with 2018 primarily due to higher transaction costs related to acquisitions in 2018.
THE BALANCE SHEETS
The following discussion is a comparison of the Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Current Assets:
Refer to the "Cash Flows" section for discussion on the change in cash and cash equivalents. Accounts receivable increased primarily due to the timing of billings related to marine contracts as of December 31, 2020. Unbilled receivables decreased primarily due to customer billings exceeding revenue recognized for marine contracts as of December 31, 2020.
Property, Plant and Equipment, Net:
The increase in property, plant and equipment, net in 2020 was primarily due to capital expenditures of $132 million, the net impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes of $22 million and $11 million from a business acquired in 2020. The increase was partially offset by depreciation of $111 million in 2020.
Other Assets:
The increase in goodwill in 2020 was primarily due to foreign currency exchange rate changes of $46 million. The decrease in other intangible assets was primarily due to amortization of $47 million in 2020, partially offset by the impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes of $36 million
The decrease in non-current postretirement benefit assets was due to the creation of a new Voluntary Employee Beneficiary Association ("VEBA") trust in January 2020. The creation of a new $50 million VEBA trust to pay for certain active employee's medical benefits shifted the balance from an overfunded asset position as of December 31, 2019 to a liability position as of December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 16 - Other Postretirement Benefit Plans in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Current Liabilities:
The increase in short-term debt was primarily due to borrowings under the $100 million Amended and Restated Asset Securitization Agreement (the "Accounts Receivable Facility") being now classified as short-term due to its upcoming maturity in November of 2021, as well as an increase in borrowings under the variable-rate lines of credit for the Company's foreign subsidiaries. The decrease in the current portion of long-term debt was primarily due to the payment of $47 million on the Company's €100 million term loan that matured on September 18, 2020 (the "2020 Term Loan").
The increase in accounts payable was primarily due to efforts by the Company to increase days payable outstanding in 2020, partially offset by the impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes of $11 million.
The increase in other current liabilities was primarily due to an increase in the current derivative liability of $6 million. Refer to Note 19 - Derivative Instruments in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. In addition, accrued restructuring increased $5 million as compared to the prior year end. Refer to Note 14 - Impairment and Restructuring Charges in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Non-Current Liabilities:
The decrease in long-term debt was due to repayment of debt during the year, including the repayment of the 2020 Term Loan that matured in September of 2020 and reduced borrowings under the Fourth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the "Senior Credit Facility"), as well as the reclassification of borrowings under the Accounts Receivable facility to short-term as of December 31, 2020.
The increase in accrued postretirement benefits was primarily due to the creation of the new VEBA trust. In January 2020, the Company transferred $50 million from an existing VEBA trust under the Company's postretirement benefit plans to fund the new VEBA trust to pay for certain active employees' medical benefits. The creation of the new VEBA trust shifted the balance from overfunded as of December 31, 2019 to a liability position as of December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 16 - Other Postretirement Benefit Plans in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
The increase in other non-current liabilities was primarily due to $8.5 million of payroll taxes that are deferred for more than 12 months under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, as well as an increase to the uncertain tax positions of approximately $5 million.
Shareholders’ Equity:
The decrease in common stock is primarily due to the retirement of shares, resulting in a $12.4 million reduction to stated capital and a $213.3 million reduction to other paid-in capital, partially offset by stock option exercises of $16.1 million. Earnings invested in the business in 2020 decreased primarily due to the retirement of treasury shares of $764.9 million and dividends declared of $87.0 million, partially offset by net income attributable to the Company of $284.5 million.
The increase in accumulated other comprehensive income was primarily due to current year foreign currency adjustments of $92.7 million. See "Other Disclosures - Foreign Currency" for further discussion regarding the impact of foreign currency translation.
The decrease in treasury shares was primarily due to the retirement of 23.0 million shares for $990.6 million and $29.2 million of shares issued, net of shares surrendered, for stock compensation plans for 2020, partially offset by the purchase of 1.1 million of its common shares for $49.3 million. The decrease in noncontrolling interest was primarily due to a dividend declared by Timken India Limited that resulted in payment to the noncontrolling interest parties in the third quarter of 2020.
CASH FLOWS
Operating Activities:
The increase in net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 compared with 2019 was primarily due to a favorable impact of working capital items of $47.6 million, the favorable impact of income taxes of $8.4 million, the favorable impact of pension and other postretirement benefit expense and contributions of $38.1 million, partially offset by lower net income of $82.3 million. Refer to the table below for additional detail of the impact of each line on net cash provided by operating activities.
The following chart displays the impact of working capital items on cash during 2020 and 2019, respectively:
The following table displays the impact of income taxes on cash during 2020 and 2019, respectively:
Investing Activities:
The decrease in net cash used in investing activities in 2020 compared with 2019 was primarily due to a $202.5 million decrease in cash used for acquisitions and a $19.0 million decrease in cash used in capital expenditures, partially offset by a $5.2 million increase in cash used for investments in short-term marketable securities.
Financing Activities:
The decrease in net cash used by financing activities in 2020 compared with 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in net borrowings of $234.6 million due to an increase of debt payments in 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Reconciliation of total debt to net debt and the ratio of net debt to capital:
Net Debt:
Ratio of Net Debt to Capital:
The Company presents net debt because it believes net debt is more representative of the Company's financial position than total debt due to the amount of cash and cash equivalents held by the Company and the ability to utilize such cash and cash equivalents to reduce debt if needed.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had strong liquidity with $320.3 million of cash and cash equivalents on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. $287.4 million of its $320.3 million of cash and cash equivalents resided in jurisdictions outside the U.S. Repatriation of non-U.S. cash could be subject to taxes and some portion may be subject to governmental restrictions. Part of the Company's strategy is to grow in attractive market sectors, many of which are outside the U.S. This strategy includes making investments in facilities, equipment and potential new acquisitions. The Company plans to fund these investments, as well as meet working capital requirements, with cash and cash equivalents and unused lines of credit within the geographic location of these investments where feasible.
On June 25, 2019, the Company entered into the Senior Credit Facility, which is a $650.0 million unsecured revolving credit facility that matures on June 25, 2024. At December 31, 2020, the Senior Credit Facility had outstanding borrowings of $9.7 million, which reduced the availability to $640.3 million. The Senior Credit Facility has two financial covenants: a consolidated leverage ratio and a consolidated interest coverage ratio. The maximum consolidated leverage ratio permitted under the Senior Credit Facility is 3.5 to 1.0. As of December 31, 2020, the Company's consolidated leverage ratio was 1.92 to 1.0 (based on the net debt construct discussed further below). The minimum consolidated interest coverage ratio permitted under the Senior Credit Facility is 3.0 to 1.0. As of December 31, 2020, the Company's consolidated interest coverage ratio was 10.14 to 1.0.
On May 27, 2020, both the Senior Credit Facility and the $350 million variable-rate term loan that matures on September 11, 2023 (the "2023 Term Loan") were amended to, among other things, effectively increase the limit with respect to the consolidated leverage ratio. As amended, the consolidated leverage ratio under both the Senior Credit Facility and the 2023 Term Loan is calculated using a net debt construct, netting unrestricted cash in excess of $25 million, instead of total debt. This change to the consolidated leverage ratio calculation will be effective through June 30, 2021, after which the calculation of the consolidated leverage ratio under the Senior Credit Facility and the 2023 Term Loan will revert back to a total debt construct.
The interest rate under the Senior Credit Facility is variable with a spread based on the Company's debt rating. The average rate on outstanding U.S. dollar borrowings was 2.01% and the average rate on outstanding Euro borrowings was 1.48% as of December 31, 2020. In addition, the Company pays a facility fee based on the applicable rate, which is variable with a spread based on the Company's debt rating, multiplied by the aggregate commitments of all of the lenders under the Senior Credit Facility. The Company currently carries investment-grade credit ratings with Moody's (Baa3), Fitch (BBB-) and Standard and Poor's (BBB-).
The Company has a $100 million Accounts Receivable Facility, which matures on November 30, 2021. The Accounts Receivable Facility is subject to certain borrowing base limitations and is secured by certain domestic trade accounts receivable of the Company. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $58.0 million outstanding borrowings under the Accounts Receivable Facility. Certain borrowing base limitations reduced the availability under the Accounts Receivable Facility to $83.9 million at December 31, 2020. The Company currently intends to renew or replace the Accounts Receivable Facility prior to its maturity.
Other sources of liquidity include uncommitted short-term lines of credit for certain of the Company's foreign subsidiaries, which provide for borrowings of up to approximately $277.4 million. At December 31, 2020, the Company had borrowings outstanding of $61.8 million and bank guarantees of $0.7 million, which reduced the aggregate availability under these facilities to approximately $214.9 million.
At December 31, 2020, the Company was in full compliance with all applicable covenants on its outstanding debt, and expects to remain in full compliance with its debt covenants.
The Company expects to generate cash from operating activities of approximately $450 million in 2021, a decrease from 2020 of approximately $128 million, or 22%, as the Company anticipates working capital to be a use of cash in 2021 versus a source of cash in 2020. The Company expects capital expenditures to be approximately $150 million in 2021, compared with $122 million in 2020.
FUTURE CONTRACTUAL PAYMENTS
The Company’s contractual debt obligations and contractual commitments outstanding as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
Payments due by period:
The interest payments beyond five years primarily relate to long-term fixed-rate notes. Refer to Note 11 - Financing Arrangements in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
In order to maintain minimum funding requirements, the Company is required to make contributions to the trusts established for its defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans. The table above shows the expected future minimum cash contributions to the trusts for the funded plans as well as estimated future benefit payments to participants for the unfunded plans. Those minimum funding requirements and estimated benefit payments can vary significantly. The amounts in the table above are based on actuarial estimates using current assumptions for, among other things, discount rates, expected return on assets and health care cost trend rates. During 2020, the Company made cash contributions and payments of approximately $17.9 million to its global defined benefit pension plans and $2.7 million to its other postretirement benefit plans. Refer to Note 15 - Retirement Benefit Plans and Note 16 - Other Postretirement Benefit Plans in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Refer to Note 5 - Income Taxes and Note 12 - Contingencies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Company's exposure for certain tax and legal matters.
In the ordinary course of business, the Company utilizes standby letters of credit issued by financial institutions to guarantee certain obligations, most of which relate to insurance contracts. At December 31, 2020, outstanding letters of credit totaled $41.5 million, primarily having expiration dates within 12 months.
NEW ACCOUNTING GUIDANCE ISSUED AND NOT YET ADOPTED
Information required for this Item is incorporated by reference to Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The Company’s financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. The following paragraphs include a discussion of some critical areas that require a higher degree of judgment, estimates and complexity.
Inventory:
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market, with approximately 61% valued by the first-in, first-out ("FIFO") method and the remaining 39% valued by the last-in, first-out ("LIFO") method. The majority of the Company’s domestic inventories are valued by the LIFO method, while all of the Company’s international inventories are valued by the FIFO method. An actual valuation of the inventory under the LIFO method can be made only at the end of each year based on the inventory levels and costs at that time. Accordingly, interim LIFO calculations are based on management’s estimates of expected year-end inventory levels and costs. Because these are subject to many factors beyond management’s control, annual results may differ from interim results as they are subject to the final year-end LIFO inventory valuation. The Company recognized a decrease in its LIFO reserve of $3.2 million during 2020 compared to an increase in its LIFO reserve of $5.0 million during 2019.
Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets:
The Company tests goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment at least annually, performing its annual impairment test as of October 1st. Furthermore, goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Each interim period, the Company assesses whether or not an indicator of impairment is present that would necessitate a goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets impairment analysis be performed in an interim period other than during the fourth quarter.
The Company reviews goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level. The Mobile Industries segment has four reporting units and the Process Industries segment has two reporting units. The reporting units within the Mobile Industries segment are Mobile Industries, Lubrication Systems, Aerospace Drive Systems and Aerospace Bearing Inspection. The reporting units within the Process Industries segment are Process Industries and Industrial Services.
Accounting guidance permits an entity to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether additional indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment testing, including goodwill, is required. No qualitative factors indicated that it was more likely than not that the fair value of reporting units were less than their respective carrying values, but due to the length of time since the previous quantitative tests, the Company chose to perform a quantitative analysis for all reporting units as of October 1, 2020.
The Company prepares its quantitative goodwill impairment analysis by comparing the estimated fair value of each reporting unit, using an income approach (a discounted cash flow model), as well as a market approach, with its carrying value. The income approach and market approach are weighted in arriving at fair value based on the relative merits of the methods used and the quantity and quality of collected data to arrive at the indicated fair value.
The income approach requires several assumptions including future sales growth, EBITDA margins and capital expenditures. The Company’s reporting units each provide their forecast of results for the next five years. These forecasts form the basis for the information used in the discounted cash flow model. The discounted cash flow model also requires the use of a discount rate and a terminal revenue growth rate (the revenue growth rate for the period beyond the five years forecast by the reporting units), as well as projections of future operating margins (for the period beyond the forecast five years). During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company used discount rates for its individual reporting units in the range of 10.0% to 11.0% and a terminal revenue growth rate in the range of 2.0% to 3.0%.
The market approach requires several assumptions including sales and EBITDA multiples for comparable companies that operate in the same markets as the Company’s reporting units. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company used sales multiples in the range of 1.05 to 2.00 and EBITDA multiples in the range of 7.0 to 9.5 for its reporting units.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $1,047.6 million of goodwill on its Consolidated Balance Sheet, of which $384.6 million was attributable to the Mobile Industries segment and $663.0 million was attributable to the Process Industries segment. See Note 9 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for movements in the carrying amount of goodwill by segment.
The Company notes that reporting units with goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles primarily due to recent acquisitions are likely to have fair values that are closer to the current carrying value, due to the shorter period of time for fair value from the recent acquisition to have changed. The Lubrication reporting unit has a carrying value of $436.9 million and the fair value as of October 1, 2020 exceeded that amount by 10%. The Lubrication reporting unit primarily consists of businesses acquired in 2017 and 2019, and as a result, it is consistent with expectations that the fair value is closer to the carrying value.
In addition, there was one indefinite-lived intangible with a carrying value totaling $17.5 million in which the fair value exceeded the carrying value of the assets by 10% or less. This is consistent with management's expectations, as the acquisition that generated this asset was completed in the second half of 2019.
Based on the October 1, 2020 quantitative assessment, all other reporting units and indefinite-lived intangibles have fair value that exceeds the current carrying value by more than 10%.
Management believes the future sales growth and EBITDA margins in the long range plan and the discount rate used in the valuations requires significant use of judgment. If any of our reporting units do not meet our long range plan estimates or our discount rate increase significantly, we could be required to perform an interim goodwill impairment analysis or charges in future periods. The assumptions used for the reporting units and indefinite-lived intangibles with fair values exceeding carrying values of 10% or less are more sensitive to future performance and will be monitored accordingly.
Income taxes:
Significant management judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, valuation allowances against deferred tax assets, and accruals for uncertain tax positions.
The Company, which is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous non-U.S. jurisdictions, accounts for income taxes in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 740, “Income Taxes.” Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, as well as net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Deferred tax assets relate primarily tax loss carryforwards in foreign jurisdictions, as well as pension and postretirement benefit obligations in the U.S., which the Company believes are more likely than not to result in future tax benefits. In determining the need for a valuation allowance, the historical and projected financial performance of the entity recording the net deferred tax asset is considered along with any other pertinent information. The Company recorded $0.7 million in 2020 and $44.5 million in 2019 of tax benefits related to the reversal of valuation allowances. Refer to Note 5 - Income Taxes in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion on the valuation allowance reversals.
In the ordinary course of the Company’s business, there are many transactions and calculations where the ultimate income tax determination is uncertain. The Company is regularly under audit by tax authorities. Accruals for uncertain tax positions are provided for in accordance with the requirements of ASC Topic 740. The Company records interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions as a component of income tax expense. In 2020, the Company recorded $6.4 million of net tax expense for uncertain tax positions, which consisted of $10.7 million of interest and increases to current and prior year uncertain tax positions. This expense was partially offset by $4.2 million related to the net reversal of accruals for prior year uncertain tax positions and settlements with tax authorities. The Company also recorded $3.8 million of uncertain tax positions related to deferred tax liabilities.
Purchase accounting and business combinations:
Assets acquired and liabilities assumed as part of a business combination are recognized at their acquisition date fair values. In determining these fair values, the Company utilized various forms of the income, cost and market approaches depending on the asset or liability being valued. The Company used a discounted cash flow model to measure the trade names, customer relationship, and technology and know-how-related intangible assets. The estimation of fair value required significant judgment related to future net cash flows based on assumptions related to revenue and EBITDA growth rates, discount rates, and royalty rates. Inputs were generally determined by taking into account competitive trends, market comparisons, independent appraisals, and historical data, among other factors, and were supplemented by current and anticipated market conditions.
Refer to Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies for further discussion regarding the fair value process.
Revenue recognition:
A contract exists when it has approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable.
Revenue is recognized when performance obligations under the terms of a contract with a customer of the Company are satisfied. Refer to Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion around the Company's revenue policy.
Benefit Plans:
The Company sponsors a number of defined benefit pension plans that cover eligible employees. The Company also sponsors several funded and unfunded postretirement plans that provide health care and life insurance benefits for eligible retirees and their dependents. These plans are accounted for in accordance with ASC Topic 715-30, "Defined Benefit Plans - Pension," and ASC Topic 715-60, "Defined Benefit Plans - Other Postretirement."
The measurement of liabilities related to these plans is based on management's assumptions related to future events, including discount rates and health care cost trend rates. Management regularly evaluates these assumptions and adjusts them as required and appropriate. Other plan assumptions also are reviewed on a regular basis to reflect recent experience and the Company's future expectations. Actual experience that differs from these assumptions may affect future liquidity, expense and the overall financial position of the Company. While the Company believes that current assumptions are appropriate, significant differences in actual experience or significant changes in these assumptions may affect materially the Company's pension and other postretirement employee benefit obligations and its future expense and cash flow.
The discount rate is used to calculate the present value of expected future pension and postretirement cash flows as of the measurement date. The Company establishes the discount rate by constructing a notional portfolio of high-quality corporate bonds and matching the coupon payments and bond maturities to projected benefit payments under the Company's pension and postretirement welfare plans. The bonds included in the portfolio generally are non-callable. A lower discount rate will result in a higher benefit obligation; conversely, a higher discount rate will result in a lower benefit obligation. The discount rate also is used to calculate the annual interest cost, which is a component of net periodic benefit cost.
The expected rate of return on plan assets is determined by analyzing the historical long-term performance of the Company's pension plan assets, as well as the mix of plan assets between equities, fixed-income securities and other investments, the expected long-term rate of return expected for those asset classes and long-term inflation rates. Short-term asset performance can differ significantly from the expected rate of return, especially in volatile markets. A lower-than-expected rate of return on pension plan assets will increase pension expense and future contributions.
The Company recognizes actuarial gains and losses immediately through net periodic benefit cost upon the annual remeasurement in the fourth quarter, or on an interim basis if specific events trigger a remeasurement.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans:
The Company recognized net periodic benefit cost of $23.9 million during 2020 for defined benefit pension plans, compared to net periodic benefit cost of $22.7 million during 2019. The Company recognized mark-to-market charges of $16.2 million during 2020 compared to $13.9 million during 2019. Mark-to-market charges in 2020 were primarily due to the impact of a net reduction in the discount rate used to measure its defined benefit pension obligations of $88.0 million and the impact of experience losses of $16.9 million, partially offset by higher than expected returns on plan assets of $84.3 million and other changes in valuation assumptions of $4.4 million. The impact of the net reduction in the discount rate used to measure the Company's defined benefit pension obligations was primarily driven by a 66 basis point reduction in the weighted-average discount rate used to measure its U.S. plan obligations, which decreased from 3.50% in 2019 to 2.84% in 2020.
In 2021, the Company expects net periodic benefit cost to be approximately $1 million for defined benefit pension plans, compared with net periodic benefit cost of $23.9 million in 2020. Net periodic benefit cost for 2021 does not include mark-to-market charges that will be recognized immediately through earnings in the fourth quarter of 2021, or on an interim basis if specific events trigger a remeasurement. Excluding the mark-to-market charges of $16.2 million and curtailment losses of $0.9 million recognized in 2020, net periodic benefit cost was $6.8 million in 2020. The expected reduction in net periodic benefit cost, excluding mark-to-market charges and curtailment losses, primarily reflects lower expected interest costs.
The Company expects to contribute to its defined benefit pension plans or pay directly to participants of defined benefit plans approximately $16 million in 2021 compared with $17.9 million of contributions and payments in 2020.
For expense purposes in 2020, the Company applied a weighted-average discount rate of 3.50% to its U.S. defined benefit pension plans. For expense purposes in 2021, the Company will apply a weighted-average discount rate of 2.84% to its U.S. defined benefit pension plans.
For expense purposes in 2020, the Company applied an expected weighted-average rate of return of 5.22% for the Company’s U.S. pension plan assets. For expense purposes in 2021, the Company will apply an expected weighted-average rate of return on plan assets of 4.69%.
The following table presents the sensitivity of the Company's U.S. projected pension benefit obligation ("PBO") to the indicated increase/decrease in key assumptions:
In the table above, a 25 basis point decrease in the discount rate will increase the PBO by $22.6 million and decrease income before income taxes through the recognition of actuarial losses of $22.6 million. A 25 basis point increase in the discount rate will decrease the PBO by $22.6 million and increase income before income taxes through the recognition of actuarial gains of $22.6 million. Defined benefit pension plans in the U.S. represent 64% of the Company's benefit obligation.
Other Postretirement Benefit Plans:
The Company recognized net periodic benefit credit of $6.5 million during 2020 for other postretirement benefit plans, compared to net periodic benefit credit of $20.5 million during 2019. The Company recognized mark-to-market charges of $1.4 million during 2020 compared to mark-to-market gains of $18.0 million during 2019. Mark-to-market charges in 2020 were primarily due to the impact of an 81 basis point decrease in the discount rate used to measure the Company's defined benefit postretirement obligations, which decreased from 3.43% in 2019 to 2.62% in 2020. The decrease in the discount rate resulted in a $3.9 million loss. This mark-to-market charge was partially offset by mark-to-market gains of $2.0 million due to the impact of a reduction in the rate for Medicare Advantage plans, $0.4 million due to higher than expected returns on plans assets and $0.1 million due to changes in other actuarial assumptions.
In addition to mark-to-market charges and gains, the Company recognized prior service credits of $9.8 million during 2020 compared to $5.4 million during 2019. During July 2019, the Company announced changes to the medical plan offerings for certain of its postretirement benefit plans, effective January 1, 2020, which will impact the benefits provided to certain retirees. This plan amendment resulted in a $92.8 million reduction in the postretirement benefit obligation and a corresponding pretax adjustment to accumulated other comprehensive loss. The pretax adjustment of $92.8 million began being amortized in the third quarter of 2019 and will be amortized from accumulated other comprehensive loss into net periodic benefit cost (as a benefit) until 2031.
In 2021, the Company expects net periodic benefit credit of approximately $8 million for other postretirement benefit plans, compared to net periodic benefit credit of $6.5 million in 2020. Net periodic benefit credit for 2021 does not include mark-to-market charges that will be recognized immediately through earnings in the fourth quarter of 2021, or on an interim basis if specific events trigger a remeasurement. Excluding the mark-to-market charges of $1.4 million recognized in 2020, the net periodic benefit credit was $7.9 million in 2020, which is relatively consistent with the outlook for 2021.
In January 2020, the Company established a second VEBA trust for certain active employees’ medical benefits. The Company transferred $50 million from the existing VEBA trust to fund this new VEBA trust. The $50 million that was transferred was primarily classified as other current assets based on the portfolio of the assets in the trust. The Company utilized all of the assets of the trust in 2020 for the payment of certain active employees’ medical benefits. In January 2021, the Company transferred the remaining $11.1 million in the existing VEBA trust to the new VEBA trust. As a result, the Company expects to fund 2021 payments for other postretirement benefit plans, which are expected to be approximately $5 million, from the general funds of the Company.
For expense purposes in 2020, the Company applied a discount rate of 3.43% to its other postretirement benefit plans. For expense purposes in 2021, the Company will apply a discount rate of 2.62% to its other postretirement benefit plans. For expense purposes in 2020, the Company applied an expected rate of return of 3.00% to the VEBA trust assets.
The following table presents the sensitivity of the Company's accumulated other postretirement benefit obligation ("APBO") to the indicated increase/decrease in key assumptions:
In the table above, a 25 basis point decrease in the discount rate will increase the APBO by $1.3 million and decrease income before income taxes through the recognition of actuarial losses of $1.3 million. A 25 basis point increase in the discount rate will decrease the APBO by $1.3 million and increase income before income taxes through the recognition of actuarial gains of $1.3 million.
For measurement purposes, the Company assumed a weighted-average annual rate of increase in the per capita cost (health care cost trend rate) for medical benefits of 5.5% for 2021, declining gradually to 5.0% in 2023 and thereafter for medical and prescription drug benefits. For Medicare Advantage benefits, actual contract rates have been set for 2020 through 2022, and are assumed to increase by 7.3% for 2022, declining gradually to 5.0% in 2031 and thereafter. The assumed health care cost trend rate may have a significant effect on the amounts reported. A one percentage point increase in the assumed health care cost trend rate would have increased the 2020 total service and interest cost components by $0.1 million and would have increased the postretirement benefit obligation by $1.8 million. A one percentage point decrease would provide corresponding reductions of $0.1 million and $1.6 million, respectively.
Other loss reserves:
The Company has a number of loss exposures that are incurred in the ordinary course of business such as environmental clean-up, product liability, product warranty, litigation and accounts receivable reserves. Establishing loss reserves for these matters requires management’s judgment with regards to estimating risk exposure and ultimate liability or realization. These loss reserves are reviewed periodically and adjustments are made to reflect the most recent facts and circumstances.
OTHER DISCLOSURES:
Foreign Currency:
Assets and liabilities of subsidiaries are translated at the rate of exchange in effect on the balance sheet date; income and expenses are translated at the average rates of exchange prevailing during the reporting period. Related translation adjustments are reflected as a separate component of accumulated other comprehensive loss. Foreign currency gains and losses resulting from transactions are included in the Consolidated Statements of Income.
Net of related derivative activity, the Company recognized a foreign currency exchange loss resulting from transactions of $10.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and recognized a gain of $6.1 million and $3.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a positive non-cash foreign currency translation adjustment of $97.3 million that increased shareholders’ equity, compared with a negative non-cash foreign currency translation adjustment of $19.7 million that decreased shareholders’ equity for the year ended December 31, 2019. The foreign currency translation adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2020 were favorably impacted by the weakening of the U.S. dollar relative to other currencies as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019.
Trade Law Enforcement:
The U.S. government has an antidumping duty order in effect covering tapered roller bearings from China. The Company is a producer of these bearings, as well as ball bearings and other bearing types, in the U.S.
Quarterly Dividend:
On February 12, 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.29 per common share. The quarterly dividend will be paid on March 4, 2021 to shareholders of record as of February 22, 2021. This will be the 395th consecutive quarterly dividend paid on the common shares of the Company.
Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements set forth in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and in the Company’s 2020 Annual Report to Shareholders that are not historical in nature (including the Company’s forecasts, beliefs and expectations) are “forward-looking” statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. In particular, Management’s Discussion and Analysis contains numerous forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements generally will be accompanied by words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “forecast,” “outlook,” “intend,” “may,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “project” or other similar words, phrases or expressions. You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company cautions readers that actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied in forward-looking statements made by or on behalf of the Company due to a variety of factors, such as:
(a)deterioration in world economic conditions, or in economic conditions in any of the geographic regions in which the Company or its customers or suppliers conduct business, including adverse effects from a global economic slowdown, terrorism, or hostilities. This includes: political risks associated with the potential instability of governments and legal systems in countries in which the Company or its customers or suppliers conduct business, changes in currency valuations and recent world events that have increased the risks posed by international trade disputes, tariffs and sanctions;
(b)negative impacts to the Company's business, results of operations, financial position or liquidity, disruption to the Company's supply chains, negative impacts to customer demand or operations, and availability and health of employees, as a result of COVID-19 or other pandemics and associated governmental measures such as restrictions on travel and manufacturing operations;
(c)the effects of fluctuations in customer demand on sales, product mix and prices in the industries in which the Company operates. This includes: the ability of the Company to respond to rapid changes in customer demand, the effects of customer or supplier bankruptcies or liquidations, the impact of changes in industrial business cycles, the effects of distributor inventory corrections reflecting de-stocking of the supply chain and whether conditions of fair trade continue in the Company's markets;
(d)competitive factors, including changes in market penetration, increasing price competition by existing or new foreign and domestic competitors, the introduction of new products or services by existing and new competitors, and new technology that may impact the way the Company’s products are produced, sold or distributed;
(e)changes in operating costs. This includes: the effect of changes in the Company’s manufacturing processes; changes in costs associated with varying levels of operations and manufacturing capacity; availability and cost of raw materials and energy; changes in the expected costs associated with product warranty claims; changes resulting from inventory management and cost reduction initiatives; the effects of unplanned plant shutdowns; the effects of government-imposed restrictions meant to address climate change; and changes in the cost of labor and benefits;
(f)the success of the Company’s operating plans, announced programs, initiatives and capital investments; the ability to integrate acquired companies and to address material issues not uncovered during the Company's due diligence review; and the ability of acquired companies to achieve satisfactory operating results, including results being accretive to earnings;
(g)the Company’s ability to maintain appropriate relations with unions or works councils that represent Company associates in certain locations in order to avoid disruptions of business and to maintain the continued service of our management and other key employees;
(h)unanticipated litigation, claims, investigations or assessments. This includes: claims, investigations or problems related to intellectual property, product liability or warranty, foreign export and trade laws, competition and anti-bribery laws, environmental or health and safety issues, data privacy and taxes;
(i)changes in worldwide financial and capital markets, including availability of financing and interest rates on satisfactory terms, which affect the Company’s cost of funds and/or ability to raise capital, as well as customer demand and the ability of customers to obtain financing to purchase the Company’s products or equipment that contain the Company’s products;
(j)the Company's ability to satisfy its obligations and comply with covenants under its debt agreements, maintain favorable credit ratings and its ability to renew or refinance borrowings on favorable terms;
(k)the impact on the Company's pension obligations and assets due to changes in interest rates, investment performance and other tactics designed to reduce risk; and
(l)those items identified under Item 1A. Risk Factors on pages 9 through 17.
Additional risks relating to the Company’s business, the industries in which the Company operates or the Company’s common shares may be described from time to time in the Company’s filings with the SEC. All of these risk factors are difficult to predict, are subject to material uncertainties that may affect actual results and may be beyond the Company’s control.
Readers are cautioned that it is not possible to predict or identify all of the risks, uncertainties and other factors that may affect future results and that the above list should not be considered to be a complete list. Except as required by the federal securities laws, the Company undertakes no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.