ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion is intended to assist in understanding our financial performance and should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes accompanying those financial statements included elsewhere in this Comprehensive Form 10-K, including the information under the caption “Summary of Critical Accounting Policies.” In addition to historical financial information, the following management’s discussion and analysis may contain forward-looking statements. These statements reflect our expectations or estimates based on the information we have today but are not guarantees or predictions of future performance. They involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, many of which are beyond our control, and which may cause actual results to differ materially from the statements contained here. You are cautioned not to put undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. The Company assumes no obligation to update or otherwise revise these forward-looking statements, except as required by law. More discussion of risks can be found under Item 1A, Risk Factors.
Summary
NOTE: This discussion has been impacted by the restatement described in the Restatement Footnote. Certain of the financial and other information provided in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations has been updated to reflect the restatement adjustments.
The Business and Strategy
Tandy Leather Factory, Inc. is one of the world’s largest specialty retailers of leather and leathercraft-related items. Founded in 1919 in Fort Worth, Texas, the Company introduced leathercrafting to millions of American and later Canadian and other international customers and has built a track record as the trusted source of quality leather, tools, hardware, supplies, kits and teaching materials for leatherworkers everywhere. Today, our mission remains to build on our legacy of inspiring the timeless art and trade of leatherworking.
What differentiates Tandy from the competition is our high brand awareness and strong brand equity and loyalty, our network of retail stores that provides convenience, a high-touch customer service experience, a hub for the local leathercrafting community, and our 100-year heritage. We believe that this combination of qualities is unique to Tandy and gives the brand competitive advantages that are very difficult for others to replicate.
We sell our products primarily through company-owned stores and through orders generated from our four websites: tandyleather.com, tandyleather.ca, tandyleather.eu and tandyleather.com.au. We also manufacture leather lace, cut leather pieces and most of the do-it-yourself kits that are sold in our stores and on our websites. We maintain our principal offices at 1900 Southeast Loop 820, Fort Worth, Texas 76140.
As of December 31, 2019, the Company operated a total of 115 retail stores. There were 103 stores in the U.S., 11 stores in Canada and one store in Spain. All e-commerce sales through our websites were fulfilled and recognized through our network of retail stores.
The Company operates a total of 106 retail stores as of May 2021. There are 95 stores in the U.S., ten stores in Canada and one store in Spain. During the second quarter of 2020, we consolidated U.S. e-commerce web order fulfilment from the stores to our Fort Worth distribution center.
New management joined the Company in October 2018 and set new strategic directions for both the short and long term. The overarching goal for 2019 and 2020 was to invest in rebuilding a foundation for growth by: 1) improving our brand proposition, 2) reversing the sales decline with business customers, 3) building our talent, processes, tools and systems and 4) positioning us for long-term growth.
The Restatement
In July 2019, the Company began an investigation of potential misstatements in its prior financial statements related to historical methods of valuation and expensing of inventory. In October 2019, the Company announced that certain prior financial statements could not be relied upon, specifically the following filings: financial statements for (i) the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016 included in the Company’s 2018 Annual Report on Form 10-K, (ii) the quarterly and year-to-date periods within fiscal 2017 and 2018 included in the Company’s Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, and (iii) the three months ended March 31, 2019 included in the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q. Much effort and resources in 2019, 2020 and 2021 to date have been spent investigating the nature and magnitude of the misstatements, determining the corrected values, developing and implementing improved controls, including new processes and systems, and creating and preparing these restated financials. Through these efforts, we identified other areas that were also misstated, the details of which are described in the Restatement Footnote. The discussion of financial results presented here is reflective of the restatement adjustments.
Nasdaq suspended trading in the Company’s stock on Nasdaq as of August 13, 2020 due to the Company not being current with its SEC filings. Our stock has since traded on the OTC Link (previously “Pink Sheets”) operated by OTC Markets Group under the symbol “TLFA.” Nasdaq denied the Company’s appeal of its decision to suspend trading in the Company’s stock and the Company’s stock was formally delisted on February 9, 2021. We intend to reapply for Nasdaq listing after we have made our required Exchange Act filings, including the Delinquent Filings. Any such listing would be subject to Nasdaq approval.
COVID-19 and Outlook
In late 2019, COVID-19 was detected in Wuhan, China and has since spread to other parts of the world, including the U.S. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic. Federal, state, and local governments implemented various restrictions, including travel restrictions, border closings, restrictions on public gatherings, quarantining of people who may have been exposed to the virus, shelter-in-place restrictions and limitations on business operations. As previously announced and for the health and safety of employees and customers, on March 17, 2020, the Company made the decision to begin temporary store closures. The
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020 temporarily shifted our strategic focus to company survival and cash preservation. We began closing stores on March 18, 2020, and by April 2, 2020, we temporarily closed all stores to the public. While we pivoted to serve customers only online, the Company experienced significant decreases in demand for its products in Q2 and Q3 of 2020, negatively impacting net sales.
In response, we took immediate action to mitigate the impact of temporary store closures on our cash flows by: (i) furloughing 406 Tandy employees, comprising two-thirds of the Tandy work force, (ii) temporarily cutting corporate salaries, with deeper cuts for the Executive Leadership Team, (iii) negotiating abatements, deferrals and other favorable lease terms with landlords, and (iv) negotiating longer payment terms with our key product vendors.
Due to our size, we were not eligible for the Paycheck Protection Program administered through the Small Business Administration. Also, due to our not being current on financial filings with the SEC, we were not able to obtain loans under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, also known as the CARES Act. During the second quarter of 2020, the Company borrowed $0.4 million through the Spanish government’s Institute of Official Credit Guarantee for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises, a COVID-19 relief program. The term of the agreement is for five years and the interest rate is fixed at 1.5%. Based on the terms of the loan agreement, we make interest-only payments for the first two years and monthly principal and interest payments for the remainder of the term of the agreement. In Canada, we participated in the Canada Emergency Commercial Rent Assistance (“CECRA”) program for rent relief. This program provided for a 75% reduction in the store rent for included stores for the months of April, May and June 2020. We received total rent abatements under the program of $0.05 million.
Eight stores were permanently closed during the second quarter of 2020 as leases expired or early terminations were negotiated, including at locations where we believe we can retain a majority of customers through geographically proximate stores and/or our enhanced website platform. After these permanent closures, Tandy operates 106 stores, including ten in Canada and one in Spain.
On May 22, 2020, our Fort Worth flagship store reopened to the public, the beginning of a phased approach to reopening our stores with limited hours, new protocols for sanitizing, social distancing, wearing masks and taking daily temperatures of employees. During the third quarter of 2020, all 106 of Tandy’s stores had reopened to the public, and the store re-openings were well received by our employees and customers. During the fourth quarter of 2020 and into the present, we continue to manage through the pandemic as we saw increased spikes in COVID-19 infections, and continue to see varying levels of infection rates, and have been forced to close certain stores or move certain stores to “curbside only” operations.
While we previously fulfilled our web orders out of our retail stores, during the second quarter of 2020, we built a centralized web fulfillment capability in our Fort Worth distribution center and have been and expect to continue to fulfill web orders primarily through Fort Worth going forward. Both our e-commerce business and stores have been performing above last year sales levels, but the future remains uncertain, and more store closures and/or the ongoing unemployment crisis could cause a material negative impact on future sales.
As part of the Company’s accounting policy for long-lived asset impairments, we believe the COVID-19 impact on the Company’s results of operations, cash flows and financial position and the ongoing uncertainty the virus has created around future operating results represented a triggering event starting in the first quarter of 2020 and continuing throughout the remainder of 2020.
Estimated impairment charges recognized during 2020 totaled approximately $1.1 million and primarily related to property and equipment and operating lease assets for certain stores that are projected to underperform to a level where the cash flows they generate will not be sufficient to cover their respective asset carry values.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Net Sales
After relatively little change from 2017 to 2018, 2019 consolidated net sales declined by $8.3 million, or 10.0%, as compared to 2018. Of this decline, $1.7 million was the result of five store closures, the discontinuation of unprofitable sales on Amazon, Walmart.com and eBay, making our Leathercraft Library of patterns and videos free, and ending our wholesale pricing clubs where customers received lower prices for a yearly membership fee. All these changes were aligned with our new strategies and supported the key initiatives described above. The decline of $6.6 million was primarily a result of a reduction in promotional activity associated with the new pricing strategy, out-of-stock inventory and the transition of commercial customers to a new model, resulting in lower sales to these customers.
The table below reports our global net sales by store category for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018:
We operated 115 stores worldwide as of December 31, 2019 and 120 stores as of December 31, 2018. Five lower-performing stores were closed during 2019: Irving, TX (January 2019), Fort Wayne, IN (January 2019), Minto, NSW, Australia (February 2019), Manchester, UK (June 2019), and Escondido, CA (October 2019). The two stores categorized as new stores, Austin, TX and Calgary, AB, were opened in July 2018, so were not open for the full year in 2018. We also closed one store in 2018, Northampton, UK (September 2018).
In stores that remained open for the full year, sales declined 8.9% in 2019, and such declines were driven by the factors described above.
The table below reports our global net sales by store category for the year ended December 31, 2018 compared to the year ended December 31, 2017:
We operated 120 stores worldwide as of December 31, 2018 and 119 stores as of December 31, 2017. During 2018, we opened two stores, Austin, TX (July 2018) and Calgary, AB (July 2018), and closed one store in Northampton, UK (September 2018). During 2017, we opened three new stores: Allen, TX (April 2017), Miami, FL (May 2017), and McAllen, TX (May 2017). Our store in Harrisburg, PA was temporarily closed April 2016 - January 2017, so we categorized it as a closed store, since it was not open for the full year in 2017.
Prior to 2019, we defined our customers in a number of different groups, the largest two being Retail, primarily hobbyists, and Business, small and medium-sized businesses. However, through customer research over the last two years and better understanding of past practices used to categorize customers into these groups, the Company determined that there was insufficient distinction between such categories. We are continuing to assess and evolve our thinking on customer segments with focus on levels of annual and lifetime spend.
To address the opportunity among the largest customers, in 2019 we launched a Commercial Program designed to better meet the needs of these customers. The program is comprised of dedicated outside sales representatives, clear and competitive volume-based pricing, personalized service and sourcing, shipping directly to customers from our distribution center, and improved product consistency, quality and availability.
Gross Profit
Decline in gross profit margin rate in 2019 to 56.0% from 61.2% in 2018 was a result of a combination of factors including our move to a new pricing strategy which lowered the highest pricing tiers to be on par with competition on key items, product and customer mix shifts and $0.6 million in added reserve for inventory write-downs in 2019. Average unit retails (sales/units sold) declined by 5.5% in 2019 versus in 2018.
2018 gross profit rose from 2017 by $1.9 million, driven by an increase in sales and gross profit rate. The gross profit rate increased by 160 basis points to 61.2%, primarily driven by an improvement in the product mix toward categories with higher margins.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses decreased by $1.1 million in 2019 as compared to the corresponding prior year mostly as a result of payroll and occupancy savings associated with store closures, lower bonuses, group insurance expense savings, and marketing expense reductions, partially offset by higher costs for restricted stock units, the annual store manager conference and non-routine expenses related to the restatement and Chief Financial Officer (“CFO”) transition. Adjusted operating expenses, which excludes the non-routine items related to the restatement and CFO transition, declined in 2019 by $2.7 million, compared to prior year, mostly as a result of the items noted above. Adjusted operating expenses excluding non-routine items as shown above is a non-GAAP measure and is included here because we believe it provides additional information regarding the Company’s financial performance on a recurring basis. Non-routine items in 2019 primarily included legal and accounting fees associated with the restatement and recruiting fees, exit costs, interim CFO-related expenses, and expenses for a number of other contract accounting professionals associated with the transition to our CFO.
2018 Restated operating expenses rose by $2.0 million from 2017 restated operating expenses, primarily driven by higher store payroll and payroll-related expenses, escalations in occupancy costs such as facility rent and maintenance expenses, and increases in sales-variable expenses such as credit card merchant fees.
Impairment Expense
We completed our annual goodwill impairment assessment as of December 31, 2019, and based on the concluded fair value of the reporting unit, we recorded impairment expense of $1.0 million during the fourth quarter of 2019, representing the entire balance of goodwill. See Note 3, Significant Accounting Policies - Goodwill and other intangible assets of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Comprehensive Form 10-K for further detail.
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, three stores and four stores, respectively, were reviewed for impairment due to overall underperformance. Based on the results of the review, impairment expense of less than $0.01 million and $0.3 million was recorded for 2019 and 2018, respectively. There were no impairment charges in 2017.
Other Income/Expense (net)
Other income/expense consists primarily of interest expense and interest income. In 2019, 2018 and 2017, we incurred other expenses/(income) (net) of $(0.1) million, $(0.2) million (restated) and $0.04 million (restated), respectively. In 2019, we earned $0.2 million in interest income and paid $0.04 million in interest expense on our debt. We earned $0.2 million and $0.1 million in interest income and paid $0.3 million and $0.2 million in interest expense on our bank debt in 2018 and 2017, respectively.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate was 26.6%, 29.2% (restated), and 60.9% (restated) for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively. For 2019, the difference between our statutory rates and our effective rate are primarily due to state income taxes, the difference in tax rates for loss carryback periods, items that are nondeductible for income tax purposes, and the change in valuation allowance against certain foreign net operating losses. For 2018, the difference between our statutory rates and our effective rate are primarily due to state income taxes, the difference it tax rates in foreign jurisdictions, items that are nondeductible for income tax purposes, and the change in valuation allowance against certain foreign net operating losses. Going forward, we expect that our effective tax rate for 2020 will be 25-27%.
In 2017, in connection with the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, we recorded an additional $1.3 million of net income tax expense as follows:
(1) classified as part of the Federal current provision in 2017
(2) classified as part of the Federal deferred provision in 2017
Capital Resources, Liquidity and Financial Condition
We require cash principally for day-to-day operations, to purchase inventory and to finance capital investments. We expect to fund our operating and liquidity needs from a combination of current cash balances and cash generated from operating activities. Any excess cash will be invested as determined by our Board of Directors. Our cash balance as of December 31, 2019 totaled $15.9 million, and as of March 31, 2021, our cash balance totaled $10.9 million.
Spain Loan
During the second quarter of 2020, the Company borrowed $0.4 million from Banco Santander S.A. under the Institute of Official Credit Guarantee for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises in order to facilitate the continuation of employment and to attenuate the economic effects of the COVID-19 virus. This loan was provided for by the Spanish government as part of a COVID-19 relief program. The term of the agreement is five years, and the interest rate is fixed at 1.5%. Based on the terms of the loan agreement, we are required to make monthly interest-only payments for the first two years and monthly principal and interest payments for the remainder of the term of the agreement.
Lines of Credit
As previously disclosed, on October 14, 2019, our management, in consultation with the Audit Committee, determined that Tandy’s previously issued Consolidated Financial Statements as of and for (i) the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, (ii) the three and six-month periods ended June 30, 2018, (iii) the three and nine-month periods ended September 30, 2018, and (iv) the three-month period ended March 31, 2019, should no longer be relied upon due to misstatements related to our accounting processes for inventory transactions, and we would restate such financial statements as part of the Restatement Process. See the Restatement Footnote for further information around the Restatement Process. As a result, the Company did not timely file with the SEC its Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the periods ended June 30, and September 30, 2019, March 31, June 30, and September 30, 2020 and March 31, 2021, or its Annual Report on Form 10-K for fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2020 (collectively, the “Delinquent Filings”). Under the terms of the Promissory Note agreements the Company had in place with its primary bank, BOKF, NA d/b/a Bank of Texas (“BOKF”), we were required to provide BOKF quarterly financial statements and compliance certificates. We were unable to provide these financial statements and compliance certificates for the Delinquent Filings noted above. In response, on April 2, 2020, BOKF provided notice under the terms of the Promissory Note agreements that such Promissory Notes were cancelled. As of the date of cancellation, Tandy had no borrowings outstanding under these credit facilities or with any other lending institution. As of the date of this filing, Tandy has no lines of credit outstanding.
In August 2015, our Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program, pursuant to which we were authorized to repurchase up to 1.2 million shares of our common stock at prevailing market rates through August 2016 (collectively, “Repurchasing Shares”). Subsequently, the program was amended to increase the number of shares available for repurchase to 2.2 million and to extend the program through August 2019. In June 2019, the program was again amended to increase the number of shares available to one million as of such date and to extend the program through August 9, 2020. In 2019, 2018, and 2017, we repurchased 131,782 shares at an average price of $5.58 per share, 243,387 shares at an average price of $6.79 per share and 0 shares, respectively. As of December 31, 2019, there were 996,163 shares available for repurchase under the plan. The Company suspended repurchasing any shares under its program beginning in June 2019, because of the lack of publicly-available financial information of the Company during this period. Management expects to resume the Company’s repurchase program (as conditions allow) following completion of our financial restatement and the filing of all Delinquent Filings with the SEC.
On August 9, 2020, the Board of Directors approved a new program to repurchase up to $5 million of its common stock between August 9, 2020 and July 31, 2022, subject to the completion of our financial restatement and the filing of all Delinquent Filings with the SEC. The Company’s previous share repurchase program expired in August 2020.
On September 18, 2015, we executed a Promissory Note and Business Loan Agreement with BOKF which provided us with a working capital line of credit facility of up to $6 million which was secured by our inventory. On August 20, 2018, this line of credit was amended to extend the maturity to September 18, 2020 and to reduce the interest rate by 0.35%, and on September 18, 2019, the maturity date was further extended through September 18, 2021. The Business Loan Agreement contained covenants that required us to maintain a funded debt to EBITDA ratio of no greater than 1.5 to 1 and a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio greater than or equal to 1.2 to 1. Both ratios were calculated quarterly on a trailing four quarter basis. For the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, there were no amounts drawn on this line of credit.
Also, on September 18, 2015, we executed a Promissory Note and Business Loan Agreement with BOKF which provided us with a line of credit facility of up to $10 million for the purpose of repurchasing shares of our common stock pursuant to our stock repurchase program, announced in August 2015 and subsequently amended, which permitted us to repurchase up to 2.2 million shares of our common stock at prevailing market prices through August 2020. Subsequently, this line of credit was amended to increase the availability from $10 million to $15 million for the repurchase of shares of our common stock pursuant to our stock repurchase program through the end of the draw down period which was the earlier of August 9, 2020 or the date on which the entire amount was drawn. In addition, this Promissory Note was amended on August 20, 2018 to reduce the interest rate by 0.35%, and on September 18, 2019, the maturity date was further extended through September 18, 2024. We were required to make monthly interest-only payments through September 18, 2020. After this date, the principal balance would have rolled into a 4-year term note with principal and interest paid on a monthly basis with a maturity date of September 18, 2024. This Promissory Note was secured by a Deed of Trust on the real estate located at 1900 SE Loop 820, Fort Worth, Texas. There were no amounts drawn on this line of credit during 2017. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we drew $1.6 million on this line of credit which we used to purchase 243,387 shares of our common stock pursuant to our stock repurchase program. As of December 31, 2018, the outstanding balance on this line of credit was $9.0 million. During the quarter ended March 31, 2019, we paid off this line of credit with no pre-payment penalties incurred.
Prior to August 20, 2018, amounts drawn under either Promissory Note accrued interest at the London Interbank Offered Rate for U.S. dollars (commonly known as “LIBOR”) plus 1.85% (3.351% as of December 31, 2017). Beginning August 20, 2018, the notes accrued interest at LIBOR plus 1.5% (4.0% as of December 31, 2018). Neither line of credit carried commitment fees.
Share Repurchase Program
In August 2015, our Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program, pursuant to which we were authorized to repurchase up to 1.2 million shares of our common stock at prevailing market rates through August 2016. Subsequently, the program was amended to increase the number of shares available for repurchase to 2.2 million and to extend the program through August 2019. In June 2019, the program was again amended to increase the number of shares available to one million as of such date and to extend the program through August 9, 2020.
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we repurchased the following shares:
As of December 31, 2019, there were 996,163 shares that remained available for repurchase under the plan.
On August 9, 2020, the Board of Directors approved a new program to repurchase up to $5 million of its common stock between August 9, 2020 and July 31, 2022, subject to the completion of our financial restatement and the filing of all Delinquent Filings with the SEC. The Company’s previous share repurchase program expired in August 2020.
On January 28, 2021, we entered into an agreement with an institutional shareholder of the Company, to repurchase 500,000 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0024 in a private transaction. The purchase price was $3.35 per share for a total of $1.7 million. The closing of the repurchase of these shares took place on February 1, 2021. Prior to the repurchase, the shares represented approximately 5.5% of our outstanding common stock.
Cash Flows
(1) As described in Note 2 to these Consolidated Financial Statements, we have restated the Consolidated Financial Statements.
For the year ended 2019, we generated $10.5 million of cash from operations driven by our efforts to streamline working capital levels, of which $9.3 million was from the liquidation of inventory. The 2019 net loss of $1.9 million was offset by non-cash expenses of $6.7 million, including depreciation and amortization, impairments, and stock-based compensation. With the cash generated from operations, we invested $18.1 million in short-term U.S. Treasuries and sold short-term U.S. Treasuries at maturity for $9.1 million, and we invested $0.3 million in capital expenditures for the purchase of store fixtures and systems implementations. We used cash in financing activities to extinguish $9.0 million of debt and to repurchase 131,782 shares of treasury stock for $0.7 million at an average price of $5.58 per share. The activities above, in addition to the effect of exchange rate changes, resulted in a net decrease in cash of $8.2 million.
For the year ended 2018, we generated $7.8 million of cash from operations primarily due to net income of $4.4 million, plus $2.3 million from non-cash expenses, including depreciation and amortization, impairments, and stock-based compensation and $1.1 million of working capital including $1.0 million due to the liquidation of inventory. We invested in capital expenditures of $1.1 million for new store fixtures, store relocations and remodels, and computer equipment. And we borrowed $1.6 million to finance the repurchase of 243,387 shares of treasury stock for $1.7 million at an average price of $6.79 per share. The activities above, in addition to the effect of exchange rate changes, resulted in a net increase in cash of $6.0 million.
For the year ended 2017, we generated $2.5 million of cash from operations primarily due to net income of $2.5 million, plus $2.8 million from non-cash expenses, including depreciation and amortization, and stock-based compensation and partially offset by a $2.8 million decrease in working capital of which $3.0 million was a build-up of inventory and $2.3 million related to payments of accrued expenses and other liabilities. We invested in capital expenditures of $1.7 million, including vehicles and computer equipment for our new district managers. The activities above, in addition to the effect of exchange rate changes, resulted in a net increase in cash of $1.2 million.
We believe that cash flow from operations and our existing cash reserves will be adequate to fund our operations through 2021, taking into account the current effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and cash flow and our current business performance. In addition, we anticipate that this cash flow and our current cash reserves will enable us to meet our contractual obligations and commercial commitments throughout 2021. There can be no assurance, however, that the COVID-19 pandemic would not result in further restrictions on our business operations in a manner that would more materially impact our cash flow.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements during 2019, 2018, or 2017, and we do not have any such arrangements as of the date of this filing.
Summary of Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires the use of estimates that affect the reported value of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates are based on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for the Company’s conclusions. The Company continually evaluates the information used to make these estimates as the business and the economic environment changes. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and estimates are subject to change due to modifications in the underlying conditions or assumptions. The policies discussed below require estimates that contain a significant degree of judgement. The use of estimates is pervasive throughout the Consolidated Financial Statements, but the accounting policies and estimates considered most critical are as follows.
Revenue Recognition. Our revenue is earned from sales of merchandise and generally occurs via two methods: (1) at the store counter and (2) shipment of product generally via web sales. We recognize revenue when we satisfy the performance obligation of transferring control of product merchandise over to a customer. At the store counter, our performance obligation is met and revenue is recognized when a sales transaction occurs with a customer. When merchandise is shipped to a customer, our performance obligation is met and revenue is recognized when title passes to the customer. Shipping terms are normally free on board (“FOB”) shipping point and title passes when the merchandise is shipped to the customer. Sales tax and comparable foreign tax is excluded from net sales, while shipping charged to our customers is included in net sales. Net sales is based on the amount of consideration that we expect to receive, reduced by estimates for future merchandise returns. Our sales return allowance for future merchandise returns is estimated based on historical sales return rates. Under our sales returns policy, merchandise may be returned, under most circumstances, up to 60 days after date of purchase. As merchandise is returned, the company records the sales return against the sales return allowance. We record a gift card liability for the unfulfilled performance obligation on the date we issue a gift card to a customer. We record revenue and reduce the gift card liability as the customer redeems the gift card. In addition, for gift card breakage, we recognize a proportionate amount for the expected unredeemed gift cards over the expected customer redemption period, which is one year.
Inventory. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or net realizable value. Finished goods held for sale includes the cost of merchandise purchases, the costs to bring the merchandise to our Texas distribution center, warehousing and handling expenditures, and distributing and delivering merchandise to our stores. These costs include depreciation of long-lived assets utilized in acquiring, warehousing and distributing inventory. Manufacturing inventory including raw materials and work-in-process are valued on a first-in, first out basis using full absorption accounting which includes material, labor, and other applicable manufacturing overhead. Carrying values of inventory are analyzed and, to the extent that the cost of inventory exceeds the net realizable value, provisions are made to reduce the carrying amount of the inventory. We regularly review all inventory items to determine if there are (i) damaged goods (e.g., for leather, excessive scars or damage from ultra-violet (“UV”) light), (ii) items that need to be removed from our product line (e.g., slow-moving items, inability of a supplier to provide items of acceptable quality or quantity, and to maintain freshness in the product line) and (iii) pricing actions that need to be taken to adequately value our inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Since the determination of net realizable value of inventory involves both estimation and judgement with regard to market values and reasonable costs to sell, differences in these estimates could result in ultimate valuations that differ from the recorded asset. The majority of inventory purchases and commitments are made in U.S. dollars in order to limit the Company’s exposure to foreign currency fluctuations. Goods shipped to us are recorded as inventory owned by us when the risk of loss shifts to us from the supplier. Inventory is physically counted twice annually in the Texas distribution center. At the store level, inventory is physically counted each quarter. Inventory is then adjusted in our accounting system to reflect actual count results.
Leases. We lease certain real estate for our retail store locations under long-term lease agreements. Starting in 2019, with the adoption of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), once we have determined an arrangement is a lease, at inception we recognize an operating lease asset and lease liability at commencement date based on the present value of the lease payments over the lease term. The present value of our lease payments may include: (1) rental payments adjusted for inflation or market rates, and (2) lease terms with options to renew the lease when it is reasonably certain we will exercise such an option. The exercise of lease renewal options is generally at our discretion. Payments based on a change in an index or market rate are not considered in the determination of lease payments for purposes of measuring the related lease liability. We discount lease payments using our incremental borrowing rate based on information available as of the measurement date. Prior to 2019, rent expense on operating leases, including rent holidays and scheduled rent increases, was recorded on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease, commencing on the date we took possession of the leased property. Rent expense is recorded in operating expenses. The net excess of rent expense over the actual cash paid has been recorded as accrued expenses and other liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. As of December 31, 2019, we have no finance leases, no sublease agreements, and no lease agreements in which we are named as a lessor. Subsequent to the recognition of our operating lease assets and lease liabilities, we recognize lease expense related to our operating leases on a straight-line basis over the lease term. The depreciable life of related leasehold improvements is based on the shorter of the useful life or the lease term. We also perform interim reviews of our operating lease assets for impairment when evidence exists that the carrying value of an asset group, including a lease asset, may not be recoverable.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. We evaluate long-lived assets on a quarterly basis to identify events or changes in circumstances (“triggering events”) that indicate the carrying value of certain assets may not be recoverable. Upon the occurrence of a triggering event, right-of-use (“ROU”) lease assets, property and equipment and definite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment and an impairment loss is recorded in the period in which it is determined that the carrying amount of the assets is not recoverable. The determination of recoverability is made based upon the estimated undiscounted future net cash flows of assets grouped at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets with such cash flows to be realized over the estimated remaining useful life of the primary asset within the asset group. The Company determined the lowest level of identifiable cash flows that are independent of other asset groups to be primarily at the individual store level. If the estimated undiscounted future net cash flows for a given store are less than the carrying amount of the related store assets, an impairment loss is determined by comparing the estimated fair value with the carrying value of the related assets. The impairment loss is then allocated across the asset group’s major classifications which in this case are operating lease assets and property and equipment. Triggering events at the store level could include material declines in operational and financial performance or planned changes in the use of assets, such as store relocation or store closure. This evaluation requires management to make judgements relating to future cash flows, growth rates and economic and market conditions. The fair value of an asset group is estimated using a discounted cash flow valuation method.
Stock-based Compensation. The Company’s stock-based compensation relates primarily to restricted stock unit (“RSU”) awards. Accounting guidance requires measurement and recognition of compensation expense at an amount equal to the grant date fair value. Compensation expense is recognized for service-based stock awards on a straight-line basis or ratably over the requisite service period, based on the closing price of the Company’s stock on the date of grant. The service-based awards typically vest ratably over the requisite service period, provided that the participant is employed on the vesting date. The total compensation expense is reduced by actual forfeitures as they occur over the requisite service period of the awards. Performance-based RSUs vest, if at all, upon the Company satisfying certain performance targets. The Company records compensation expense for awards with a performance condition when it is probable that the condition will be achieved. If the Company determines it is not probable a performance condition will be achieved, no compensation expense is recognized. If the Company changes its assessment in a subsequent period and concludes it is probable a performance condition will be achieved, the Company will recognize compensation expense ratably between the period of the change in assessment through the expected date of satisfying the performance condition for vesting. If the Company subsequently assesses that it is no longer probable that a performance condition will be achieved, the accumulated expense that has been previously recognized will be reversed. The compensation expense ultimately recognized, if any, related to performance-based awards will equal the grant date fair value based on the number of shares for which the performance condition has been satisfied. We issue shares from authorized shares upon the lapsing of vesting restrictions on RSUs. We do not use cash to settle equity instruments issued under stock-based compensation awards. We had one stock option plan that expired in March 2017. This plan permitted annual stock option grants to non-employee directors with an exercise price equal to the fair market value of the shares at the date of grant. These options vested and became exercisable six months from the option grant date. Under this plan, no stock options were awarded in 2015 or after, therefore, we did not recognize any stock-based compensation expense for these options during those periods.
Income Taxes. Income taxes are estimated for each jurisdiction in which we operate. This involves assessing current tax exposure together with temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for tax and financial statement accounting purposes. Any resulting deferred tax assets are evaluated for recoverability based on estimated future taxable income. To the extent recovery is deemed not likely, a valuation allowance is recorded. Our evaluation regarding whether a valuation allowance is required or should be adjusted also considers, among other things, the nature, frequency, and severity of recent losses, forecasts of future profitability and the duration of statutory carryforward periods. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates in effect in the years when those temporary differences are expected to reverse. The effect on deferred taxes from a change in tax rate is recognized through continuing operations in the period that includes the enactment date of the change. Changes in tax laws and rates could affect recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future. A tax benefit from an uncertain tax position may be recognized when it is more-likely-than-not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits. Income tax positions must meet a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold to be recognized. We recognize tax liabilities for uncertain tax positions and adjust these liabilities when our judgement changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from the current estimate of the tax liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense and the effective tax rate in the period in which new information becomes available. We may be subject to periodic audits by the Internal Revenue Service and other taxing authorities. These audits may challenge certain of our tax positions, such as the timing and amount of deductions and allocation of taxable income to the various jurisdictions.