Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes and the information contained in other sections of this report, particularly under the headings “Risk Factors”, “Selected Consolidated Financial Data” and “Business”. This discussion and analysis is based on the beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. The statements in this discussion and analysis concerning expectations regarding our future performance, liquidity and capital resources, as well as other non-historical statements in this discussion and analysis, are forward-looking statements. See “Forward-Looking Statements”. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including those described under “Risk Factors”. Our actual results could differ materially from those suggested or implied by any forward-looking statements.
We operate on a fiscal calendar widely used by the retail industry that results in a given fiscal year consisting of a 52- or 53-week period ending on the Saturday closest to January 31 of the following year. References to "fiscal year 2020" or "fiscal 2020" refer to the fiscal year ended January 30, 2021, references to "fiscal year 2019" or "fiscal 2019" refer to the fiscal year ended February 1, 2020 and references to "fiscal year 2018” or "fiscal 2018” refer to the fiscal year ended February 2, 2019. Fiscal years 2020, 2019, and 2018 each consisted of a 52-week period.
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 appears below. As permitted by SEC rules, we have omitted the discussion and analysis of our financial condition, cash flows and results of operations for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018. See Item 7,“Management’s Discussions and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”, in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended February 1, 2020, for this discussion.
Overview
Tillys is a leading destination specialty retailer of casual apparel, footwear, accessories and hardgoods for young men, young women, boys and girls. We believe we bring together an unparalleled selection of iconic global, emerging and proprietary brands rooted in an active and outdoor lifestyle. The Tillys concept began in 1982 when our co-founders, Hezy Shaked and Tilly Levine, opened our first store in Orange County, California. As of January 30, 2021, we operated 238 stores in 33 states, averaging approximately 7,400 square feet. We also sell our products through our e-commerce website, www.tillys.com.
Known or Anticipated Trends
As described elsewhere in this Report, the COVID-19 pandemic had far-reaching adverse impacts on many aspects of our business during fiscal 2020, both directly and indirectly, including on consumer behavior, store traffic, operational capabilities and our operations generally, timing of deliveries, demands on our information technology and e-commerce capabilities, inventory and expense management, managing our workforce, our store configurations and operations upon reopening, and our people, which have materially disrupted our business and the market generally. The scope and nature of these impacts continue to evolve.
As previously disclosed, all of our stores were abruptly closed on March 18, 2020, as a precautionary action in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and remained closed pursuant to government mandate for the remainder of the first quarter and into the second quarter of fiscal 2020. As a result, if our stores and e-commerce can remain in operation throughout the first and second quarters of fiscal 2021, we would expect our total net sales and earnings per share to be significantly improved compared to the first and second quarters of fiscal 2020. However, specifics are impossible to predict with any certainty, particularly with regard to how our operations may be impacted by the pandemic in the future as the situation continues to evolve, and how close store performance will be in relation to fiscal 2019 pre-pandemic levels, as well as how e-commerce will perform as it begins to anniversary last year's significant net sales increases during the store shutdown period noted above. While all of our stores are open as of the date of this filing, roll-outs of the COVID-19 vaccines have begun, and rates of COVID-19 cases in the United States appear to be declining, we believe our operations continue to be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, including as a result of reduced hours of store operation, restrictions on in-store customer traffic, and shipping delays from foreign sources, among other factors. We cannot predict whether or to what degree those impacts may continue. In addition, we may experience additional or further impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, and/or elect or need to take additional measures as the information available to us continues to develop, including with respect to our employees, inventory receipts, store leases, and relationships with our third-party vendors. We will continue to assess the evolving impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our consumers, employees, supply chain, and operations, and intend to adjust our responses accordingly. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and our response thereto may impact our business, financial condition, and results of operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. For more details, see Item 1A. “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Business”.
How We Assess the Performance of Our Business
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of performance and financial measures. The key indicators of the financial condition and operating performance of our business are net sales, comparable store sales, gross profit, selling, general and administrative expenses and operating income.
Net Sales
Net sales reflect revenue from the sale of our merchandise at store locations and through e-commerce, net of sales taxes. Store sales are reflected in sales when the merchandise is received by the customer. For e-commerce sales, we recognize revenue, and the related cost of goods sold at the time the merchandise is shipped to the customer. Net sales also include shipping and handling fees for e-commerce shipments that have been shipped to the customer. Net sales are net of returns on sales during the period as well as an estimate of returns expected in the future stemming from current period sales. We recognize revenue from gift cards as they are redeemed for merchandise. Prior to redemption, we maintain a current liability for unredeemed gift card balances. Our gift cards do not have expiration dates and in most cases there is no legal obligation to remit unredeemed gift cards to relevant jurisdictions. Based on actual historical redemption patterns, we determined that a small percentage of gift cards are unlikely to be redeemed (which we refer to as gift card “breakage”). Based on our historical gift card breakage rate, we recognize breakage revenue over the redemption period in proportion to actual gift card redemptions.
Our business is seasonal and as a result our revenues fluctuate from quarter to quarter. In addition, our revenues in any given quarter can be affected by a number of factors including the timing of holidays and weather patterns. The third and fourth quarters of the fiscal year, which include the back-to-school and holiday sales seasons, have historically produced stronger sales and disproportionately stronger operating results than have the first two quarters of the fiscal year.
Comparable Store Sales
Comparable store sales is a measure that indicates the change in year-over-year comparable store sales, which allows us to evaluate how our store base is performing. Numerous factors affect our comparable store sales, including:
•overall economic trends;
•our ability to attract traffic to our stores and online platform;
•our ability to identify and respond effectively to consumer preferences and fashion trends;
•competition;
•the timing of our releases of new and seasonal styles;
•changes in our product mix;
•pricing;
•the level of customer service that we provide in stores;
•our ability to source and distribute products efficiently;
•calendar shifts of holiday or seasonal periods;
•the number and timing of store openings and the relative proportion of new stores to mature stores; and
•the timing and success of promotional and advertising efforts.
Historically, our comparable store sales are sales from our e-commerce platform and stores open at least 12 full fiscal months as of the end of the current reporting period. However, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our comparable store sales for fiscal 2020 are defined as sales from our e-commerce platform and stores open on a daily basis compared to the same respective fiscal dates of last year in light of the varying periods of pandemic-related store closures that took place during fiscal 2020. A remodeled, relocated or refreshed store is included in comparable store sales, both during and after construction, if the square footage of the store used to sell merchandise was not changed by more than 20% and the store was not closed for remodel for more than five days in any fiscal month. We include sales from our e-commerce platform as part of comparable store sales as we manage and analyze our business on a single omni-channel basis and have substantially integrated our investments and operations for our stores and e-commerce platform to give our customers seamless access and increased ease of shopping. Comparable store sales exclude gift card breakage income and e-commerce shipping and handling fee revenue. Some of our competitors and other retailers may calculate comparable or “same store” sales differently than we do. As a result, data in this report regarding our comparable store sales may not be comparable to similar data made available by other retailers.
Gross Profit
Gross profit is equal to our net sales less our cost of goods sold. Cost of goods sold reflects the direct cost of purchased merchandise as well as buying, distribution and occupancy costs. Buying costs include compensation and benefit expense for our internal buying organization. Distribution costs include costs for receiving, processing and warehousing our store merchandise, and shipping of merchandise to or from our distribution and e-commerce fulfillment centers and to our e-commerce customers and between store locations. Occupancy costs include the rent, common area maintenance, utilities, property taxes, security and depreciation costs of all store locations. These costs are significant and can be expected to continue
to increase as our company grows. The components of our reported cost of goods sold may not be comparable to those of other retail companies.
We regularly analyze the components of gross profit as well as gross profit as a percentage of net sales. Specifically we look at the initial markup on purchases, markdowns and reserves, shrinkage, buying costs, distribution costs and occupancy costs. Any inability to obtain acceptable levels of initial markups, a significant increase in our use of markdowns or a significant increase in inventory shrinkage or inability to generate sufficient sales leverage on the buying, distribution and occupancy components of cost of goods sold could have an adverse impact on our gross profit and results of operations.
Gross profit is also impacted by shifts in the proportion of sales of proprietary branded products compared to third-party branded products, as well as by sales mix shifts within and between brands and between major product departments such as young men's and women's apparel, footwear or accessories. A substantial shift in the mix of products could have a material impact on our results of operations. In addition, gross profit and gross profit as a percent of sales have historically been higher in the third and fourth quarters of the fiscal year, as these periods include the back-to-school and winter holiday selling seasons. This reflects that various costs, including occupancy costs, generally do not increase in proportion to the seasonal sales increase.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Our selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses are comprised of store selling expenses and corporate-level general and administrative expenses. Store selling expenses include store and regional support costs, including personnel, advertising and debit and credit card processing costs, e-commerce receiving and processing costs and store supplies costs. General and administrative expenses include the payroll and support costs of corporate functions such as executive management, legal, accounting, information systems, human resources, impairment charges and other centralized services. Store selling expenses generally vary proportionately with net sales and store growth. In contrast, general and administrative expenses are generally not directly proportional to net sales and store growth, but will be expected to increase over time to support the needs of our growing company. SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales are usually higher in lower volume periods and lower in higher volume periods.
Operating (Loss) Income
Operating (loss) income equals gross profit less SG&A expenses. Operating (loss) income excludes interest income, interest expense and income taxes. Operating (loss) income percentage measures operating income as a percentage of our net sales.
Results of Operations
The following tables summarize key components of our results of operations for the periods indicated, both in dollars and as a percentage of our net sales:
The following table presents store operating data for the periods indicated:
(1)During fiscal 2019 and 2018, our comparable store sales were sales from our e-commerce platform and stores open at least 12 full fiscal months as of the end of the current period. However, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our comparable store sales for fiscal 2020 are defined as sales from our e-commerce and stores open on a daily basis compared to the same respective fiscal dates last year. A remodeled or relocated store is included in comparable store sales, both during and after construction, if the square footage of the store used to sell merchandise was not change by more than 20% and the store was not closed for remodel for more than five days in any fiscal month. Comparable store sales include sales through our e-commerce platform but exclude gift card breakage income, deferred revenue from the loyalty program and e-commerce shipping and handling fee revenue.
(2)E-commerce sales, e-commerce shipping and handling fee revenue and gift card breakage income are excluded from net sales in deriving average net sales per brick-and-mortar store.
(3)E-commerce revenues include e-commerce sales and e-commerce shipping fee revenue.
Fiscal Year 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year 2019
Net Sales
Net sales were $531.3 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $619.3 million in fiscal 2019, a decrease of $88.0 million, or 14.2% from last year, primarily as a result of the various periods of store closures resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. The components of our net sales decrease were as follows:
Our comparable net sales, including e-commerce net sales and excluding stores for periods of pandemic-related closures, increased 3.7% during fiscal 2020 compared to an increase of 0.8% during fiscal 2019. E-commerce net sales increased 76.2% and represented approximately 32.6% of total net sales during fiscal 2020 compared to an increase of 9.7% and a 15.9% share of total net sales during fiscal 2019. Comparable net sales in physical stores, excluding periods of pandemic-related closures, decreased 13.5%. Total net sales from physical stores represented approximately 67.4% of total net sales during fiscal 2020. This compares to a comparable decrease of 0.7% and a 84.1% share of total net sales during fiscal 2019. All stores were closed in mid-March 2020 as a result of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and remained closed for two months or more on a case by case basis. Upon reopening, physical stores operated with significant government-mandated restrictions on customer traffic and reduced operating hours for the remainder of fiscal 2020.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $142.2 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $186.7 million in fiscal 2019, a decrease of $44.5 million, or 23.8%. These results were negatively influenced by the restrictions on store customer traffic and operating hours and the government imposed impacts due to COVID-19. Gross margin, or gross profit as a percentage of net sales, decreased to 26.8% in fiscal 2020 from 30.1% in fiscal 2019. Product margins improved 60 basis points as a percentage of net sales, primarily due to reduced total markdowns overall compared to last year. Buying, distribution, and occupancy costs deleveraged 400 basis points, collectively. Distribution costs deleveraged 190 basis points as a percentage of net sales primarily due to an increase in e-commerce shipping costs of $8.5 million resulting from a greater volume of e-commerce orders. Occupancy costs deleveraged 200 basis points as a percentage of net sales despite being reduced by $4.1 million and having two fewer stores compared to last year, against lower total net sales. Buying costs deleveraged 10 basis points as a percentage of net sales
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses ("SG&A")
SG&A was $145.2 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $158.3 million in fiscal 2019. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A was 27.3% for fiscal 2020 and 25.6% for fiscal 2019. The components of the changes in SG&A, both in terms of percentage of net sales and total dollars, were as follows:
Operating (Loss) Income
Operating loss was $(3.0) million in fiscal 2020 compared to operating income of $28.5 million for fiscal 2019, a decrease of $31.5 million, or 110.7%. As a percentage of net sales, operating loss was (0.6)% for fiscal 2020 compared to operating income of 4.6% for fiscal 2019. The $31.5 million decrease in operating income was primarily due to the significant COVID-19 pandemic impacts on our business as noted above.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
Income tax benefit was $(1.3) million for fiscal 2020 compared to income tax expense of $8.7 million for fiscal 2019. Our effective tax rates were 53.4% for fiscal 2020 and 27.9% for fiscal 2019.
Net (Loss) Income and (Loss) Earnings Per Share
Net loss was $(1.1) million for fiscal 2020 compared to net income of $22.6 million for fiscal 2019, a decrease of $23.8 million, or 105.1%. Loss per basic share was $(0.04) for fiscal 2020 compared to diluted earnings per share of $0.76 for fiscal 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the significant COVID-19 pandemic impacts on our business noted above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our business relies on cash flows from operating activities as well as cash on hand as our primary sources of liquidity. We currently expect to finance company operations, store growth and remodels with existing cash on hand, marketable securities and cash flows from operations.
In addition to cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities, the most significant components of our working capital are merchandise inventories, accounts payable and accrued expenses. Subject to certain assumptions regarding the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, and our responses thereto (including such actions we have taken or may take in the future as disclosed elsewhere in this Report), we believe that cash flows from operating activities, our cash and marketable securities on hand, and credit facility availability will be sufficient to cover our working capital requirements and anticipated capital expenditures for the next 12 months from the issuance of this Report. If cash flows from operations are not sufficient or available to meet our capital requirements, then we will be required to obtain additional equity or debt financing in the future. There can be no assurance that equity or debt financing will be available to us when we need it or, if available, that the terms will be satisfactory to us and not dilutive to our stockholders.
Impact of CARES Act on Company Liquidity
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, was signed into law. The CARES Act includes tax provisions applicable to businesses, such as net operating losses, enhanced interest deductibility, optional deferral of deposits of payroll taxes, a refundable employee retention payroll tax credit, and changes to the depreciation rules for qualified improvement property. As of January 30, 2021, pursuant to the CARES Act, we have deferred the deposit of certain payroll taxes, applied for certain tax credits, and accelerated depreciation on qualified improvement property.
Working Capital
Working capital at January 30, 2021, was $78.6 million compared to $63.6 million at February 1, 2020, an increase of $15.0 million. The changes in our working capital during fiscal 2020 were as follows:
Cash Flow Analysis
A summary of operating, investing and financing activities is shown in the following table:
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Operating activities consist primarily of net income adjusted for non-cash items that include depreciation, asset impairment write-downs, deferred income taxes and share-based compensation expense, plus the effect on cash of changes during the year in our assets and liabilities.
Net cash provided by operating activities increased in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 primarily due to the timing of payments to vendors, an increase in accrued expenses and an increase in accrued compensation and benefits, offset by a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets and a decrease in net income.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Investing activities consist of capital expenditures for growth related to new store openings as well as for remodels and changes in fixtures and equipment at existing stores, investments in information technology, distribution center enhancements, assets at our corporate headquarters and the addition or replacement of company vehicles. Investing activities also consist of the purchase and sale of marketable securities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $3.2 million in fiscal 2020. Capital expenditures totaled $8.5 million, primarily related to new and remodeled stores and other improvements in our existing stores and information technology systems. We purchased $80.9 million of marketable securities and received proceeds of $86.2 million from marketable securities during fiscal 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities was $6.5 million in fiscal 2019. Capital expenditures totaled $14.3 million, primarily related to new and remodeled stores and other improvements in our existing stores and information technology systems. We purchased $126.5 million of marketable securities and received proceeds of $134.3 million from marketable securities during fiscal 2019.
Net Cash Used in Financing Activities
Financing activities consist of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, cash dividends paid, borrowings and repayments of our line of credit, and employee taxes paid in result of the net settlement of issued restricted stock.
Net cash used in financing activities was $29.7 million in fiscal 2020. This included $29.7 million of cash dividends paid and $23.7 million in both borrowings and repayments under our line of credit.
Net cash used in financing activities was $27.9 million in fiscal 2019. This included $29.5 million of cash dividends paid, partially offset by $1.6 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Asset-Backed Credit Facility
On November 9, 2020, we entered into a credit agreement (the "New Credit Agreement") with Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. ("Bank"), which replaced our previous amended and restated credit agreement (as amended, the "Prior Credit Agreement") with the Bank, which was terminated concurrently therewith. No borrowings were outstanding under the Prior Credit Agreement as of the closing date.
The New Credit Agreement provides for an asset-based, senior secured revolving credit facility of up to $65.0 million consisting of revolving loans, letters of credit and swing line loans provided by lenders, with a sub limit on credit outstanding at any time of $10.0 million and a sub limit for swing line loans of $7.5 million. The New Credit Agreement also includes an uncommitted accordion feature whereby we may increase the revolving commitment by an aggregate amount not to exceed $12.5 million, subject to certain conditions. The revolving facility matures on November 9, 2023. The payment and performance in full of the secured obligations under the revolving facility are secured by a lien on and security interest in all of the assets of our company.
The maximum borrowings permitted under the revolving facility is equal to the lesser of (x) the revolving commitment and (y) the borrowing base. The borrowing base is equal to (a) 90% of the borrowers’ eligible credit card receivables, plus (b) 90% of the cost of the borrowers’ eligible inventory, less inventory reserves established by the agent, and adjusted by the appraised value of such eligible inventory, plus (c) 90% of the cost of the borrowers’ eligible in-transit inventory, less inventory reserves established by the agent, and adjusted by the appraised value of such eligible in-transit inventory (not to exceed 10% of the total amount of all eligible inventory included in the borrowing base) less (d) reserves established by the agent. As of the closing date, we were eligible to borrow up to a total of $40.1 million under the revolving facility. As of the closing date, we had no outstanding borrowings under the New Credit Agreement and the only utilization of the letters of credit sub limit under the New Credit Agreement was a $2.025 million irrevocable standby letter of credit, which was previously issued under the Prior Credit Agreement and was transferred on the closing date to the New Credit Agreement.
The unused portion of the revolving commitment accrues a commitment fee, which ranges from 0.375% to 0.50% per annum, based on the average daily borrowing capacity under the revolving facility over the applicable fiscal quarter. Borrowings under the revolving facility bear interest at a rate per annum that ranges from the LIBOR rate plus 2.0% to the LIBOR rate plus 2.25%, or the base rate plus 1.0% to the base rate plus 1.25%, based on the average daily borrowing capacity under the revolving facility over the applicable fiscal quarter. We may elect to apply either the LIBOR rate or base rate interest to borrowings at our discretion, other than in the case of swing line loans, to which the base rate shall apply.
Under the New Credit Agreement, we are subject to a variety of affirmative and negative covenants of types customary in an asset-based lending facility, including a financial covenant relating to availability, and customary events of default. Prior to the first anniversary of the closing date, we are prohibited from declaring or paying any cash dividends to our respective stockholders or repurchasing of our own common stock. After the first anniversary of the closing date, we are allowed to declare and pay cash dividends to our respective stockholders and repurchase our own common stock, provided, among other
things, no default or event of default exists as of the date of any such payment and after giving effect thereto and certain minimum availability and minimum projected availability tests are satisfied.
In connection with the entry into the New Credit Agreement, on November 9, 2020, we entered into certain ancillary agreements, including (i) a security agreement in favor of the agent, and (ii) a guaranty by us in favor of the agent. The security agreement and the guaranty replaced (i) the general pledge agreement, dated as of May 3, 2012, by us in favor of the bank, (ii) the continuing guaranty by us in favor of the agent, dated May 3, 2012, and (iii) the amended and restated security agreement with respect to equipment and the amended and restated security agreement with respect to rights to payment and inventory, in each case, dated as of May 3.
As of January 30, 2021, we were in compliance with all of our covenants, eligible to borrow up to a total of $35.4 million, and had no outstanding borrowings under the New Credit Agreement.
Contractual Obligations
We enter into long-term contractual obligations and commitments in the normal course of business, primarily non-cancellable operating leases.
We lease approximately 172,000 square feet for our corporate headquarters and distribution center from a company that is owned by the co-founders of Tillys. These buildings are located at 10 and 12 Whatney, Irvine, California. The lease is accounted for as an operating lease and expires on December 31, 2027.
We lease approximately 26,000 square feet of office and warehouse space with a company that is owned by one of the co-founders of Tillys. This building is located at 11 Whatney, Irvine, California. The lease is accounted for as an operating lease and expires on June 30, 2022.
We lease approximately 81,000 square feet for our e-commerce distribution center from a company that is owned by one of the co-founders of Tillys. This building is located at 17 Pasteur, Irvine, California. The lease is accounted for as an operating lease and expires on October 31, 2021.
Our leases are generally non-cancellable operating leases expiring at various dates through fiscal year 2031. Certain leases provide for additional rent based on a percentage of sales and annual rent increases based upon the Consumer Price Index. In addition, many of our store leases contain certain co-tenancy provisions that permit us to pay rent based on a pre-determined percentage of sales when the occupancy of the retail center falls below minimums established in such lease.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements, except with respect to certain purchase obligations primarily for software maintenance services and the letter of credit outstanding under our New Credit Agreement as discussed above.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires the appropriate application of accounting policies, some of which require us to make estimates and assumptions about future events and their impact on amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements. Since future events and their impact cannot be determined with absolute certainty, the actual results will inevitably differ from our estimates.
We believe the application of our accounting policies, and the estimates inherently required therein, are reasonable. Our accounting policies and estimates are reevaluated on an ongoing basis and adjustments are made when facts and circumstances dictate a change.
The policies and estimates discussed below involve the selection or application of alternative accounting policies that are material to our consolidated financial statements. With respect to critical accounting policies, even a relatively minor variance between actual and expected experience can potentially have a materially favorable or unfavorable impact on subsequent results of operations. However, our historical results for the periods presented in the consolidated financial statements have not been materially impacted by such variances. Our accounting policies are more fully described in "Note 2: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting policies and estimates with our Board of Directors.
We have certain accounting policies that require more significant management judgment and estimates than others. These include our accounting policies with respect to revenue recognition, loyalty program, merchandise inventories, long-lived assets, operating leases, share-based compensation and accounting for income taxes, which are more fully described below.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized for store sales when the customer receives and pays for the merchandise at the register, net of estimated returns. Taxes collected from our customers are recorded on a net basis. For e-commerce sales, we recognize revenue, net of
sales taxes and estimated sales returns, and the related cost of goods sold at the time the merchandise is shipped to the customer. Amounts related to shipping and handling that are billed to customers are reflected in net sales, and the related costs are reflected in cost of goods sold in the Consolidated Statements Operations.
Our business is seasonal and as a result our revenues fluctuate from quarter to quarter. In addition, our revenues in any given quarter can be affected by a number of factors including the timing of holidays and weather patterns. The third and fourth quarters of the fiscal year, which include the back-to-school and holiday sales seasons, have historically produced stronger sales and disproportionately stronger operating results than have the first two quarters of the fiscal year.
Gift Cards
We recognize revenue from gift cards as they are redeemed for merchandise. Prior to redemption, we maintain a current liability for unredeemed gift card balances. Our gift cards do not have expiration dates and in most cases there is no legal obligation to remit unredeemed gift cards to relevant jurisdictions. Based on actual historical redemption patterns, we determined that a small percentage of gift cards are unlikely to be redeemed (which we refer to as gift card "breakage"). Based on our historical gift card breakage rate, we recognize breakage revenue over the redemption period in proportion to actual gift card redemptions.
Loyalty Program
We have a customer loyalty program wherein customers accumulate points based on purchase activity. Once a loyalty member achieves a certain point level, the member earns an award that may be used towards the purchase of merchandise. Unredeemed awards and accumulated partial points are accrued as deferred revenue and awards redeemed by the member for merchandise are recorded as an increase to net sales. Our loyalty program allows customers to redeem their awards instantly or build up to additional awards over time. We currently expire unredeemed awards and accumulated partial points 365 days after the last purchase activity. A liability is estimated based on the standalone selling price of awards and partial points earned and estimated redemptions.
Merchandise Inventories
Merchandise inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, which generally is the merchandise selling price. Cost is calculated using the retail inventory method. Under the retail inventory method, inventory is stated at its current retail selling value and then is converted to a cost basis by applying a cost-to-retail ratio based on beginning inventory and the fiscal year purchase activity. The retail inventory method inherently requires management judgments and estimates, such as the amount and timing of markdowns needed in order to sell through slow-moving inventories.
Markdowns are recorded when the sales value of the inventory has diminished. Factors considered in the determination of markdowns include current and anticipated demand, customer preferences, age of the merchandise and fashion trends. When a decision is made to mark down merchandise, the resulting gross margin reduction is recognized in the period in which the markdown is recorded. During each accounting period we record adjustments to our inventories, which are reflected in cost of goods sold, if the cost of specific inventory items on hand exceeds the amount we expect to realize from the ultimate sale or disposal of the inventory. This adjustment calculation requires us to make assumptions and estimates, which are based on factors such as merchandise seasonality, historical trends and inventory levels, including estimated sell-through rates of remaining units.
To the extent that management’s estimates differ from actual results, additional markdowns may be required that could reduce our gross margin, operating income and the carrying value of inventories. Our success is largely dependent upon our ability to anticipate the changing fashion tastes of our customers and to respond to those changing tastes in a timely manner. If we fail to anticipate, identify or react appropriately to changing styles, trends or brand preferences of our customers, we may experience lower sales, excessive inventories and more frequent and extensive markdowns, which would adversely affect our operating results.
We also record an inventory shrinkage reserve calculated as a percentage of net sales for estimated merchandise losses for the period between the last physical inventory count and the balance sheet date. These estimates are based on historical percentages and can be affected by changes in merchandise mix and changes in shrinkage trends. We perform physical inventory counts at least once per year for the entire chain of stores and our distribution center and adjust the inventory shrinkage reserve accordingly. If actual physical inventory losses differ significantly from the estimate, our results of operations could be adversely impacted. The inventory shrinkage reserve reduces the value of total inventory and is a component of inventories on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The inventory shrinkage reserve at January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020 was not material.
Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate the carrying value of our long-lived assets, consisting largely of leasehold improvements, furniture and fixtures and equipment at store, distribution center and corporate office locations, for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. Factors that are considered important that could result in the necessity to perform an impairment review include a current-period operating or cash flow loss combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses and a forecast that indicates continuing losses or insufficient income associated with the realization of a long-lived asset or asset group. Other factors include a significant change in the manner of the use of the asset or a significant negative industry or economic trend. This evaluation is performed based on estimated undiscounted future cash flows from operating activities compared with the carrying value of the related assets. If the undiscounted future cash flows are less than the carrying value, an impairment loss is recognized, measured by the difference between the carrying value and the estimated fair value of the assets, based on discounted cash flows using our weighted-average cost of capital, with such estimated fair values determined using the best information available. Quarterly, we assess whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred that potentially indicate the carrying value of long-lived assets may not be recoverable.
The estimation of future cash flows from operating activities requires significant estimates of factors that include future sales and gross margin performance. Factors used in the valuation of long-lived assets with finite lives include, but are not limited to, discount rates, management’s plans for future operations, recent operating results and projected future cash flows. If our net sales or gross profit performance or other estimated operating results are not achieved at or above our forecasted level, or inflation exceeds our forecast and we are unable to recover such costs through price increases, the carrying value of certain of our retail stores may prove to be unrecoverable and we may incur additional impairment charges in the future.
Operating Leases
During the first quarter of 2019, we adopted ASC 842, Leases (the "Lease Standard"), using the transition method provided in ASU 2018-11 (refer to "Note 2: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" in Item 8). As a result, reporting periods beginning in the first quarter of 2019 are presented under the Lease Standard while prior period amounts are not adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with our historic accounting under ASC 840 - Leases.
Upon adoption of the Lease Standard, we recorded our operating leases on the consolidated balance sheet as operating lease assets, current portion of operating lease liabilities and non-current operating lease liabilities. Operating lease liabilities are initially recognized based on the net present value of the fixed portion of our lease components through the lease term. To calculate the net present value, we apply an incremental borrowing rate ("IBR"). The incremental borrowing rate is determined using a portfolio approach based on the rate of interest we would pay to borrow an amount equal to the lease payments on a collateralized basis over a similar term. From our adoption of ASC 842 during Q1 FY2019 through Q2 FY2020, the IBR used was obtained from our financial institution. Beginning Q3 FY2020, the IBR used was obtained from an independent third-party valuation firm. We recognize operating lease assets based on lease liabilities and initial direct costs, less any tenant allowance incentives. We test operating lease assets for impairment in the same manner as long-lived assets, and include the related operating lease liability and operating lease payments in our analysis.
Share-based Compensation
We account for share-based compensation in accordance with the provisions of ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, or ASC 718, which establishes accounting for equity instruments exchanged for employee services. Under the provisions of this standard, share-based compensation expense is measured at the grant date, based on the calculated fair value of the award, and is recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the employee’s requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the equity grant). Changes in these inputs and assumptions can materially affect the measurement of the estimated fair value of the award and related share-based compensation expense.
Determining the fair value of share-based awards at the grant date requires judgment. We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options. The determination of the grant date fair value of options using an option-pricing model is affected by a number of assumptions, such as the fair value of the common stock, our expected stock price volatility over the expected term of the options, stock option exercise and cancellation behaviors, risk-free interest rates, and expected dividends, which we estimate as follows:
•Fair Value of Our Common Stock. We use the closing price of our Class A common stock on the date of grant.
•Expected Term. We have limited historical information regarding expected option term. Accordingly, we determined the expected stock option term of the awards using the latest historical data available from comparable public companies and our expectation of exercise behavior.
•Volatility. Our stock volatility for each grant is measured using the weighted average of historical daily price changes of our common stock over the most recent period equal to the expected option term of the awards.
•Risk-Free Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the yields of United States Treasury securities with maturities similar to the expected term of the stock options for each stock option group.
•Dividend Yield. We do not currently have any policy with respect to recurring dividends in place. However, we have declared and paid special cash dividends in each of the prior four years, including $0.70 per share in early 2017 and
$1.00 per share in each of early 2018, 2019 and 2020 to all holders of record of issued and outstanding shares of Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Under our New Credit Agreement, we are prohibited from declaring or paying any cash dividend to our respective stockholders through the first anniversary of the closing date. There can be no guarantee that we will continue to pay special cash dividends in the future. Consequently, we used an expected dividend yield of zero in the valuation of our share-based compensation.
If any of the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes model change significantly, share-based compensation expense for future awards may differ materially compared with the expense for awards granted previously.
Accounting for Income Taxes
We account for income taxes and the related accounts using the asset and liability method in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, or ASC 740. Under this method, we accrue income taxes payable or refundable and recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on differences between GAAP and tax bases of assets and liabilities. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse, and recognize the effect of a change in enacted rates in the period of enactment.
We record net deferred tax assets to the extent we believe these assets will more likely than not be realized. In making such determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial operations.
We establish assets and liabilities for uncertain positions taken or expected to be taken in income tax returns, using a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold. We include in income tax expense any interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions.