Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Item 1A. Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a commercial-stage medical technology company transforming organ transplant therapy for end-stage organ failure patients across multiple disease states. We developed the OCS to replace a decades-old standard of care that we believe is significantly limiting access to life-saving transplant therapy for hundreds of thousands of patients worldwide. Our innovative OCS technology replicates many aspects of the organ’s natural living and functioning environment outside of the human body. As such, the OCS represents a paradigm shift that transforms organ preservation for transplantation from a static state to a dynamic environment that enables new capabilities, including organ optimization and assessment. We believe our substantial body of clinical evidence has demonstrated the potential for the OCS to significantly increase the number of organ transplants and improve post-transplant outcomes.
We developed the OCS to comprehensively address the major limitations of cold storage. The OCS is a portable organ perfusion, optimization and monitoring system that utilizes our proprietary and customized technology to replicate near-physiologic conditions for donor organs outside of the human body. We designed the OCS technology platform to perfuse donor organs with warm, oxygenated, nutrient-enriched blood, while maintaining the organs in a living, functioning state; the lung is breathing, the heart is beating and the liver is producing bile. Because the OCS significantly reduces injurious ischemic time on donor organs as compared to cold storage and enables the optimization and assessment of donor organs, it has demonstrated improved clinical outcomes relative to cold storage and offers the potential to significantly improve donor organ utilization.
We designed the OCS to be a platform that allows us to leverage core technologies across products for multiple organs. To date, we have developed three OCS products, one for each of lung, heart and liver transplantations, making the OCS the only multi-organ technology platform. Our OCS products have been used for over 1,800 human organ transplants. We have commercialized the OCS Lung and OCS Heart outside of the United States and received our first PMA from the FDA in March 2018 for the use in the United States of the OCS Lung for donor lungs currently utilized for transplantation and since May 2019, for donor lungs currently unutilized for transplantation.
Since our inception, we have focused substantially all of our resources on designing, developing and building our proprietary OCS technology platform and organ-specific OCS products; obtaining clinical evidence for the safety and effectiveness of our OCS products through clinical trials; securing regulatory approval; organizing and staffing our company; planning our business; raising capital; commercializing our products; developing our market and distribution chain and providing general and administrative support for these operations. To date, we have funded our operations primarily with proceeds from sales of preferred stock and borrowings under loan agreements, proceeds from the sale of common stock in our IPO, the sale of our common stock in equity offerings, and revenue from clinical trials and commercial sales of our OCS products.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our ability to generate net revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend on the successful further development and commercialization of our products. We generated net revenue of $25.6 million and $23.6 million for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 28, 2019, respectively. We incurred net losses of $28.7 million and $33.5 million, respectively, for those same years. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $398.2 million. We expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future as we focus on growing commercial sales of our products in both the United States and select non-U.S. markets, including growing our sales and clinical adoption team, which will pursue increasing commercial sales and clinical adoption of our OCS products; scaling our manufacturing operations; continuing research, development and clinical trial efforts; and seeking regulatory clearance for new products and product enhancements, including new indications, in both the United States and select non-U.S. markets. Further, following the closing of our IPO we have incurred and expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. As a result, we will need substantial additional funding for expenses related to our operating activities, including selling, general and administrative expenses and research, development and clinical trials expenses.
On May 6, 2019, we completed our IPO, pursuant to which we issued and sold 6,543,500 shares of common stock, inclusive of 853,500 shares we sold pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares. The aggregate net proceeds received by us from the IPO were $91.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions as well as other offering costs of $6.0 million.
On May 26, 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of our common stock, which resulted in the sale of 5,750,000 shares of common stock, inclusive of 750,000 shares we sold pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares. The aggregate net proceeds received by us from the offering were $75.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions as well as other offering costs of $0.6 million.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development and commercialization, we are unable to accurately predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when, or if, we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial net revenue sufficient to achieve profitability, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings and strategic alliances. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. If we are unable to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the further development and commercialization efforts of one or more of our products, or may be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents, and marketable securities, will be sufficient for us to fund our operating expenses, capital expenditure requirements and debt service payments for at least the next 12 months. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources”.
COVID-19
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has been and will likely continue to be extensive in many aspects of society, which has resulted in and will likely continue to result in significant disruptions to the global economy, as well as businesses and capital markets around the world. Impacts to our business as a result of COVID-19 include the temporary disruption of transplant procedures at many of the organ transplant centers who purchase OCS products; disruptions to our manufacturing operations and supply chain caused by facility closures, reductions in operating hours, staggered shifts and other social distancing efforts; labor shortages; decreased productivity and unavailability of materials or components; restrictions on or delays of our clinical trials and studies; delays of reviews and approvals by the FDA and other health authorities; limitations on our employees’ and customers’ ability to travel, and delays in product installations, trainings or shipments to and from affected countries and within the United States. In response to the pandemic, healthcare providers have, and may need to further, reallocate resources, such as physicians, staff, hospital beds and intensive care unit facilities, and these actions significantly delay the provision of other medical care such as organ transplantation and reduce the number of transplant procedures that are performed, which has a negative impact on our revenue and clinical trial activities. Our sales and clinical adoption team has been and may continue to be restricted in visiting many transplant centers in person. Customer delays or reductions in capital expenditures and operating budgets also have a negative impact on our product sales. We plan to maintain these or similar restrictions until we believe employees can fully resume such activities in accordance with federal, state and local requirements. The COVID-19 pandemic also has impacted operations at the FDA and other health authorities, resulting in delays of reviews and approvals, including with respect to our OCS Heart PMA application, and may affect other potential PMA applications. For example, although the FDA had scheduled an advisory committee of experts from outside the FDA to review and evaluate our OCS Heart PMA application in the second quarter of 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic the advisory committee meeting was postponed to October 2020. However, this meeting was further postponed to allow the FDA to review additional, already collected, short and longer-term data from the OCS Heart EXPAND Trial and OCS Heart EXPAND CAP trial. The FDA advisory committee meeting is expected to be held on April 6, 2021.
In April 2020, we announced several steps to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. These steps are intended to protect the health and safety of our employees, to establish a process to support the continuous supply of our OCS products at transplant centers globally and to maintain financial flexibility. These actions include transitioning most employees to a remote work environment, except for those who are deemed essential to product supply and reducing near-term expenses, such as reducing non-essential discretionary expenses. We also deferred a portion of executive and employee compensation from April 2020 through August 31, 2020. While the COVID-19 pandemic did not significantly impact our business or results of operations during the first quarter of 2020, OCS product sales have been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic since the second quarter of 2020 and we anticipate a negative impact to OCS product sales in 2021. The extent of the future impact on our operations and financial condition will depend on the length and severity of the pandemic, its consequences, and containment and vaccination efforts. While the FDA approved emergency use authorization of vaccines in December 2020, it is expected to take several months for widespread vaccinations to occur and it is not yet known how vaccination efforts will impact the COVID-19 pandemic.
We have observed recovery in the frequency of transplant procedures, but not yet at the same activity level as prior to the disruption of business and economic activities resulting from COVID-19. In addition, while the number of transplant procedures performed has declined during the COVID-19 pandemic, organ transplantations are non-elective, life-saving procedures and we believe that the need for these procedures will persist. However, as interventions to contain the spread of the virus are lifted or reduced, new COVID-19 outbreaks may result in new or heightened restrictions, which could again cause disruptions to our customers’ operations and adversely impact organ transplant procedures.
We continue to monitor developments regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects. However, we are unable to predict the extent of the impact with confidence due to the uncertainty of future developments, such as the duration of the pandemic, additional or modified government actions, new information which may emerge concerning the severity and incidence of COVID-19 and actions to contain the virus or treat its impact. In particular, the speed of the continued spread of COVID-19 globally, and the magnitude, duration and frequency of interventions to contain the spread of the virus, such as government-imposed quarantines, including shelter-in-place mandates, sweeping restrictions on travel, mandatory shutdowns for non-essential businesses, requirements regarding social distancing, and other public health safety measures, will determine the impact of the pandemic on our business.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Revenue
We generate revenue primarily from sales of our single-use, organ-specific disposable sets (i.e., our organ-specific OCS Perfusion Sets sold together with our organ-specific OCS Solutions) used on our organ-specific OCS Consoles, each being a component of our OCS products. To a lesser extent, we also generate revenue from the sale of OCS Consoles to customers and from the implied rental of OCS Consoles loaned to customers at no charge. For each new transplant procedure, customers purchase an additional OCS disposable set for use on the customer’s existing organ-specific OCS Console.
All of our revenue has been generated by sales to transplant centers in the United States, Europe and Asia-Pacific, or, in some cases, to distributors selling to transplant centers in select countries. Substantially all of our customer contracts have multiple-performance obligations that contain promises consisting of OCS Perfusion Sets and OCS Solutions. In some of those contracts, the promises also include an OCS Console, whether sold or loaned to the customer.
Some of our revenue has been generated from products sold in conjunction with the clinical trials conducted for our OCS products, under arrangements referred to as customer clinical trial agreements. Under most of these customer clinical trial agreements, we place an organ-specific OCS Console at the customer site for its use free of charge for the duration of the clinical trial, and the customer separately purchases from us the OCS disposable sets used in each transplant procedure during the clinical trial. When we loan the OCS Console to the customer, we retain title to the console at all times and do not require minimum purchase commitments from the customer related to any OCS products. In such cases, we invoice the customer for OCS disposable sets based on customer orders received for each new transplant procedure and the prices set forth in the customer agreement. Over time, we typically recover the cost of the loaned OCS Console through the customer’s continued purchasing and use of additional OCS disposable sets. For these reasons, we have determined that part of the selling price for the disposable set is an implied rental payment for use of the OCS Console. We continue to loan OCS Consoles to some of our customers during commercialization of our OCS products.
Because all promises of a customer contract are delivered and recognized as revenue at the same time and because revenue allocated to promises other than OCS disposable sets, such as implied rental income and service revenue, is insignificant, all performance obligations from customer contracts are classified as a single category of revenue in our consolidated statements of operations.
Under some of our customer clinical trial agreements, we make payments to our customers for reimbursements of clinical trial materials and for specified clinical documentation related to their use of our OCS products. Because some of these payments do not provide us with a separately identifiable benefit, we record such payments as a reduction of revenue from the customer, resulting in our net revenue presentation. We recorded reimbursable clinical trial costs as a reduction of revenue of $2.7 million and $2.2 million for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 28, 2019, respectively.
In March 2018, we received our first FDA PMA for the OCS Lung, and we began commercial sales of this product in the United States during the fourth quarter of 2018. In May 2019, we received our second FDA PMA for the OCS Lung for additional clinical indications. Therefore, our net revenue in the United States for the OCS Lung is now derived primarily from commercial sales and consists of sales of OCS disposable sets and, to a much lesser extent, sales of OCS Consoles. In 2019, we also recorded revenue from clinical trial sales of the OCS Lung for our OCS Lung EXPAND II Trial, which stopped enrollment as of June 24, 2019 since we received FDA PMA for the OCS Lung EXPAND indication.
In the United States, we expect to continue to only have clinical trial sales for our OCS Heart and OCS Liver products until we receive similar FDA PMA for those products. Our net revenue in the United States for OCS Heart and OCS Liver products fluctuates from period to period as a result of the timing of patient enrollment in our clinical trials. Historically, our net revenue during periods of patient enrollment has been higher due to the sale of OCS disposable sets for use during these clinical trials, as compared to periods during which our clinical trials were not actively enrolling. Our OCS Heart EXPAND Trial began patient enrollment in September 2015 and completed patient enrollment in March 2018. Our OCS Liver PROTECT trial began enrollment in January 2016 and completed enrollment in October 2019. Our OCS Heart EXPAND CAP trial began patient enrollment in May 2019 and is currently enrolling patients. Our OCS Heart DCD trial began patient enrollment in December 2019 and has completed enrolling patients. Our OCS Heart DCD CAP trial has been approved by the FDA and we began enrolling patients in December 2020. Our OCS Liver PROTECT CAP trial began patient enrollment in February 2020 and has completed initial enrollment; however, we have applied to the FDA to enroll additional patients in this trial. Our net revenue may continue to fluctuate from period to period as a result of the timing of ongoing clinical trials in which our OCS products are used.
Through December 31, 2020, all of our sales outside of the United States have been commercial sales (unrelated to any clinical trials) and our net revenue has been generated primarily from sales of OCS disposable sets and, to a much lesser extent, sales of OCS Consoles. Commercial sales of OCS disposable sets generally have a higher average selling price than clinical trial sales of OCS disposable sets.
We expect that our net revenue will increase over the long term as a result of receiving our first two FDA PMAs for the OCS Lung in the United States in March 2018 and May 2019 and any potential future FDA approvals in the United States for OCS Heart and OCS Liver. We also expect that our net revenue will increase over the long term as a result of anticipated growth in non-U.S. sales if national healthcare systems begin to reimburse transplant centers for the use of the OCS, if transplant centers utilize the OCS in more transplant cases, and if more transplant centers adopt the OCS in their programs. We expect that net revenue will continue to be negatively impacted in 2021 a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue consists primarily of costs of components of our OCS Consoles and disposable sets, costs of direct materials, labor and the manufacturing overhead that directly supports production, and costs related to the depreciation of OCS Consoles loaned to customers. When we loan an OCS Console to a customer for its use free of charge, we capitalize as property and equipment the cost of our OCS Console and depreciate these assets over the five-year estimated useful life of the console. Included in the cost of OCS disposable sets are the costs of our OCS Lung, OCS Heart and OCS Liver Solutions.
We expect that cost of revenue will increase or decrease in absolute dollars primarily as, and to the extent that, our net revenue increases or decreases.
Gross profit is the amount by which our net revenue exceeds our cost of revenue in each reporting period. We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by net revenue. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, primarily production volumes, the cost of components and direct materials, manufacturing costs, headcount, the selling price of our OCS products and fluctuations in amounts paid by us to customers related to reimbursements of their clinical trial expenses.
We expect that cost of revenue as a percentage of net revenue will decrease and gross margin and gross profit will increase over the long term as our sales and production volumes increase and our cost per unit of our OCS disposable sets decreases due to economies of scale. We intend to use our design, engineering and manufacturing capabilities to further advance and improve the efficiency of our manufacturing processes, which we believe will reduce costs and increase our gross margin. As utilization by customers of our OCS products increases, we expect that a greater number of OCS disposable sets will be used per year on the same OCS Console, thereby driving overall gross margin improvement. Because we expect that the number of OCS disposable sets sold over time will be significantly greater than the number of OCS Consoles sold or loaned to customers over that same period, we expect that our gross margin improvement will not be significantly affected by the number of OCS Consoles that we sell or loan to customers. While we expect gross margin to increase over the long term, it will likely fluctuate from quarter to quarter.
Operating Expenses
Research, Development and Clinical Trials Expenses
Research, development and clinical trials expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, product development, hardware and software engineering, clinical trials to develop clinical evidence of our products’ safety and effectiveness, regulatory expenses, testing, consultant services and other costs associated with our OCS technology platform and OCS products, which include:
•
employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research, hardware and software development, regulatory and clinical trial functions;
•
expenses incurred in connection with the clinical trials of our products, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors and data management organizations;
•
the cost of maintaining and improving our product designs, including the testing of materials and parts used in our products;
•
laboratory supplies and research materials; and
•
facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and insurance.
We expense research, development and clinical trials costs as incurred. In the future, we expect that research, development and clinical trials expenses will increase over the long term due to ongoing product development and approval efforts. We expect to continue to perform activities related to obtaining additional regulatory approvals for expanded indications in the United States and to developing the next generation of our OCS technology platform.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our sales and clinical adoption team and personnel in executive, marketing, finance and administrative functions. Selling, general and administrative expenses also include direct and allocated facility-related costs, promotional activities, marketing, conferences and trade shows as well as professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, investor and public relations, accounting and audit services. We expect to continue to increase headcount in our sales and clinical adoption team and increase marketing efforts as we continue to grow commercial sales of our OCS products in both U.S. and select non-U.S. markets.
We expect that our selling, general and administrative expenses will increase over the long term as we increase our headcount to support the expected continued sales growth of our OCS products. We also anticipate that we will continue to incur increased accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, compliance and director and officer insurance costs as well as investor and public relations expenses associated with our continued operation as a public company.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest expense associated with outstanding borrowings under our loan agreement as well as the amortization of debt discount associated with such agreement.
Change in Fair Value of Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
Prior to our IPO in May 2019, we had outstanding warrants to purchase preferred stock. We classified these warrants as a liability on our consolidated balance sheet that we remeasured to fair value at each reporting date, and we recognized changes in the fair value of the warrant liability as a component of other income (expense) in our consolidated statements of operations.
On May 6, 2019, immediately prior to the closing of our IPO, the warrants to purchase preferred stock were converted into warrants to purchase common stock, and the fair value of the warrant liability at that time was reclassified to common stock. As a result, subsequent to the closing of our IPO, we no longer remeasure the fair value of the warrant liability at each reporting date.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net includes interest income, realized and unrealized foreign currency transaction gains and losses and other non-operating income and expense items unrelated to our core operations.
Interest income consists of interest earned on our invested cash balances. Foreign currency transaction gains and losses result from intercompany transactions as well as transactions with customers or vendors denominated in currencies other than the functional currency of the legal entity in which the transaction is recorded.
Provision for Income Taxes
Since our inception, we have not recorded any U.S. federal or state income tax benefits for the net operating losses we have incurred in each year or for the research and development tax credits we generated in the United States, as we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all of our net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits will not be realized. In reporting periods subsequent to 2016, we have recorded provisions for foreign income taxes of an insignificant amount related to the operations of one of our foreign subsidiaries.
As of December 31, 2020, we had U.S. federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of $322.0 million and $252.7 million, respectively, which may be available to offset future taxable income and begin to expire in 2021 and 2030, respectively. Our federal net operating losses include $108.0 million, which can be carried forward indefinitely. As of December 31, 2020, we also had U.S. federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $7.6 million and $5.0 million, respectively, which may be available to offset future tax liabilities and begin to expire in 2021 and 2024, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had no foreign net operating loss carryforwards. We have recorded a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets at each balance sheet date.
Results of Operations
Prior to 2020, our fiscal year ended on the last Saturday in December, and we reported fiscal years using a 52/53-week convention. Under this convention, certain fiscal years contained 53 weeks. Each fiscal year was typically composed of four 13-week fiscal quarters, but in years with 53 weeks, the fourth quarter was a 14-week period. Our fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 included 52 weeks. In February 2020, we changed the end of our fiscal year from the last Saturday in December to December 31.
Comparison of the Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 28, 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 28, 2019:
Net Revenue
Net revenue from customers in the United States was $19.2 million in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 and increased by $3.0 million in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019. The increase in net revenue from customers in the United States was primarily due to sales of OCS disposable sets for use in our OCS Heart EXPAND CAP Trial and OCS Heart DCD Trial and sales of OCS disposable sets to customers for use in our OCS Liver PROTECT CAP Trial, partially offset by a decrease in sales of our OCS Lung disposable sets. Net revenue from sales of OCS Lung products in the United States decreased from $8.0 million in the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 to $5.4 million in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to fewer sales of OCS Lung disposable sets as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which impacted lung transplants more than other organ transplants due to the nature of the disease, new protocols required for safe lung transplants and the necessary use of ventilators post-transplant. Net revenue from OCS Heart disposable sets sold to customers for use in our OCS Heart EXPAND CAP Trial and OCS Heart DCD Trial increased from $4.7 million in the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 to $8.6 million in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Net revenue from OCS Liver disposable sets sold to customers for use in our OCS Liver PROTECT Trial increased from $3.5 million in the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 to $5.2 million in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, the U.S. selling price of OCS disposable sets sold in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately 12% higher than the U.S. selling prices of OCS disposable sets sold in the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019, which accounted for $2.0 million of the overall $3.0 million increase in net revenue in the United States from the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Net revenue from customers outside the United States was $6.4 million in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 and decreased by $1.0 million compared to the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019. The decrease in net revenue from customers outside the United States was primarily due to the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue decreased by $0.7 million in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019. Gross profit increased by $2.8 million in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019. Gross margin was 65% and 59% for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 and December 28, 2019, respectively. Gross profit and gross margin increased primarily as a result of a higher average selling price of OCS disposable sets sold in the United States in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 relative to the average selling price of OCS disposable sets sold in the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 and cost reduction and cost containment measures adopted by management to address the challenges of the operating environment caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Expenses
Research, Development and Clinical Trials Expenses
Total research, development and clinical trials expenses decreased by $1.0 million from $19.9 million in the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 to $18.8 million in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Personnel related costs and clinical trial costs increased by $1.5 million and $0.4 million, respectively, due primarily to additional resources supporting clinical trials and new product development. Consulting and third-party testing, laboratory supplies and research materials costs and other costs decreased by $2.7 million, $0.2 million and $0.1 million, respectively, due primarily to our cost management and cost containment strategies implemented by our management in 2020 to address the challenges of the operating environment caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Total selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $0.6 million from $23.6 million in the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 to $24.2 million in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to increases in personnel related costs, as we hired additional resources and engaged consultants to support commercial sales of our OCS Lung product in the United States and to support our operation as a public company. Stock-based compensation expense also increased by $1.3 million due primarily to additional grants to existing employees. These increases were partially offset by professional and consultant fees and tradeshows and conferences decreases of $0.8 million and $1.1 million, respectively, primarily as a result of tradeshows and conferences being canceled or delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic and cost management and cost containment strategies implemented by our management.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased to $4.0 million for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2020 from $4.4 million for the fiscal year ending December 28, 2019, as a result of lower interest rates.
Change in Fair Value of Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
The change in the fair value of our preferred stock warrant liability in the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 was due primarily to the changes in the fair value of our preferred stock during that period.
On May 6, 2019, immediately prior to the closing of our IPO, the warrants to purchase preferred stock were converted into warrants to purchase common stock, and the fair value of the warrant liability at that time was reclassified to common stock. As a result, subsequent to the closing of our IPO, we no longer remeasure the fair value of the warrant liability at each reporting date.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 28, 2019 included interest income of $0.7 million and $1.0 million, respectively, resulting from interest earned on invested cash balances, and included $1.0 million of realized and unrealized foreign currency transaction gains and $0.2 million of realized and unrealized foreign currency transaction losses for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 28, 2019, respectively. Interest income decreased from fiscal 2019 to fiscal 2020 as a result of lower interest rates on invested balances.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. To date, we have funded our operations primarily with proceeds from sales of preferred stock and borrowings under loan agreements, proceeds from the sale of common stock in our public offerings and revenue from clinical trials and commercial sales of our OCS products.
On May 6, 2019, we completed our IPO, pursuant to which we issued and sold 6,543,500 shares of common stock, inclusive of 853,500 shares we sold pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares. The aggregate net proceeds received by us from the IPO were $91.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions as well as other offering costs of $6.0 million. On May 26, 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of our common stock, which resulted in the sale of 5,750,000 shares of common stock, inclusive of 750,000 shares we sold pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares. The aggregate net proceeds received by us from the offering were $75.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions as well as other offering costs of $0.6 million.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $125.6 million.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the fiscal periods presented:
Operating Activities
During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $30.3 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $28.7 million and net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $5.6 million, partially offset by net non-cash charges of $4.1 million. Net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of a $3.9 million decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities, a $1.7 million increase in inventory and a $0.8 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, partially offset by a $0.9 million increase in deferred rent.
During the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019, operating activities used $32.3 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $33.5 million and net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.6 million, partially offset by net non-cash charges of $2.9 million. Net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 consisted primarily of a $4.1 million increase in inventory and a $3.2 million increase in accounts receivable, partially offset by a $5.9 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities.
Changes in accounts receivable, inventory, accounts payable, and accrued expenses and other current liabilities in each reporting period are generally due to growth in our business, including the growth in sales, expenses and employee headcount.
Investing Activities
During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities of $41.6 million consisted of $121.8 million in purchases of marketable securities and $0.5 million in purchases of property and equipment, partially offset by proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities of $80.7 million.
During the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019, net cash used by investing activities was $60.5 million, primarily due to the purchases of marketable securities of $82.4 million and purchases of property and equipment of $0.2 million, partially offset by the proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities of $22.0 million.
Financing Activities
During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities of $75.5 million consisted primarily of proceeds from the issuance of common stock in our May 2020 public offering of $75.7 million and our employee share ownership plans of $0.6 million, both partially offset by payments of offering costs of $0.7 million.
During the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $92.7 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds from issuance of common stock in our IPO that closed in May 2019, partially offset by payment of offering costs related to our IPO.
Long-Term Debt
In June 2018, TransMedics entered into the Credit Agreement with OrbiMed, pursuant to which it borrowed $35.0 million.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest at an annual rate equal to the LIBOR subject to a minimum of 1.0% and a maximum of 4.0%, plus 8.5%, or the Applicable Margin, subject in the aggregate to a maximum interest rate of 11.5%. In addition, borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear paid-in-kind, or PIK interest, at an annual rate equal to the amount by which LIBOR plus the Applicable Margin exceeds 11.5%, but not to exceed 12.5%. The PIK interest is added to the principal amount of the borrowings outstanding at the end of each quarter until the maturity date of the Credit Agreement in June 2023. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement are repayable in quarterly interest-only payments until the maturity date, at which time all principal and accrued interest is due and payable. At our option, we may prepay outstanding borrowings under the Credit Agreement, subject to a prepayment premium that decreases annually. Our current prepayment premium is 4.5% and will decrease to zero in June 2021. We are also required to make a final payment in an amount equal to 3.0% of the principal amount of any prepayment or repayment, which we are accreting to interest expense over the term of the Credit Agreement using the effective interest method.
All obligations under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by us and each of our material subsidiaries. All obligations of us and each guarantor are secured by substantially all of our and each guarantor’s assets, including their intellectual property, subject to certain exceptions, including a perfected security interest in substantially all tangible and intangible assets of us and each guarantor. Under the Credit Agreement, we have agreed to certain affirmative and negative covenants to which we will remain subject until maturity. The covenants include maintaining a minimum liquidity amount of $3.0 million; the requirement, on an annual basis, to deliver to OrbiMed annual audited financial statements with an unqualified audit opinion from our independent registered public accounting firm; and restrictions on our activities, including limitations on dispositions, mergers or acquisitions; encumbering our intellectual property; incurring indebtedness or liens; paying dividends; making certain investments; and engaging in certain other business transactions. The obligations under the Credit Agreement are subject to acceleration upon the occurrence of specified events of default, including payment default, change in control, bankruptcy, insolvency, certain defaults under other material debt, certain events with respect to governmental approvals (if such events could cause a material adverse change in our business), failure to comply with certain covenants. including the minimum liquidity and unqualified audit opinion covenants, and a material adverse change in our business, operations or other financial condition. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all of the other covenants under the Credit Agreement.
Upon the occurrence of an event of default and until such event of default is no longer continuing, the Applicable Margin will increase by 4.0% per annum. If an event of default (other than certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency) occurs and is continuing, OrbiMed may declare all or any portion of the outstanding principal amount of the borrowings plus accrued and unpaid interest to be due and payable. Upon the occurrence of certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency, all of the outstanding principal amount of the borrowings plus accrued and unpaid interest will automatically become due and payable. In addition, we may be required to prepay outstanding borrowings, subject to certain exceptions, with portions of net cash proceeds of certain asset sales and certain casualty and condemnation events. While we do not expect that the transition from LIBOR, including any legal or regulatory changes made in response to its future phase out, or the risks related to its discontinuance will have a material effect on our financing costs, the impact is uncertain at this time.
Funding Requirements
As we continue to pursue and increase commercial sales of our OCS products, we expect our costs and expenses to increase in the future, particularly as we expand our sales and clinical adoption team, scale our manufacturing operation, continue research, development and clinical trial efforts, and seek regulatory approval for new products and product enhancements, including new indications, both in the United States and in select non-U.S. markets. In addition, following the closing of our IPO, we have incurred and expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. The timing and amount of our operating and capital expenditures will depend on many factors, including:
•
the amount of net revenue generated by sales of our OCS Consoles, OCS disposable sets and other products that may be approved in the United States and select non-U.S. markets;
•
the costs and expenses of expanding our U.S. and non-U.S. sales and marketing infrastructure and our manufacturing operations;
•
the extent to which our OCS products are adopted by the transplant community;
•
the ability of our customers to obtain adequate reimbursement from third-party payors for procedures performed using the OCS products;
•
the degree of success we experience in commercializing our OCS products for additional indications;
•
the costs, timing and outcomes of any future clinical studies and regulatory reviews, including to seek and obtain approvals for new indications for our OCS products;
•
the emergence of competing or complementary technologies;
•
the number and types of future products we develop and commercialize;
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications and maintaining, enforcing and defending intellectual property-related claims; and
•
the level of our selling, general and administrative expenses.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities will enable us to fund our operating expenses, capital expenditure requirements, and debt service payments for at least 12 months following the filing of our annual report on Form 10-K.
We may need to raise additional funding, which might not be available on favorable terms or at all. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Financial Position and Need for Additional Capital” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the effects that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods:
(1)
Amounts in table reflect payments due for our leases of office and laboratory space in Andover, Massachusetts under two operating lease agreements. For more information, see “Note 12. Commitments and Contingencies” to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2)
Amounts in table reflect the contractually required principal and interest payments payable under the Credit Agreement, under which borrowings bear interest at a variable rate. For purposes of this table, the interest due under the Credit Agreement was calculated using an assumed interest rate of 9.5% per annum, which was the interest rate in effect as of December 31, 2020. Because such interest rate is below the PIK interest threshold of 11.5%, we did not include PIK in our calculated payments.
In January 2021, we entered into an unconditional $9.5 million purchase commitment in the ordinary course of business, for goods with specified annual minimum quantities to be purchased through December 2029. The contract is not cancellable without penalty and therefore, our commitments in the table above will increase by $1.5 million in the next year, $2.0 million in 1-3 years, $2.0 million in years 3-5, and $4.0 million in more than 5 years.
We also enter into other contracts in the normal course of business with consulting firms, material suppliers and other third parties for clinical trials and testing and manufacturing services. These contracts do not contain minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable by us upon prior written notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including noncancelable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation. These payments are not included in the table above as the amount and timing of such payments are not known.
Inflation Risk
We do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. If our costs were to become subject to significant inflationary pressures, we may not be able to fully offset such higher costs through price increases. Our inability or failure to do so could harm our business, financial condition or results of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue primarily from sales of our single-use, organ-specific disposable sets (i.e., our organ-specific OCS Perfusion Sets sold together with our organ-specific OCS Solutions) used on our organ-specific OCS Consoles, each being a component of our OCS products. To a lesser extent, we also generate revenue from the sale of OCS Consoles to customers and from the implied rental of OCS Consoles loaned to customers at no charge. For each new transplant procedure, customers purchase an additional OCS disposable set for use on the customer’s existing organ-specific OCS Console.
We recognize revenue from sales to customers by applying the following five steps: (1) identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer, (2) identification of the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determination of the transaction price, (4) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognition of revenue when, or as, performance obligations are satisfied. Because all performance obligations of a customer order are delivered and recognized as revenue at the same time and because revenue allocated to performance obligations other than OCS disposable sets, such as implied rental income and service revenue, is insignificant, all components of revenue from customer contracts are classified as a single category of revenue in our consolidated statements of operations.
Substantially all of our customer contracts have multiple-performance obligations that contain deliverables consisting of OCS Perfusion Sets and OCS Solutions. In some of those contracts, the promises also include an OCS Console, whether sold or loaned to the customer. We evaluate each promise within a contract to determine whether it represents a distinct performance obligation. A performance obligation is distinct if (1) the product or service is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract and (2) the customer can benefit from the product or service on its own or with other resources that are readily available to the customer.
When a customer order includes an OCS Console, whether sold or loaned, we have determined that customer training and the equipment set-up of the OCS Console, each performed by us, are not distinct because they are not sold on a standalone basis and can only be performed by us in conjunction with a sale or loan of our OCS Console. In addition, we have determined that the OCS Console itself is not distinct because the customer cannot benefit from the OCS Console without the training and equipment set-up having been completed. As a result, when the order includes an OCS Console, we have concluded that training, OCS Console equipment set-up, and the OCS Console itself are highly interdependent and represent a single, combined performance obligation. Consequently, we do not recognize any revenue from any component of a customer order that includes an OCS Console, whether sold or loaned, until the OCS Console has arrived at the customer site and the training and equipment set-up have been completed by us. We have concluded that “transfer of control” of an OCS Console occurs only after the console has arrived at the customer site and the training and equipment set-up have been completed by us.
Some of our revenue has been generated from products sold in conjunction with the clinical trials conducted for our OCS products, under contracts referred to as customer clinical trial agreements. Under most of these customer clinical trial agreements, we place an organ-specific OCS Console at the customer site for its use free of charge for the duration of the clinical trial, and the customer separately purchases from us the OCS disposable sets used in each transplant procedure during the clinical trial. When we loan the OCS Console to the customer, we retain title to the console at all times and do not require minimum purchase commitments from the customer related to any OCS products. In such cases, we invoice the customer for OCS disposable sets based on customer orders received for each new transplant procedure and the prices set forth in the customer agreement. Over time, we typically recover the cost of the loaned OCS Console through the customer’s continued purchasing and use of additional OCS disposable sets. For these reasons, we have determined that part of the selling price for the disposable set is an implied rental payment for use of the OCS Console.
When a customer contract contains multiple-performance obligations that include a loan of an OCS Console for the customer’s use at the customer site as well as OCS disposable sets that are delivered simultaneously, we allocate the selling price between the lease deliverables (i.e., the OCS Console) and non-lease deliverables (i.e., the OCS disposable sets) based on the relative estimated standalone selling price, or SSP, of each distinct performance obligation. To date, the amounts allocated to lease deliverables have been insignificant. In determining SSP, we maximize observable inputs and consider a number of data points, including: (1) the pricing of standalone sales (in instances where available), (2) the pricing established by management when setting prices for deliverables that are intended to be sold on a standalone basis, (3) contractually stated prices for deliverables that are intended to be sold on a standalone basis, and (4) other pricing factors, such as the geographical region in which the products are sold and expected discounts based on the customer size and type.
Revenue is recognized when control of the OCS product or products is transferred to the customer in an amount that reflects the amount we expect to be entitled to in exchange for the product or products.
Performance Obligations
The primary performance obligations in our customer contracts from which we derive revenue are as follows:
•
OCS Console-The OCS Console is a medical device that houses and controls the function of the OCS. The performance obligation of the OCS Console includes customer training and equipment set-up. Revenue for each OCS Console is recognized at the point in time at which control is transferred to the customer, which is typically only after the console has arrived at the customer site and the training and equipment set-up have been completed by us because the customer cannot benefit from the OCS Console without the training and equipment set-up having been completed. At that time, we believe control has been transferred to the customer.
•
OCS Perfusion Set-The OCS Perfusion Set is a single-use disposable set that stores the organ and circulates blood. Revenue for each OCS Perfusion Set is recognized at the point in time at which control is transferred to the customer, which is when title transfers to the customer in connection with delivery. In most of our customer contracts, title to the OCS Perfusion Set transfers when the OCS Perfusion Set arrives at the customer site. In limited instances, title transfers upon shipment by us to the customer.
•
OCS Solutions-The OCS Solutions are a set of nutrient-enriched solutions to optimize the organ’s condition outside the human body. Revenue for each OCS Solution is recognized at the point in time at which control is transferred to the customer, which is when title transfers to the customer in connection with delivery. In most of our customer contracts, title to the OCS Solutions transfers when the OCS Solutions arrive at the customer site. In limited instances, title transfers upon shipment by us to the customer.
Payments Made to Customers
Under our customer contracts that include a customer clinical trial agreement, we receive payments from sales to the customer of its OCS products and also make payments to that customer for reimbursements of clinical trial costs, materials, and for specified clinical documentation related to the customer’s use of our OCS products. We also make payments to customers involved in post-approval studies for information related to the transplant procedures performed. We determine the appropriate accounting treatments for these payments depending on the nature of the payment and whether they are for distinct goods or services.
In these cases, we have determined that the payments made to the customer for reimbursement of clinical trial materials and its costs incurred to execute specific clinical trial protocols related to our OCS products do not provide us with a distinct good or service transferred by the customer, and, therefore, we record such payments as a reduction of revenue from the customer in our consolidated statements of operations. Reductions of revenue related to such payments made to customers for reimbursements are recognized when we recognize the revenue for the sale of our OCS disposable sets. For the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 28, 2019, we recorded as a reduction of revenue $2.7 million and $2.2 million, respectively, of reimbursable clinical trial costs.
In these same cases, we have also determined that payments made to the customer to obtain information related to post-approval studies or existing standard-of-care protocols (i.e., unrelated to our OCS products) do meet the criteria to be classified as a cost because we receive a distinct good or service transferred by the customer separate from the customer’s purchase of our OCS products and the price paid represents the fair value of the distinct good or service received by us. As a result, these payments made by us to customers for information related to post-approval studies or standard-of-care protocols are recorded as operating expenses. For the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 28, 2019, we recorded as operating expenses $1.6 million and $1.2 million, respectively, related to payments made to customers for information related to post-approval studies or existing standard-of-care protocols.
Variable Consideration
Revenue is reported net of any taxes assessed by a governmental authority that are directly imposed on a revenue-producing transaction (e.g., sales, use, and value added taxes). We only include estimated variable amounts in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved.
Revenue from reimbursements of out-of-pocket expenses, including travel, lodging, and meals, is accounted for as variable consideration and is insignificant.
We do not consider shipping to be a performance obligation. We record shipping costs billed to customers as revenue and records the associated costs incurred by us for those items as cost of revenue.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock-based option awards granted to employees, directors and non-employees based on their fair value on the date of the grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. Compensation expense for those awards is recognized over the requisite service which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. Generally, we issue awards with only service-based vesting conditions and record the expense for these awards using the straight-line method. We account for forfeitures as they occur and record compensation cost assuming all option holders will complete the requisite service period. If an award is forfeited, the Company reverses compensation expense previously recognized in the period the award is forfeited.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model uses as inputs the fair value of our common stock and assumptions we make for the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our common stock options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our common stock options, and our expected dividend yield.
Valuation of Inventory
We value inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost computed using the first-in, first-out method. We regularly review inventory quantities on-hand for excess and obsolete inventory and, when circumstances indicate, record charges to write down inventories to their estimated net realizable value, after evaluating historical sales, future demand, market conditions and expected product life cycles. Such charges are classified as cost of revenue in our consolidated statements of operations. Any write-down of inventory to net realizable value creates a new cost basis.
At the end of each reporting period, we assess whether losses should be accrued on long-term manufacturing purchase commitments in accordance with ASC 330, Inventory, which requires that losses that are expected to arise from firm, noncancelable and unhedged commitments for the future purchase of inventory, measured in the same way as inventory losses, should be recognized in the current period in the statements of operations unless they are deemed recoverable through firm sales contacts or when there are other circumstances that reasonably assure continuing sales without price decline. As of the end of each reporting period presented in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we did not identify any potential losses arising from remaining future purchase commitments as compared to estimated future customer sales through the remainder of the term of the manufacturing purchase commitment and, as a result, did not recognize in a current period any loss provision for future-period remaining purchase commitments.
Backlog
We define backlog as contractually committed orders for our products for which the associated revenue has not been recognized and the customer has not been invoiced. Amounts that have been invoiced but not yet recognized as revenue are reported as deferred revenue on our consolidated balance sheets and are not included in our calculation of backlog. As of December 31, 2020 and December 28, 2019, we had backlog of $0.5 million. Of the amount of backlog as of December 31, 2020, we expect that substantially all of it will be invoiced to customers within the following 12 months. However, because our customers may cancel, change or reschedule orders without penalty at any time prior to shipment, we have no assurance that we will be able to convert our backlog into shipped orders.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.