ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
General Overview
Our principal business is residential homebuilding and the development of lifestyle communities with operations geographically focused in Arizona, California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Nevada, North and South Carolina, Oregon, Texas, and Washington. We serve a wide array of consumer groups from coast to coast, including entry-level, move-up, and active adult buyers, building single and multi-family attached and detached homes. Our homebuilding company operates under our Taylor Morrison and Darling Homes, and our recently acquired William Lyon Signature, brand names. We also have an exclusive partnership with Christopher Todd Communities in our “Build-to-Rent” business. (Refer to Item 1. Business for additional discussion regarding Build-to-Rent.) In addition, as part of our acquisition of WLH, we acquired Urban Form Development, LLC (“Urban Form”), which primarily develops and constructs multi-use properties consisting of commercial space, retail, and multi-family properties. We also have operations which provide financial services to customers through our wholly owned mortgage subsidiary, Taylor Morrison Home Funding, INC (“TMHF”), title services through our wholly owned title services subsidiary, Inspired Title Services, LLC (“Inspired Title”), and homeowner’s insurance policies through our insurance agency, Taylor Morrison Insurance Services, LLC (“TMIS”). Our business as of December 31, 2020, is organized into multiple homebuilding operating components, and a financial services component, all of which are managed as four reportable segments: East, Central, West and Financial Services, as follows:
Annual Overview and Business Strategy
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the national economy, our industry, and various areas within our operations; however, the demand for housing has remained strong. We believe strong demand is, in part, attributable to an increase in families working and learning from home. There has been an increase in the need for indoor space and outdoor living. Furthermore, the instability in several major cities throughout the United States has driven people to search for homes in more suburban areas on the outskirts of cities, which are areas in which we typically build. We experienced price appreciation in our markets and utilized price increases to slow our net sales orders pace. Interest rates have remained low and our buyer profile has remained strong, driving demand even further.
While we are encouraged by certain positive and improved trends during recent months, several challenges still exist, such as lingering underemployment concerns, stagnation in real wages and real or perceived personal wealth, national and global economic uncertainty and uncertainty around the interest rate environment. As it relates to COVID-19, we are also challenged by shortages in the labor supply, partially driven by social distancing measures, uncertainty of future local, state and national mandates, and the overall impact the virus can have on the general population. While certain regions of the United States are in various stages of reopening, the United States continues to struggle with rolling outbreaks of the virus, and the effects of COVID-19 could continue to impact our financial condition and results of operations. Due to uncertainty surrounding this ongoing public health crisis and its continued impact on the U.S. economy, we cannot fully predict either the near-term or long-term effects that the pandemic will have on our business. Although customer traffic and sales initially slowed following the imposition of social distancing and government-mandated economic shutdowns in March 2020, resulting in higher rates of cancellation than usual as a result of buyers' economic uncertainty, we saw a recovery in all of our metrics, including net sales orders, average sales pace per community, home closings, and cancellation rate throughout the remainder of the year. However, the duration and magnitude of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic remains unknown, and could adversely affect our business in future periods.
Because residential construction was designated as an essential business in nearly all of our operating markets, our construction operations continued wherever appropriate during the year, despite the shelter-in-place orders and other restrictions on commercial activity. All Company operations have been conducted in compliance with federal, state, and local COVID-19 guidelines, orders, and ordinances applicable to construction and homebuilding activities. Since the height of the pandemic, the majority of the states in which we operate have begun to gradually resume normal business operations, and we have continued our construction operations in each of those states. From the beginning of the pandemic, we have taken and continue to take a number of strategic actions in response to the COVID-19 crisis to continue to provide uninterrupted service
to our customers while protecting their health and safety, as well as that of our employees and vendors. Specifically, we have focused on transforming our customer experience online through innovative digital options, including (i) shifting to a remote selling environment; (ii) providing virtual options for online home tours, design center selections and new home demonstrations; and (iii) offering “curbside” or “drive thru” closings nationwide.
To mitigate the inherent business impacts and the uncertainty of the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented initiatives across the company to reduce all non-essential expenses and capital expenditures, including but not limited to temporarily reducing or deferring new land acquisitions, phasing development, and implementing a revised cadence on all new inventory home starts. These actions may reduce growth and cause a decline of our lot count and the volume of homes delivered in future periods.
Although we intentionally reduced our forecasted land spend for the year ended December 31, 2020, we continue to allocate capital and manage our land portfolio to acquire assets that have attractive characteristics, including good access to schools, shopping, recreation and transportation facilities. In connection with our overall land inventory management and investment process, our management team reviews these considerations, as well as other financial metrics, in order to decide the highest and best use of our capital.
We intend to maintain a consistent approach to land positioning within our regions, markets and communities in the foreseeable future in an effort to concentrate a greater amount of our land inventory in attractive areas. We also intend to continue to combine our land development expertise with our homebuilding operations to increase the flexibility of our business and to optimize our margin performance. From time to time, we may sell land in our communities if we believe it is best for our overall strategy and operations. We do not expect such sales to have a significant effect on our overall results, but they may impact our overall gross margins.
Factors Affecting Comparability of Results
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $127.2 million of costs relating to our acquisition of WLH. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized aggregate costs of $10.7 million relating to our acquisitions of WLH and AV Homes. For the year ended December 31, 2018, we recognized $30.8 million of costs relating to the AV Homes Acquisition. Such costs are recognized in Transaction and corporate reorganization expenses on the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $74.1 million of expense relating to purchase accounting for WLH. Of that expense, $69.7 million is included in cost of home closings and $4.4 million is included in cost of land closings. No such expenses were recognized for the years ended December 31, 2019 or December 31, 2018.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $10.2 million and $5.8 million of expense relating to losses on our extinguishment of debt, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2018, we did not incur a loss on extinguishment of debt.
As of December 31, 2019, our assets in Chicago were held for sale and as a result we adjusted the fair value of the assets within this division to the lower of fair value (less costs to sell) or net book value. In addition, we wrote off other components of the operations in accordance with the guidance set forth in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment. For the year ended December 31, 2019, total impacts to the Consolidated Statement of Operations include the following: Cost of home closings impact of $0.7 million, Cost of land closings impact of $9.9 million, Sales, commissions and other marketing costs impact of $0.4 million, General and administrative expenses impact of $1.1 million and Other expense, net impact of $1.2 million. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2018, we did not have significant fair value adjustments relating to assets reclassified as held for sale.
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, we recognized an incremental $43.1 million and $39.3 million of warranty charges in our Central region, respectively, due to a construction defect issue which was isolated to one specific community. Although we believe we have identified substantially all homes impacted by the issue, it is reasonably possible that the estimated liability will change as a result of our evaluation of potential changes in the estimated repair costs and the number of homes impacted. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not incur or recognize incremental warranty charges relating to this defect issue.
On October 26, 2018, in connection with our corporate reorganization, all assets remaining in our Canadian subsidiary were contributed to a subsidiary in the United States. As a result, $20.1 million of unrecognized Accumulated other comprehensive loss on foreign currency translation was recognized as a component of Transaction and corporate reorganization expenses on
the Consolidated Statement of Operations. In addition, we recognized $15.3 million in non-resident Canadian withholding taxes from the Canada Unwind in Income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2018. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not incur or recognize corporate reorganization expenses or taxes associated with such reorganization.
Critical Accounting Policies
General
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by management, which have a material impact on the carrying value of assets and liabilities and the recognition of income and expenses. The estimates and assumptions used by management are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The significant accounting policies that management believes are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are critical accounting policies and are described below.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The standard's core principle requires an entity to recognize revenue when it transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
Home and land closings revenue
Under ASC 606, the following steps are applied to determine the proper home closings revenue and land closings revenue recognition: (1) we identify the contract(s) with our customer; (2) we identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) we determine the transaction price; (4) we allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) we recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy the performance obligation. For our home sales transactions, we have one contract, with one performance obligation, with each customer to build and deliver a home (or develop and deliver land). Based on the application of the five steps, the following summarizes the timing and manner of home and land sales revenue:
•Revenue from closings of residential real estate is recognized when closings have occurred, the buyer has made the required minimum down payment, obtained necessary financing, the risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to the buyer, and we have no continuing involvement with the property, which is generally upon the close of escrow. Revenue is reported net of any discounts and incentives.
•Revenue from land sales is recognized when a significant down payment is received, title passes and collectability of the receivable is reasonably assured, and we have no continuing involvement with the property, which is generally upon the close of escrow.
Amenity and other revenue
We own and operate certain amenities such as golf courses, club houses, and fitness centers, which require us to provide club members with access to the facilities in exchange for the payment of club dues. We collect club dues and other fees from the club members, which are invoiced on a monthly basis. Revenue from our golf club operations is also included in amenity and other revenue. Amenity and other revenue also includes revenue from the sale of assets which include multi-use properties as part of our Urban Form operations.
Financial services revenue
Mortgage operations and hedging activity related to financial services are not within the scope of Topic 606 and are recognized at the time the related real estate transactions are completed, usually upon the close of escrow. All of the loans TMHF originates are sold to third party investors within a short period of time, on a non-recourse basis. Gains and losses from the sale of mortgages are recognized in accordance with ASC Topic 860-20, Sales of Financial Assets. TMHF generally does not have continuing involvement with the transferred assets; therefore, we derecognize the mortgage loans at time of sale, based on the difference between the selling price and carrying value of the related loans upon sale, recording a gain/loss on
sale in the period of sale. Also included in financial services revenue/expenses is the realized and unrealized gains and losses from hedging instruments.
Real Estate Inventory Valuation and Costing
Inventory consists of raw land, land under development, homes under construction, completed homes, and model homes, all of which are stated at cost. In addition to direct carrying costs, we also capitalize interest, real estate taxes, and related development costs that benefit the entire community, such as field construction supervision and related direct overhead. Home vertical construction costs are accumulated and charged to cost of sales at the time of home closing using the specific identification method. Land acquisition, development, interest, and real estate taxes are allocated to homes and units generally using the relative sales value method. Generally, all overhead costs relating to purchasing, the vertical construction of a home, and construction utilities are considered overhead costs and are allocated on a per unit basis. These costs are capitalized to inventory from the point development begins to the point construction is completed. Changes in estimated costs to be incurred in a community are generally allocated to the remaining lots on a prospective basis. For those communities that have been temporarily closed or development has been discontinued, we do not allocate interest or other costs to the community’s inventory until activity resumes. Such costs are expensed as incurred.
The life cycle of the community generally ranges from two to five years, commencing with the acquisition of unentitled or entitled land, continuing through the land development phase and concluding with the sale, construction and delivery of homes. Actual community lives will vary based on the size of the community, the sales absorption rate and whether we purchased the property as raw land or as finished lots.
We capitalize qualifying interest costs to inventory during the development and construction periods. Capitalized interest is charged to cost of sales when the related inventory is charged to cost of sales.
We assess the recoverability of our inventory in accordance with the provisions of ASC Topic 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment. We review our real estate inventory for indicators of impairment on a community-level basis during each reporting period. If indicators of impairment are present for a community, generally, an undiscounted cash flow analysis is prepared in order to determine if the carrying value of the assets in that community exceeds the undiscounted cash flows. Generally, if the carrying value of the assets exceeds their estimated undiscounted cash flows, the assets are potentially impaired, requiring a fair value analysis. Our determination of fair value is primarily based on a discounted cash flow model which includes projections and estimates relating to sales prices, construction costs, sales pace, and other factors. However, fair value can be determined through other methods, such as appraisals, contractual purchase offers, and other third party opinions of value. Changes in these expectations may lead to a change in the outcome of our impairment analysis, and actual results may also differ from our assumptions.
In certain cases, we may elect to cease development and/or marketing of an existing community if we believe the economic performance of the community would be maximized by deferring development for a period of time to allow for market conditions to improve. We refer to such communities as long-term strategic assets. The decision may be based on financial and/or operational metrics as determined by us. If we decide to cease development, we will evaluate the project for impairment and then cease future development and marketing activity until such a time when we believe that market conditions have improved and economic performance can be maximized. Our assessment of the carrying value of our long-term strategic assets typically includes subjective estimates of future performance, including the timing of when development will recommence, the type of product to be offered, and the margin to be realized. In the future, some of these inactive communities may be re-opened while others may be sold.
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into various specific performance agreements to acquire lots. Real estate not owned under these agreements is reflected in Consolidated real estate not owned with a corresponding liability in Liabilities attributable to consolidated real estate not owned in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As a method of acquiring land in staged takedowns, while limiting risk and minimizing the use of funds from our available cash or other financing sources, we may transfer our right under certain specific performance agreements acquired in the acquisition of WLH to entities owned by third parties (“land banking arrangements”). These entities use equity contributions from their owners and/or incur debt to finance the acquisition and development of the land. The entities grant us an option to acquire lots in staged takedowns. In consideration for this option, we make a non-refundable deposit of 15% to 25% of the total purchase price. We are not legally obligated to purchase the balance of the lots, but would forfeit any existing deposits and could be subject to financial and other penalties if the lots were not purchased. We do not have an ownership interest in these entities or title to their assets and do not guarantee their liabilities. These land banking arrangements help us manage the financial and market risk associated with land holdings.
Insurance Costs, Self-Insurance Reserves and Warranty Reserves
We have certain deductible limits for each of our policies under our workers’ compensation, automobile, and general liability insurance policies, and we record warranty expense and liabilities for the estimated costs of potential claims for construction defects. The excess liability limits are $50 million per occurrence, aggregated annually and applied in excess of automobile liability, employer’s liability under workers compensation and general liability policies. We also generally require our subcontractors and design professionals to indemnify us and provide evidence of insurance for liabilities arising from their work, subject to certain limitations. We are the parent of Beneva Indemnity Company (“Beneva”), which provides insurance coverage for construction defects discovered up to ten years following the close of a home, coverage for premise operations risk, and from time to time, property damage. We accrue for the expected costs associated with the deductibles and self-insured amounts under our various insurance policies based on historical claims, estimates for claims incurred but not reported, and potential for recovery of costs from insurance and other sources. The estimates are subject to significant variability due to factors, such as claim settlement patterns, litigation trends, and the extended period of time in which a construction defect claim might be made after the closing of a home.
We offer a one-year limited warranty to cover various defects in workmanship or materials, a two-year limited warranty on certain systems (such as electrical or cooling systems), and a ten-year limited warranty on structural defects. In addition, any outstanding warranties which were offered by our acquired companies are also honored. Warranty reserves are established as homes close in an amount estimated to be adequate to cover expected costs of materials and outside labor during warranty periods. Our warranty is not considered a separate deliverable in the sales arrangement since it is not priced apart from the home; therefore, it is accounted for in accordance with ASC Topic 450, Contingencies, which states that warranties that are not separately priced are generally accounted for by accruing the estimated costs to fulfill the warranty obligation. The amount of revenue related to the product is recognized in full upon the delivery of the home if all other criteria for revenue recognition have been met. As a result, we accrue the estimated costs to fulfill the warranty obligation at the time a home closes, as a component of Cost of home closings on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Our loss reserves are based on factors that include an actuarial study for structural, historical and anticipated claims, trends related to similar product types, number of home closings, and geographical areas. We also provide third-party warranty coverage on homes where required by Federal Housing Administration or Veterans Administration lenders. We regularly review the reasonableness and adequacy of our reserves and make adjustments to the balance of the preexisting reserves to reflect changes in trends and historical data as information becomes available. Self-insurance and warranty reserves are included in Accrued expenses and other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Investments in Unconsolidated Entities and Variable Interest Entities (VIEs)
We are involved in joint ventures with related and unrelated third parties for homebuilding and development activities. We use the equity method of accounting for entities over which we exercise significant influence but do not have a controlling interest over the operating and financial policies of the investee. For unconsolidated entities in which we function as the managing member, we have evaluated the rights held by our joint venture partners and determined that they have substantive participating rights that preclude the presumption of control. For joint ventures accounted for using the equity method, our share of net earnings or losses is included in equity in income of unconsolidated entities when earned and distributions are credited against its investment in the joint venture when received. These joint ventures are recorded in investments in unconsolidated entities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
We evaluate our investments in unconsolidated joint ventures for indicators of impairment. A series of operating losses of an investee or other factors may indicate that a decrease in value of our investment in the unconsolidated entity has occurred which is other-than-temporary. The amount of impairment recognized is the excess of the investment’s carrying amount over its estimated fair value. Additionally, we consider various qualitative factors to determine if a decrease in the value of the investment is other-than-temporary. These factors include age of the venture, stage in its life cycle, our intent and ability to recover our investment in the unconsolidated entity, financial condition and long-term prospects of the unconsolidated entity, short-term liquidity needs of the unconsolidated entity, trends in the general economic environment of the land, entitlement status of the land held by the unconsolidated entity, overall projected returns on investment, defaults under contracts with third parties (including bank debt), recoverability of the investment through future cash flows and relationships with the other partners. If we believe that the decline in the fair value of the investment is temporary, then no impairment is recorded.
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into land and lot option purchase contracts in order to procure land or lots for the construction of homes. Lot option contracts enable us to control significant lot positions with a minimal initial capital investment and substantially reduce the risks associated with land ownership and development. In accordance with ASC Topic
810, Consolidation, we have concluded that when we enter into an option or purchase agreement to acquire land or lots and pay a non-refundable deposit, a VIE may be created because we are deemed to have provided subordinated financial support that will absorb some or all of an entity’s expected losses if they occur. If we are the primary beneficiary of the VIE, we will consolidate the VIE in our Consolidated Financial Statements and reflect such assets and liabilities as real estate not owned under option agreements within our inventory balance in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Valuation of Deferred Tax Assets
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method, which requires that deferred tax assets and liabilities be recognized based on future tax consequences of both temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply in the years in which the temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in earnings in the period when the changes are enacted.
In accordance with ASC Topic 740-10, Income Taxes, we evaluate our deferred tax assets by tax jurisdiction, including the benefit from net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards by tax jurisdiction, to determine if a valuation allowance is required. Companies must assess, using significant judgments, whether a valuation allowance should be established based on the consideration of all available evidence using a “more likely than not” standard with significant weight being given to evidence that can be objectively verified. This assessment considers, among other matters, the nature, frequency and severity of current and cumulative losses, forecasts of future profitability, the length of statutory carryforward periods, experience with operating losses and experience of utilizing tax credit carryforwards and tax planning alternatives.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
Non-GAAP Measures
In addition to the results reported in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”), we have provided information in this annual report relating to: (i) adjusted income before income taxes and related margin, (ii) EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA, (iii) adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share, (iv) net homebuilding debt to capitalization ratio, and (v) adjusted home closings gross margin.
Adjusted income before income taxes (and related margin) is a non-GAAP financial measure that reflects our income before income taxes excluding the impact of purchase accounting adjustments related to the acquisition of WLH, transaction expenses, loss on extinguishment of debt, inventory impairment and warranty charges and legal costs relating thereto and the write-off of our Chicago operations, as applicable. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures that measure performance by adjusting net income before allocation to non-controlling interests to exclude interest income/(expense), net, amortization of capitalized interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA), non-cash compensation expense, if any, purchase accounting adjustments relating to the acquisition of WLH, transaction expenses, loss on extinguishment of debt, inventory impairment and warranty charges and legal costs relating thereto and the write-off of our Chicago operations, as applicable.Adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share are non-GAAP financial measures that reflect the net income available to the Company excluding the impact of purchase accounting adjustments relating to the acquisition of WLH, transaction expenses, loss on extinguishment of debt, inventory impairment and warranty charges and legal costs relating thereto, the write-off of our Chicago operations and the tax impact due to such adjustments, as applicable. Net homebuilding debt to capitalization ratio is a non-GAAP financial measure we calculate by dividing (i) total debt, less unamortized debt issuance costs/premiums and mortgage warehouse borrowings, net of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents, by (ii) total capitalization (the sum of net homebuilding debt and total stockholders’ equity). Adjusted home closings gross margin is a non-GAAP financial measure based on GAAP home closings gross margin (which is inclusive of capitalized interest), excluding purchase accounting adjustments relating to the acquisition of WLH and inventory impairment and warranty charges, as applicable.
Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate our performance on a consolidated basis, as well as the performance of our regions, and to set targets for performance-based compensation. We also use the ratio of net homebuilding debt to total capitalization as an indicator of overall leverage and to evaluate our performance against other companies in the homebuilding industry. In the future, we may include additional adjustments in the above-described non-GAAP financial measures to the extent we deem them appropriate and useful to management and investors.
We believe that adjusted income before income taxes and related margin, adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share, as well as EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA, are useful for investors in order to allow them to evaluate our operations without the effects of various items we do not believe are characteristic of our ongoing operations or performance and also because such metrics assist both investors and management in analyzing and benchmarking the performance and value of our business. Adjusted EBITDA also provides an indicator of general economic performance that is not affected by fluctuations in interest rates or effective tax rates, levels of depreciation or amortization, or unusual items.Because we use the ratio of net homebuilding debt to total capitalization to evaluate our performance against other companies in the homebuilding industry, we believe this measure is also relevant and useful to investors for that reason. We believe that adjusted home closings gross margin is useful to investors because it allows investors to evaluate the performance of our homebuilding operations without the varying effects of items or transactions we do not believe are characteristic of our ongoing operations or performance.
These non-GAAP financial measures should be considered in addition to, rather than as a substitute for, the comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures of our operating performance or liquidity. Although other companies in the homebuilding industry may report similar information, their definitions may differ. We urge investors to understand the methods used by other companies to calculate similarly-titled non-GAAP financial measures before comparing their measures to ours.
(1) WLH related purchase accounting adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes $69.7 million and $4.4 million homebuilding and land purchase accounting adjustments, respectively.
(2) Transaction and corporate reorganization expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 consist of all costs relating to our acquisitions of WLH and AV Homes, respectively, which include investment banking fees, severance, compensation, legal fees, expenses relating to credit facility paydowns and terminations, and other various integration costs. Transaction and corporate reorganization expenses for the year ended December 31, 2018 consists of all costs, excluding taxes, associated with the corporate reorganization and Canada Unwind in addition to acquisition related costs for the acquisition of AV Homes, which include investment banking fees, severance, compensation, legal fees and other various integration costs.
See also “ - Segment Home Closings Gross Margins and Adjusted Gross Margins” for the reconciliation of adjusted home closings gross margin.
The following tables and related discussion set forth key operating and financial data for our operations as of and for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. For similar operating and financial data and discussion of our fiscal 2019 results compared to our fiscal 2018 results, refer to Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” under Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the SEC on February 19, 2020, and is incorporated herein by reference.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Average Active Selling Communities
Average active selling communities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 10.0% when compared to the same period in the prior year. The increase was primarily attributable to new communities from our acquisition of WLH, partially offset by scheduled and unscheduled, early community close outs. The unscheduled close outs were the result of our strong sales environment which drove certain communities to sell out ahead of schedule. The legacy WLH operations are primarily in the Western United States which drove the increases in the West region.
Net Sales Orders(1)
(1)Net sales orders represent the number and dollar value of new sales contracts executed with customers, net of cancellations.
East:
The number of net sales orders and sales value of homes increased by 11.8% and 20.5%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The increase in net sales orders was primarily due to increased demand in most of our Florida markets compared to the prior year. Our Florida markets, including the active adult market, gained strength during the second half of the year despite the impacts of COVID-19. In addition, sales order pace increased by 19% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year, which further contributed to the increase in net sales orders. Market appreciation along with product and geographical mix contributed to the change in average selling price.
Central:
The number of net sales orders and sales value of homes increased by 28.1% and 27.5%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The increase in net sales orders stemmed primarily from our Austin and Denver markets as a result of an increase in average outlets from the acquisition of WLH in those two particular markets. In addition, sales order pace increased by 37% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year.
West:
The number of net sales orders and sales value of homes both more than doubled for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. Additional active selling communities resulting from the acquisition of WLH was the primary
contributor to the increase in net sales orders. The increase in average selling price was a result of product and geographical mix driven by the acquired WLH communities.
Sales Order Cancellations
(1) Cancellation rate represents the number of canceled sales orders divided by gross sales orders.
The total company cancellation rate decreased to 12.4% from 12.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. Our cancellation rate increased in the first half of the year as a result of the early impacts of COVID-19, which we believe was driven by an overall decrease in consumer confidence in general and the confidence of potential homebuyers in particular. However, our cancellation rate improved in the second half of 2020 which exemplifies the returning consumer confidence after several months have passed since the onset of the pandemic.
Sales Order Backlog
(1) Sales order backlog represents homes under contract for which revenue has not yet been recognized at the end of the period (including homes sold but not yet started). Some of the contracts in our sales order backlog are subject to contingencies including mortgage loan approval and buyers selling their existing homes, which can result in future cancellations.
Total backlog units and total sales value increased by 78.4% and 85.8% at December 31, 2020, respectively, compared to December 31, 2019. The increase in backlog units and sales value was primarily due to increased active selling communities resulting from the acquisition of WLH, which contributed approximately 1,800 units for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in average selling price in each region for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year was as a result of product and geographical mix shifts across all segments and increases in demand, driving prices higher.
Home Closings Revenue
East:
The number of homes closed and home closings revenue, net decreased by 5.6% and 2.9%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The decrease in both units and dollars for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year was primarily due to community close outs in higher paced outlets in several of our Florida markets. In addition, the East region experienced a decrease in both units and dollars during the second quarter of 2020 as a result of COVID-19 impacts which further contributed to the year-over-year decrease in both units and dollars. Geographical
and product mix along with market price appreciation contributed to the increase in the average selling price of homes closed for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year.
Central:
The number of homes closed and home closings revenue, net increased by 27.4% and 22.0%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The increases in both units and dollars were primarily due to the acquisition of WLH, as well as the Central region experiencing a higher opening backlog in the current year period compared to the prior year. The 4.4% decrease in average selling price for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year was the result of product and geographical mix. In addition, acquired WLH communities have a greater entry-level buyer presence in this region than legacy TMHC communities and therefore a lower average selling price.
West:
The number of homes closed and home closings revenue, net increased by approximately 83.6% and 72.5%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The increase in both units and dollars was primarily due to the increase in active selling communities resulting from the acquisition of WLH. The 6.0% decrease in average selling price for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year was the result of product and geographical mix. In addition, acquired WLH communities, specifically in the Washington and Oregon markets, have a lower average selling price than legacy TMHC communities.
Land Closings Revenue
We generally purchase land and lots with the intent to build and sell homes. However, in some locations where we act as a developer, we occasionally purchase land that includes commercially zoned parcels or areas designated for school or government use, which we typically sell to commercial developers or municipalities, as applicable. We also sell residential lots or land parcels to manage our land and lot supply on larger tracts of land. Land and lot sales occur at various intervals and varying degrees of profitability. Therefore, the revenue and gross margin from land closings will fluctuate from period to period, depending on market conditions and opportunities. Land closings revenue was $65.3 million and $27.1 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The increase in the East region was due to the sale of our Chicago operations and certain commercial assets. The increases in the Central and West regions were due to land sales from lots acquired through the WLH acquisition.
Amenity and Other Revenue
Several of our communities operate amenities such as golf courses, club houses, and fitness centers. We provide club members access to the amenity facilities and other services in exchange for club dues and fees. Corporate includes the activity relating to our Urban Form operations from the acquisition of WLH. Urban Form primarily develops and constructs multi-use properties which consist of commercial space, retail, and multi-family units. Urban Form sold an asset during the year ended December 31, 2020, generating $24.7 million in revenue.
Segment Home Closings Gross Margins and Adjusted Gross Margins
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of adjusted home closings gross margin to GAAP home closings gross margin on a segment basis (see “Non-GAAP Measures” above for additional information about our use of non-GAAP measures).
East:
Home closings gross margin percentage increased to 17.2% from 16.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, primarily due to price and product mix in our Florida markets. In addition, several markets in the East experienced higher vendor rebates due to increased scale from our acquisitions, which was partially offset by higher land and development costs for the current year compared to the prior year. Inventory impairment charges had a 50 basis point negative impact on margin for the year ended December 31, 2020, whereas inventory impairment and warranty charges had a 10 basis point negative impact on margin for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Central:
Home closings gross margin percentage increased to 18.9% from 14.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Adjusted home closings gross margin increased to 20.6% from 17.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by an increase in demand in the majority of our Central region's markets, which had lower construction costs. In addition, geographic mix, product mix, and price appreciation also contributed to the increase in home closings margin percentage for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. Home closings gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was negatively impacted by 170 basis points as a result of purchase accounting adjustments from the acquisition of WLH. Inventory impairment and warranty charges negatively impacted home closings gross margin by 370 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2019.
West:
Home closings gross margin percentage decreased to 14.7% from 20.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Adjusted home closings gross margin decreased to 16.5% from 20.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in home closings gross margin and adjusted home closings gross margin were primarily impacted by product and geographical mix within WLH communities which yielded a lower homebuilding gross margin than our legacy TMHC markets. In addition, home closings gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was negatively impacted by 180 basis points as a result of purchase accounting adjustments from the acquisition of WLH in several of the markets in the West.
Financial Services
Our Financial Services segment provides mortgage lending through our subsidiary, TMHF, title services through our subsidiary, Inspired Title, and homeowner's insurance policies through our insurance agency, TMIS. The following is a summary for the periods presented of financial services income before income taxes as well as supplemental data:
(1) Financial services transaction expenses represents the amount of one-time costs relating to the acquisition of WLH which are included in Transaction and corporate reorganization expenses on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Financial services revenue increased by 67.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in the prior year. The increase in financial services revenue was due to increased mortgage closings primarily arising from the acquisition of WLH and an increase in success rate.
Sales, Commissions and Other Marketing Costs
Sales, commissions and other marketing costs, as a percentage of home closings revenue, net, decreased to 6.4% from 6.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in the prior year. The decrease was primarily driven by leverage from an increase in home closings revenue, net as well as our initiatives to reduce non-essential expenses as a result of COVID-19.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses as a percentage of home closings revenue, net, decreased to 3.3% from 3.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in the prior year. The decrease was primarily driven by an increase in home closings revenue, net as well as our initiatives to reduce all non-essential expenses as a result of COVID-19.
Equity in Income of Unconsolidated Entities
Equity in income of unconsolidated entities was $11.2 million and $9.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our joint ventures relating to our financial services segment experienced an increase in income for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, partially offset by several of our homebuilding joint ventures nearing close out.
Interest Income, net
Interest income, net was $1.6 million and $2.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Interest income, net includes interest earned on cash balances offset by interest incurred but not capitalized on our long-term debt and other borrowings.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $23.1 million and $7.2 million, respectively. The current year included higher pre-acquisition costs on abandoned land projects. In addition, our estimated development liability for the year ended December 31, 2020, was increased as a result of higher estimated costs to complete.
Transaction and corporate reorganization expenses
Transaction expenses were $127.2 million and $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Transaction expenses for the current year consisted of acquisition related costs from the acquisition of WLH, which include investment banking fees, severance, compensation, legal fees, expenses relating to credit facility paydowns and terminations, and other various integration costs. Transaction expenses for the prior year consisted of acquisition related costs from the acquisition of AV Homes which closed in the fourth quarter of 2018 and includes investment banking fees, severance, compensation, legal fees and other various integration costs.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt, Net
Loss on extinguishment of debt was $10.2 million and $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we redeemed the entire principal amount of the 2023 6.00% Senior Notes as well as the 2025 5.875% Senior Notes, and as a result of the early redemption, we recorded a total net loss of $10.2 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we redeemed the entire principal amount of our 2021 5.25% Senior Notes and 2022 6.625% Senior Notes and as a result, we recorded a total net loss on extinguishment of debt of $5.8 million.
Income Tax Provision
Our effective tax rate was 23.0% and 20.9% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Our effective rate for both years was affected by a number of factors including state income taxes, disallowed executive compensation expense, changes to reserves for uncertain tax positions, adjustments to deferred tax assets, and energy tax credits relating to homebuilding activities. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was favorably impacted by a tax benefit from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) which contains a number of economic relief provisions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was unfavorably impacted by certain expenses related to the acquisition of WLH which are not deductible for tax purposes. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was favorably impacted by legislation enacted during the year which reinstated an income tax credit under Section 45L of the Internal Revenue Code for building energy efficient homes.
Net Income
Net income before allocation to non-controlling interests and diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $249.5 million and $1.88, respectively. Net income before allocation to non-controlling interests and diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $254.9 million and $2.35, respectively. The decreases in net income and earnings per share in the current year compared to the prior year was primarily due to an increase in transaction expenses and purchase accounting adjustments relating to the acquisition of WLH.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
We finance our operations through the following:
•Cash generated from operations;
•Borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility;
•Our various series of Senior Notes;
•Mortgage warehouse facilities;
•Project-level real estate financing (including non-recourse loans, land banking, and joint ventures); and
•Performance, payment and completion surety bonds, and letters of credit.
We believe we have adequate capital resources from cash generated from operations and sufficient access to external financing sources from borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility to conduct our operations for the next 12 months.
We may also access the capital markets to obtain additional liquidity through debt and equity offerings on an opportunistic basis. Generally, our principal uses of capital relate to land purchases, lot development, home construction, operating expenses, payment of debt service, income taxes, investments in joint ventures, stock repurchases, and the payment of various liabilities.
Cash flows for each of our communities depend on the status of the development cycle, and can differ substantially from reported earnings. Early stages of development or expansion require significant cash expenditures for land acquisitions, on and off-site development, construction of model homes, general landscaping and other amenities. Because these costs are a component of our inventory and are not recognized in our statement of operations until a home closes, we incur significant cash outflows prior to recognition of earnings.
In response to emerging trends in the mortgage business, our wholly-owned mortgage subsidiary, during the first quarter of 2020, TMHF began retaining mortgage servicing rights (“MSRs”) on certain of the loans it originates. Servicing advances TMHF makes may be subject to delays in recovery to the extent the loans we service go into forbearance or delinquency. We do not currently expect our MSR portfolio to become a significant part of TMHF’s business, though a substantial increase in the volume of loans that we service coupled with a significant increase in the number of such loans which become delinquent or subject to forbearance, could affect TMHF’s short-term liquidity and revenue from operations.
The table below summarizes our total cash and liquidity as of the dates indicated (in thousands):
Cash Flow Activities
Operating Cash Flow Activities
Our net cash provided by operating activities was $1.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $393.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash provided by operating activities was primarily attributable to an increase in homes closed and a decrease in real estate inventory, exclusive of real estate added as a result of WLH, and an increase in customer deposits.
Investing Cash Flow Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $312.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net cash used in investing activities of $19.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to the acquisition of WLH.
Financing Cash Flow Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $604.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $377.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash used in financing activities was primarily due to our repayments of the 2023 6.00% Senior Notes and 2025 5.875% Senior Notes. In addition, our repayments on mortgage warehouse borrowings increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Debt Instruments
For information regarding our debt instruments, including the terms governing our Senior Notes and our Revolving Credit Facility, see Note 9 - Debt in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this annual report.
Financial Guarantees
The following table summarizes our letters of credit and surety bonds as of the dates indicated:
(1) As of December 31, 2019, there was $77.7 million of letters of credit outstanding under the prior revolving credit facility. Additional letters of credit outstanding were under other various borrowing facilities. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there was $200.0 million and $160 million, respectively, total capacity of letters of credit available under our Revolving Credit Facility.
Contractual Obligations as of December 31, 2020
(1) Estimated interest expense amounts for debt outstanding at the respective contractual interest rates, the weighted average of which was 5.8% as of December 31, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements as of December 31, 2020
Investments in Land Development and Homebuilding Joint Ventures or Unconsolidated Entities
We participate in strategic land development and homebuilding joint ventures with related and unrelated third parties. The use of these entities, in some instances, enables us to acquire land to which we could not otherwise obtain access, or
could not obtain access on terms that are as favorable. Our partners in these joint ventures historically have been land owners/developers, other homebuilders and financial or strategic partners. Joint ventures with land owners/developers have given us access to sites owned or controlled by our partners. Joint ventures with other homebuilders have provided us with the ability to bid jointly with our partners for large or expensive land parcels. Joint ventures with financial partners have allowed us to combine our homebuilding expertise with access to our partners’ capital.
In certain of our unconsolidated joint ventures, we enter into loan agreements, whereby one of our subsidiaries will provide the lenders with customary guarantees, including completion, indemnity and environmental guarantees subject to usual non-recourse terms.
As of December 31, 2020, total cash contributed to unconsolidated joint ventures was $36.1 million
The following is a summary of investments in unconsolidated joint ventures:
Land Option Contracts and Land Banking Agreements
We are subject to the usual obligations associated with entering into contracts (including land option contracts and land banking arrangements) for the purchase, development, and sale of real estate in the routine conduct of our business. We have a number of land purchase option contracts and land banking agreements, generally through cash deposits, for the right to purchase land or lots at a future point in time with predetermined terms. We do not have title to the property and the creditors generally have no recourse. Our obligations with respect to such contracts are generally limited to the forfeiture of the related non-refundable cash deposits. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the aggregate purchase price of these contracts was $760.4 million and $289.7 million, respectively.