ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(dollars in millions, except per share data)
Business Overview
We manufacture alloy steel, as well as carbon and micro-alloy steel, with an annual melt capacity of approximately 2 million tons and shipment capacity of 1.5 million tons. Our portfolio includes special bar quality (SBQ) bars, seamless mechanical tubing (tubes), value-added solutions such as precision steel components, and billets. In addition, we supply machining and thermal treatment services and manage raw material recycling programs, which are also used as a feeder system for our melt operations. Our products and services are used in a diverse range of demanding applications in the following market sectors: automotive; oil and gas; industrial equipment; mining; construction; rail; defense; heavy truck; agriculture; power generation; and OCTG.
SBQ steel is made to restrictive chemical compositions and high internal purity levels and is used in critical mechanical applications. We make these products from nearly 100% recycled steel, using our expertise in raw materials to create custom steel products. We focus on creating tailored products and services for our customers’ most demanding applications. Our engineers are experts in both materials and applications, so we can work closely with each customer to deliver flexible solutions related to our products as well as to their applications and supply chains.
The SBQ bar, tube, and billet production processes take place at our Canton, Ohio manufacturing location. This location accounts for all of the SBQ bars, seamless mechanical tubes and billets we produce and includes three manufacturing facilities: the Faircrest, Harrison, and Gambrinus facilities. Our value-added solutions production processes take place at two downstream manufacturing facilities: Tryon Peak (Columbus, North Carolina) and St. Clair (Eaton, Ohio). Many of the production processes are integrated, and the manufacturing facilities produce products that are sold in all of our market sectors. As a result, investments in our facilities and resource allocation decisions affecting our operations are designed to benefit the overall business, not any specific aspect of the business.
During the first quarter of 2020, management completed its previously announced plan to close the Company’s TimkenSteel Material Services facility in Houston, Texas. See “Note 6 - Disposition of Non-Core Assets” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
On February 16, 2021, management announced a plan to indefinitely idle our Harrison melt and cast assets, late in the first quarter of 2021. Going forward, all of the Company’s melting and casting activities will take place at the Faircrest location. We are working collaboratively with employees, suppliers and a number of customers to ensure a well-organized and efficient transition. Our rolling and finishing operations at Harrison will not be impacted by these actions. Estimated annual cash savings from the idling of Harrison’s melt and cast assets are $15 million to $20 million. See “Note 20 - Subsequent Events” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
We conduct our business activities and report financial results as one business segment. The presentation of financial results as one reportable segment is consistent with the way we operate our business and is consistent with the manner in which the CODM evaluates performance and makes resource and operating decisions for the business as described above. Furthermore, the Company notes that monitoring financial results as one reportable segment helps the CODM manage costs on a consolidated basis, consistent with the integrated nature of our operations.
Markets We Serve
We sell products and services that are used in a diverse range of demanding applications around the world. No one customer accounted for 10% or more of net sales in 2020.
Key indicators for our market include the U.S. light vehicle production Seasonally Adjusted Annual Rate, oil and gas rig count activity and U.S. footage drilled, and industrial production for agriculture and construction markets, distribution, and mining and oil field machinery products. In addition, we closely monitor the Purchasing Managers’ Index, which is a leading indicator for our overall business.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
We continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our Company, employees, customers and supply chain. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our operations and financial results is uncertain and ultimately will depend on, among many other factors, the duration of the pandemic, further Federal and State government actions and the speed of economic recovery. We estimate the primary impact of COVID-19 on the Company was lost sales of approximately $265 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to expectations established prior to the onset of the pandemic.
In response to the significant reduction in customer demand resulting from the COVID-19 crisis, the Company has taken additional actions to further reduce operating expenses, conserve cash and maximize liquidity. The following actions began in the second quarter of 2020:
•
Reduced interim CEO and senior executives’ base salaries by 20 percent and other executives’ base salaries by 10 percent, began on May 1, 2020 and ended on December 1, 2020;
•
Reduced cash retainer for its board of directors by 20 percent beginning with the second-quarter 2020, and reduced the value of the board’s annual equity grant by 20 percent, this was reinstated to its full amount going forward on December 1, 2020;
•
Suspended the Company’s 401(k) plan matching contributions for salaried employees, effective June 1 and will be reinstated as of March 1, 2021;
•
Implemented unpaid rolling furloughs for approximately 90 percent of salaried employees, with an average 5 weeks of unpaid furloughs per employee, beginning in early April 2020 and ending in late July 2020;
•
Deferred Social Security payroll tax remittance as permitted by the CARES Act;
•
Continued to maintain flexible production schedules at all plants to align operations with customer demand, resulting in the temporary layoff of manufacturing employees; and
•
Reduced 2020 capital expenditures to $16.9 million which was below planned spending of approximately $30 million at the beginning of 2020.
Since implementation in the second quarter of 2020, the Company’s COVID-19 related actions saved approximately $15 million in cash and reduced administrative expenses by approximately $8 million in total.
Despite the negative impact of COVID-19 on our business, total liquidity was $314.1 million as of December 31, 2020, as a result of the above COVID-19 related actions as well as other working capital management efficiency improvement activities. We believe this level of liquidity is sufficient to meet the Company’s needs for at least the next 12 months. The Company will continue to take actions such as those described above in order to preserve liquidity for the duration of this pandemic.
Impact of Raw Material Prices
In the ordinary course of business, we are exposed to the volatility of the costs of our raw materials. Whenever possible, we manage our exposure to commodity risks primarily through the use of supplier pricing agreements that enable us to establish the purchase prices for certain inputs that are used in our manufacturing process. We utilize a raw material surcharge mechanism when pricing products to our customers, which is designed to mitigate the impact of increases or decreases in raw material costs, although generally with a lag effect. This timing effect can result in raw material spread whereby costs can be over- or under-recovered in certain periods. While the surcharge generally protects gross profit, it has the effect of diluting gross margin as a percent of sales.
Results of Operations
Net Sales
The charts below present net sales and shipments for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $830.7 million, a decrease of $378.1 million, or 31.3%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to a reduction in volume of approximately 258 thousand ship tons, resulting in a decrease of $286.4 million of net sales and lower surcharges of $117.5 million. These decreases in net sales were partially offset by a positive mix primarily due to the industrial end-market resulting in an increase in net sales of $42.7 million. The primary driver in the decrease in volume was lower customer demand across all end-markets primarily as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and a weak energy market. The decrease in surcharges was
primarily due to an approximate 25% decline in average surcharge per ton due to lower market prices for scrap and alloys. We estimate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our net sales during 2020 was a reduction of approximately $265 million, as compared to our forecast prior to the onset of the pandemic. Approximately half of this decrease was related to lower than forecasted volume in our mobile end-market sector, as production was halted by all major automotive manufacturers for various lengths of time during the second quarter. Excluding surcharges, net sales decreased $260.6 million, or 27.3%.
Gross Profit
The chart below presents the drivers of the gross profit variance from the year ended December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020.
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $7 million, or 31.0%, compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was driven primarily by lower volumes, partially offset by favorable manufacturing costs, raw material spread, and inventory adjustments. The primary driver in the decrease in volume was lower customer demand across all end-markets primarily as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and a weak energy market. Favorable manufacturing costs in 2020 were primarily due to the Company’s significant cost reduction actions and lower annual shutdown maintenance, slightly offset by the unfavorable impact of lower production levels on fixed cost leverage. Raw material spread was favorable due to higher scrap spread specifically during the second half of the year.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The charts below present selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
SG&A expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $15.1 million, or 16.4%, compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in 2020 is primarily due to lower wages and benefits expense which are a result of a reduction in employee headcount following the Company’s recent restructuring actions, as well as unpaid rolling furloughs for salaried employees during the second and third quarters. Additional reductions in SG&A are due to other COVID-19 related cost reduction actions, lower controllable spend as well as lower bad debt expense. The decrease is partially offset by an increase in variable compensation.
Restructuring Charges
During 2019 and throughout 2020, TimkenSteel made organizational changes to streamline its organizational structure to drive enhanced profitability and sustainable growth. These company-wide actions included the restructuring of its business support functions, the reduction of management layers throughout the organization, the closure of the TMS facility in Houston, Texas and other domestic and international actions to further improve the Company’s overall cost structure. Through these restructuring efforts, to date the Company has eliminated approximately 215 salaried positions and recognized restructuring charges of $11.7 million ($3.1 million in 2020 and $8.6 million in 2019), consisting of severance and employee-related benefits. Approximately 55 of these positions were eliminated in 2020. The Company expects to realize annual savings of approximately $27 million as a result of these actions. Refer to “Note 5 - Restructuring Charges” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $12.2 million, a decrease of $3.5 million, compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to a reduction in outstanding borrowings under the credit facility and a lower interest rate environment. Refer to “Note 14 - Financing Arrangements” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Other (Income) Expense, net
Non-service related pension and other postretirement benefit income, for all years, consists primarily of the interest cost, expected return on plan assets and amortization components of net periodic cost. The loss from remeasurement of benefit plans is due to the Company performing mark-to-market accounting on its pension and postretirement assets at year-end and upon the occurrence of certain triggering events. For more details on the remeasurement refer to “Note 15 - Retirement and Postretirement Plans.”
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security ("CARES") Act provides for an employee retention credit (“Employee Retention Credit”), which is a refundable tax credit against certain employment taxes of up to $5,000 per employee for eligible employers. The tax credit is equal to 50% of qualified wages paid to employees during a quarter, capped at $10,000 of qualified wages per employee throughout the year. The Company qualified for the tax credit in the second and third quarters of 2020 and accrued a benefit of $2.3 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 related to the Employee Retention Credit in other (income) expense, net on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Provision for Income Taxes
(1) “NM” is data that is not meaningful.
The majority of the Company’s tax expense is derived from foreign operations. The Company remains in a full valuation for the U.S. jurisdiction for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded an intraperiod tax allocation adjustment between continuing operations and other categories of comprehensive income. In periods in which the Company has a pre-tax loss from continuing operations and pre-tax income in other categories of comprehensive income, the Company must consider that income in determining the amount of tax benefit that results from a loss in continuing operations and that will be allocated to continuing operations. As a result of the intraperiod tax allocation for the year ended December 31, 2019, income tax expense of $16.7 million was recorded within other comprehensive income and a corresponding benefit was recorded to continuing operations.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
Net Sales Adjusted to Exclude Surcharges
The table below presents net sales by end-market sector, adjusted to exclude surcharges, which represents a financial measure that has not been determined in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (U.S. GAAP). We believe presenting net sales by end-market sector adjusted to exclude raw material surcharges provides additional insight into key drivers of net sales such as base price and product mix.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Amended Credit Agreement
On October 15, 2019, the Company entered into a Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the Amended Credit Agreement) with JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, Bank of America, N.A., as syndication agent, and the other lenders party thereto, which further amended and restated the Company’s Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of January 26, 2018.
The Amended Credit Agreement increased capacity to $400 million compared to $300 million in the previous facility and extended the maturity date to October 15, 2024. Furthermore, the Amended Credit Agreement provided for an enhanced asset base with reappraised fixed assets and investment grade foreign accounts receivable collateral in the borrowing base (up to $30 million), improved interest rate spread pricing by 50 basis points, and reduced the unused commitment fee to a fixed 25 basis points from the previous 37.5 to 50 basis point range.
The Amended Credit Agreement also requires the Company to (i) unless certain conditions are met, maintain certain minimum liquidity as specified in the Amended Credit Agreement during the period commencing on March 1, 2021 and ending on June 1, 2021 and (ii) maintain a minimum specified fixed charge coverage ratio on a springing basis if minimum availability requirements as specified in the Amended Credit Agreement are not maintained.
The minimum liquidity requirement for the period commencing on March 1, 2021 and ending on June 1, 2021 requires the Company to maintain a liquidity amount above the sum of the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the Convertible Senior Notes due 2021 plus an amount equal to 12.5% of the lesser of the borrowing base and the total capacity of $400 million. The Company expects to be compliant with this minimum liquidity requirement during the applicable time period.
Refer to “Note 14 - Financing Arrangements” in the Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Convertible Notes
In May 2016, the Company issued $75.0 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Senior Notes due 2021, plus an additional $11.3 million principal amount to cover over-allotments. The Convertible Senior Notes due 2021 bear cash interest at a rate of 6.0% per year, payable semiannually on June 1 and December 1, beginning on December 1, 2016. The Convertible Senior Notes due 2021 will mature on June 1, 2021, unless earlier repurchased or converted. The net proceeds received from the offering were $83.2 million, after deducting the initial underwriters’ discount and fees and paying the offering expenses. We used the net proceeds to repay a portion of the amounts outstanding under our credit agreement.
In December 2020, the Company entered into separate, privately negotiated exchange agreements with a limited number of holders of the Company’s currently outstanding Convertible Senior Notes due 2021. Pursuant to the exchange agreements, the Company exchanged $46.0 million aggregate principal amount of Convertible Senior Notes due 2021 for $46.0 million aggregate principal amount of its new Convertible Senior Notes due 2025. The Company did not receive any cash proceeds from the issuance of the Convertible Senior Notes due 2025.
The Convertible Senior Notes due 2025 bear cash interest at a rate of 6.0% per year, payable semiannually on June 1 and December 1, beginning on June 1, 2021. The Convertible Senior Notes due 2025 will mature on December 1, 2025, unless earlier repurchased or converted. The net amount of this exchange was $44.5 million, after deducting the initial underwriters’ fees and paying other transaction costs.
Refer to “Note 14 - Financing Arrangements” in the Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Additional Liquidity Considerations
The following represents a summary of key liquidity measures under the credit agreement in effect as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
(1) As of December 31, 2020, TimkenSteel had less than $400 million in collateral assets to borrow against.
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations and available borrowing capacity under our credit agreement. As of December 31, 2020, taking into account our view of mobile, industrial, and energy market demands for our products, and our 2021 operating and long-range plan, we believe that our cash balance as of December 31, 2020, projected cash generated from operations, and borrowings available under the Amended Credit Agreement, will be sufficient to satisfy our working capital needs, capital expenditures and other liquidity requirements associated with our operations, including servicing our debt obligations, as well as our Convertible Senior Notes due 2021 with a maturity date of June 1, 2021, for at least the next twelve months. Regarding the Convertible Senior Notes due 2021, we plan to repay the remaining outstanding principal balance of $40.2 million upon maturity with available cash, or a combination of available cash and credit facility borrowings.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our operations and financial results is uncertain and ultimately will depend on, among other factors, the duration of the pandemic, further Federal and State government actions and the speed of economic recovery. To the extent our liquidity needs prove to be greater than expected or cash generated from operations is less than anticipated, and cash on hand or credit availability is insufficient, we would seek additional financing to provide additional liquidity. We regularly evaluate our potential access to the equity and debt capital markets as sources of liquidity and we believe additional financing would likely be available if necessary, although we can make no assurance as to the form or terms of any such financing. We would also consider additional cost reductions and restructuring, changes in working capital management and further reductions of capital expenditures. Regardless, we will continue to evaluate additional financing or may seek to refinance outstanding borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement to provide us with additional flexibility and liquidity. Any additional financing beyond that incurred to refinance existing debt would increase our overall debt and could increase interest expense.
On March 27, 2020, the President of the United States signed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security ("CARES") Act, an economic stimulus package intended to provide support, principally in the form of tax benefits and additional liquidity, to companies and individuals negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Although the majority of the provisions included in the CARES Act did not immediately benefit the Company from a cash tax perspective due to its significant net operating losses, the Company has taken advantage of the deferral of the employer share (6.2% of employee wages) of Social Security payroll taxes that would otherwise have been owed from the date of enactment of the legislation through December 31, 2020, as afforded by the Act. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company deferred approximately $6.4 million of payroll taxes as permitted by the CARES Act, all of which will be paid in two equal installments at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2022. Additionally, the Company expects to file for and accrued a benefit of approximately $2.3 million related to the Employee Retention Credit in 2021.
For additional details regarding the Amended Credit Agreement and the Convertible Notes, please refer to “Note 14 - Financing Arrangements” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, and for our discussion regarding risk factors related to our business and our debt, see Risk Factors in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cash Flows
The following table reflects the major categories of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. For additional details, please refer to the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows included in Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report.
Operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $173.5 million compared to net cash provided of $70.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash provided by operating activities of $103.2 million was primarily due to management actions to improve working capital processes and efficiency. Refer to the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for additional information.
Investing activities
Net cash used by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $6.0 million compared to net cash used by investing activities of $38.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change was primarily due to lower capital expenditures and proceeds from sales of property, plant and equipment.
Financing activities
Net cash used by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $91.8 million compared to net cash used by financing activities of $26.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change was mainly due to higher repayments on the Credit Agreement in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
The caption Convertible Notes includes the outstanding principal balance of $40.2 million related to the Convertible Senior Notes due 2021 and the outstanding principal balance of $46.0 million related to the Convertible Senior Notes due 2025. Interest payments include interest on the Convertible Notes, as well as the unused commitment fee of 25 basis points related to the Amended Credit Agreement.
Operating leases include leases for office space, warehouses, land, machinery and equipment, vehicles and certain information technology equipment. Refer to “Note 13 - Leases” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statement for additional information.
Purchase commitments are defined as agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding. Included in purchase commitments are certain obligations related to capital commitments, service agreements and energy consumed in our production processes. These purchase commitments do not represent our entire anticipated purchases in the future but represent only those items for which we are presently contractually obligated. The majority of our products and services are purchased as needed, with no advance commitment. We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements with unconsolidated entities or other persons.
Retirement benefits are paid from plan assets and our operating cash flow. The table above includes payments to meet minimum funding requirements of our defined benefit pension plans, estimated benefit payments for our unfunded supplemental executive retirement pension, and postretirement plans. The retirement benefit funding requirements included in the table above are estimated required contributions and are significantly affected by asset returns and several other variables. These amounts are subject to change year to year. These amounts are based on Company estimates and current funding laws; actual future payments may be different. Refer to “Note 15 - Retirement and Postretirement Plans”
in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information related to the total pension and other postretirement benefit plans and expected benefit payments.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. We review our critical accounting policies throughout the year.
New Accounting Guidance
See “Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from contracts at a point in time when we have satisfied our performance obligation and the customer obtains control of the goods, at the amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive for those goods. We receive and acknowledge purchase orders from our customers, which define the quantity, pricing, payment and other applicable terms and conditions. In some cases, we receive a blanket purchase order from our customer, which includes pricing, payment and other terms and conditions, with quantities defined at the time the customer issues periodic releases from the blanket purchase order. Certain contracts contain variable consideration, which primarily consists of rebates that are accounted for in net sales and accrued based on the estimated probability of the requirements being met.
Inventory
Inventories are stated at lower of cost or net realizable value. All inventories, including raw materials, manufacturing supplies inventory as well as international (outside the U.S.) inventories, have been valued using the FIFO or average cost method as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Long-lived Assets
Long-lived assets (including tangible assets and intangible assets subject to amortization) are reviewed for impairment when events or changes in circumstances have occurred indicating the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable.
We test recoverability of long-lived assets at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows that are independent from the cash flows of other assets. Assets and asset groups held and used are measured for recoverability by comparing the carrying amount of the asset or asset group to the sum of future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset or asset group.
Assumptions and estimates about future values and remaining useful lives of our long-lived assets are complex and subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy and our internal forecasts.
If an asset or asset group is considered to be impaired, the impairment loss that would be recognized is the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. To determine fair value, we use internal cash flow estimates discounted at an appropriate interest rate, third party appraisals as appropriate, and/or market prices of similar assets, when available.
As a result of the discontinued use of certain assets, we recorded an impairment charge of $9.3 million in 2019. No impairment charge was recorded in 2020. Refer to “Note 6 - Disposition of Non-Core Assets” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous non-U.S. jurisdictions, and we account for income taxes in accordance with applicable accounting guidance. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, as well as net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. We record valuation allowances against deferred tax assets by tax jurisdiction when it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized. In determining the need for a valuation allowance, the historical and projected financial performance of the entity recording the net deferred tax asset is considered along with any other pertinent information. Net deferred tax assets relate primarily to net operating losses and pension and other postretirement benefit obligations in the U.S., which we believe are more likely than not to result in future tax benefits. As of December 31, 2020, we have recorded a valuation allowance on our net deferred tax assets in the U.S., as we do not believe it is more likely than not that a portion of our U.S. deferred tax assets will be realized.
In the ordinary course of our business, there are many transactions and calculations regarding which the ultimate income tax determination is uncertain. We are regularly under audit by tax authorities. Accruals for uncertain tax positions are provided for in accordance with the requirements of applicable accounting guidance. We record interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions as a component of income tax expense.
The Company made the accounting policy election to treat taxes related to Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income as a current period expense when incurred.
Benefit Plans
We recognize an overfunded status or underfunded status (i.e. the difference between the fair value of plan assets and the benefit obligations) as either an asset or a liability for our defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We recognize actuarial gains and losses immediately through net periodic benefit cost in the Consolidated Statements of Operations upon the annual remeasurement at December 31, or on an interim basis as triggering events warrant remeasurement. In addition, we use fair value to account for the value of plan assets.
As of December 31, 2020, our projected benefit obligations related to our pension and other postretirement benefit plans were $1,395.1 million and $128.3 million, respectively, and the underfunded status of our pension and other postretirement benefit obligations were $163.4 million and $46.1 million, respectively. These benefit obligations were valued using a weighted average discount rate of 2.68% for pension benefit plans and 2.65% for other postretirement benefit plans. The determination of the discount rate is generally based on an index created from a hypothetical bond portfolio consisting of high-quality fixed income securities with durations that match the timing of expected benefit payments. Changes in the selected discount rate could have a material impact on our projected benefit obligations and the unfunded status of our pension and other postretirement benefit plans.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net periodic pension benefit cost was $10.2 million, and net periodic other postretirement benefit income was $1.7 million. In 2020, net periodic pension and other postretirement benefit costs were calculated using a variety of assumptions, including a weighted average discount rate of 3.42% and a weighted average expected return on plan assets of 5.80% and 4.50%, respectively. The expected return on plan assets is determined based on forward-looking current market pricing. The forward-looking analysis is performed using a building block approach incorporating inputs such as current yields, valuations, economic data and broad macroeconomic themes.
The net periodic benefit cost and benefit obligation are affected by applicable year-end assumptions. Sensitivities to these assumptions may be asymmetric and are specific to the time periods noted. The impact of changing multiple factors simultaneously cannot be calculated by combining the individual sensitivities. The sensitivity to changes in discount rate assumptions may not be linear. A sensitivity analysis of the projected incremental effect of a 0.25% increase (decrease), holding all other assumptions constant, is as follows:
Aggregate net periodic pension and other postretirement benefit income for 2021 is forecasted to be $14.8 million and $5.0 million, respectively. This estimate is based on a weighted average discount rate of 2.68% for the pension benefit plans and 2.65% for other postretirement benefit plans, as well as a weighted average expected return on assets of 5.76% for the pension benefit plans and 4.50% for the other postretirement benefit plans. Actual cost also is dependent on various other factors related to the employees covered by these plans. Adjustments to our actuarial assumptions could have a material adverse impact on our operating results.
Please refer to “Note 15 - Retirement and Postretirement Plans” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information related to our pension and other postretirement benefit plans.
Other Loss Reserves
We have a number of loss exposures that are incurred in the ordinary course of business, such as environmental claims, product liability claims, product warranty claims, litigation and accounts receivable reserves. Establishing loss reserves for these matters requires management’s estimate and judgment with regard to risk exposure and ultimate liability or realization. These loss reserves are reviewed periodically and adjustments are made to reflect the most recent facts and circumstances. These other loss reserves have an immaterial impact on the Consolidated Financial Statements.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain statements set forth in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (including our forecasts, beliefs and expectations) that are not historical in nature are “forward-looking” statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. In particular, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains numerous forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements generally will be accompanied by words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “forecast,” “outlook,” “intend,”
“may,” “plan,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “seek,” “should,” “target,” “will,” “would,” or other similar words, phrases or expressions that convey the uncertainty of future events or outcomes. You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this Form 10-K. We caution readers that actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied in forward-looking statements made by or on behalf of us due to a variety of factors, such as:
•
deterioration in world economic conditions, or in economic conditions in any of the geographic regions in which we conduct business, including additional adverse effects from global economic slowdown, terrorism or hostilities. This includes: political risks associated with the potential instability of governments and legal systems in countries in which we or our customers conduct business, and changes in currency valuations;
•
the effects of fluctuations in customer demand on sales, product mix and prices in the industries in which we operate. This includes: our ability to respond to rapid changes in customer demand; the effects of customer bankruptcies or liquidations; the impact of changes in industrial business cycles; and whether conditions of fair trade exist in the U.S. markets;
•
the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations and financial results, including cash flows and liquidity;
•
competitive factors, including changes in market penetration; increasing price competition by existing or new foreign and domestic competitors; the introduction of new products by existing and new competitors; and new technology that may impact the way our products are sold or distributed;
•
changes in operating costs, including the effect of changes in our manufacturing processes; changes in costs associated with varying levels of operations and manufacturing capacity; availability of raw materials and energy; our ability to mitigate the impact of fluctuations in raw materials and energy costs and the effectiveness of our surcharge mechanism; changes in the expected costs associated with product warranty claims; changes resulting from inventory management, cost reduction initiatives and different levels of customer demands; the effects of unplanned work stoppages; and changes in the cost of labor and benefits;
•
the success of our operating plans, announced programs, initiatives and capital investments; and our ability to maintain appropriate relations with unions that represent our associates in certain locations in order to avoid disruptions of business;
•
unanticipated litigation, claims or assessments, including claims or problems related to intellectual property, product liability or warranty, and environmental issues and taxes, among other matters;
•
the availability of financing and interest rates, which affect our cost of funds and/or ability to raise capital; our pension obligations and investment performance; and/or customer demand and the ability of customers to obtain financing to purchase our products or equipment that contain our products; and the amount of any dividend declared by our Board of Directors on our common shares;
•
the overall impact of the pension and postretirement mark-to-market accounting; and
•
those items identified under the caption Risk Factors in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
You are cautioned that it is not possible to predict or identify all of the risks, uncertainties and other factors that may affect future results, and that the above list should not be considered to be a complete list. Except as required by the federal securities laws, we undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.