ITEM 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
The Company is a world leader in designing, manufacturing and marketing solutions that empower customers to achieve quality cleaning performance, reduce environmental impact and help create a cleaner, safer, healthier world. The Company is committed to creating and commercializing breakthrough, sustainable cleaning innovations to enhance its broad suite of products, including floor maintenance and outdoor cleaning equipment, detergent-free and other sustainable cleaning technologies, aftermarket parts and consumables, equipment maintenance and repair service, specialty surface coatings and asset management solutions. Our products are used in many types of environments, including retail establishments, distribution centers, factories and warehouses, public venues such as arenas and stadiums, office buildings, schools and universities, hospitals and clinics, parking lots and streets, and more. Customers include contract cleaners to whom organizations outsource facilities maintenance, as well as businesses that perform facilities maintenance themselves. The Company reaches these customers through the industry's largest direct sales and service organization and through a strong and well-supported network of authorized distributors worldwide.
The year-over-year comparisons in this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations are as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, unless stated otherwise. The discussion of 2018 results and related year-over-year comparisons as of and for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 are found in Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations", of our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Impact of COVID-19
Because we are a global company, our results of operations are affected by macroeconomic conditions. We continue to see economic and geopolitical uncertainty in many regions around the world. The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has increased the uncertainty globally and has resulted in general economic disruption. Governments across the world have taken numerous actions to limit the spread of COVID-19, including stay-at-home orders, which have reduced operating activities across global businesses.
To date, the primary impact of the pandemic on the Company's business has been related to a slowdown in sales to some end markets amid widespread closures of customer facilities and operations. We have experienced, and expect to continue experiencing, lower demand and volume for our products, including delivery and shipping delays that adversely impact our businesses. During 2020, we experienced an organic sales decline of 11.8%. We believe most of the organic sales decline in the second through fourth quarters of 2020 was due to the pandemic. We are unsure whether or not this level of decline, or if the trend in the sales decline on a quarter-to-quarter basis, will continue in the future.
We are actively managing our business to respond to the COVID-19 impact. We have prioritized the health and safety of our employees and customers. We have established a dedicated enterprise-wide response team and implemented work-from-home processes for much of our workforce. We have established cross-functional and daily communications with suppliers to review, track and prioritize high-risk components. We have also identified and activated alternative suppliers, materials and components as needed. To date, we have been able to avoid major supply disruptions. Regarding transportation, we have set up tracking, reporting and communication channels with carriers to understand their risks and to evaluate available options where necessary. For the majority of 2020, there were a limited number of restrictions on our manufacturing operations. Although end market demand was significantly lower than the same period last year, all of our factories had the ability to operate at full capacity.
We have also taken a number of actions globally to minimize the financial impact such as suspending a significant amount of business-related travel, reducing non-essential discretionary and project spending, applying for government wage subsidies and implementing merit freezes, hiring freezes, and other headcount-related actions, including a combination of salary cuts, reduced work schedules and/or furlough programs for all employees globally, while operating within the local laws and regulations, and developing multiple financial scenarios to ensure liquidity and to identify additional actions, if needed.
We continue to monitor the continuously evolving situation and guidance from authorities. As a result of the disruptions and volatility caused by COVID-19, we cannot reasonably estimate the long-term impact of the pandemic on our financials results. We expect that the longer the period of disruption continues, the more material the adverse impact will be on our business operations, financial performance and results of operations.
Historical Results
The following table compares the historical results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 in dollars and as a percentage of Net Sales (in millions, except per share amounts and percentages):
Net Sales
Net Sales in 2020 totaled $1,001.0 million, a 12.0% decrease as compared to Net Sales of $1,137.6 million in 2019.
The components of the consolidated Net Sales change for 2020 as compared to 2019, and 2019 as compared to 2018, were as follows:
The 12.0% decrease in consolidated Net Sales for 2020 as compared to 2019 was driven by:
•
Organic sales decreased approximately 11.8% which excludes the effects of foreign currency translation exchange. The organic sales decrease was primarily driven by volume declines across all regions, largely driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease was partially offset by continued strong demand for our autonomous cleaning machines in North America; and
•
An unfavorable impact from foreign currency exchange of approximately 0.2%.
The following table sets forth annual Net Sales by geographic area and the related percentage change from the prior year (in millions, except percentages):
Americas - In 2020, Americas Net Sales decreased 12.7% to $631.0 million as compared with $722.4 million in 2019. Foreign currency exchange within the Americas unfavorably impacted Net Sales by approximately 1.1% in 2020. Organic sales declines in the Americas unfavorably impacted Net Sales by approximately 11.6% due to the impact of COVID-19 throughout the entire region, partially offset by continued demand for our autonomous cleaning machines in North America.
Europe, Middle East and Africa - EMEA Net Sales in 2020 decreased 9.6% to $278.2 million as compared to 2019 Net Sales of $307.6 million. Foreign currency exchange within EMEA favorably impacted Net Sales by approximately 1.4%. Organic sales declines in EMEA unfavorably impacted Net Sales by approximately 11.0% due to the impact of COVID-19 throughout the region.
Asia Pacific - APAC Net Sales in 2020 decreased 14.7% to $91.8 million as compared to 2019 Net Sales of $107.6 million. Foreign currency exchange within APAC favorably impacted Net Sales by approximately 0.2%. Organic sales declines in APAC unfavorably impacted Net Sales by approximately 14.9% in 2020, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 throughout the region.
Gross Profit
Gross Profit margin was 40.7%, or 10 basis points higher in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily driven by actions directly resulting from the Company's enterprise strategy efforts such as pricing and cost-out initiatives, benefits from government programs related to COVID-19 and cost-reduction actions, partially offset by volume deleverage, higher material costs, and strategic investments in the business. The government benefits included in Gross Profit in 2020 were $4.9 million and were recorded in the second and fourth quarters of 2020. The benefits represent wage-related subsidies from various European, Canadian, and U.S. authorities that are not required to be repaid. Of the government benefits, $1.1 million were related to employee retention credits for U.S. employees provided by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security ("CARES") Act.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expense - The Company continues to invest in innovative product development with 3.0% of 2020 Net Sales spent on Research and Development ("R&D"). We continue to invest in developing innovative new products and technologies and the advancement of detergent-free products, fleet management, autonomous vehicles and other sustainable technologies.
R&D Expense decreased $2.6 million, or 8.0%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. As a percentage of Net Sales, 2020 R&D Expense increased 10 basis points compared to the prior year.
Selling and Administrative Expense - Selling and Administrative Expense ("S&A Expense") decreased by $43.2 million, or 12.1%, in 2020 compared to 2019. As a percentage of Net Sales, 2020 S&A Expense remained flat at 31.4%. The S&A Expense decline was primarily driven by cost-containment initiatives throughout the Company, including employee furloughs, reduction in travel spending, and temporary pay reductions as well as benefits from government programs related to COVID-19 and adjustments to management incentives. The government benefits included in S&A Expense in 2020 were $3.0 million and were recorded in the second and fourth quarters of 2020. The benefits represent wage-related subsidies from various European, Canadian and U.S. authorities that are not required to be repaid. Of the government benefits, $1.4 million were related to employee retention credits for U.S. employees provided by the CARES Act. The remaining decrease included a lower fair value adjustment to the acquisition-related contingent consideration, an adjustment to an acquisition-related liability and lower acquisition and integration costs in 2020 as compared to 2019. The decrease in S&A Expense was offset slightly by increases in restructuring costs and professional fees.
Total Other Expense, Net
Interest Income - Interest Income was $3.3 million in 2020, flat from 2019.
Interest Expense - Interest Expense was $20.7 million in 2020, as compared to $21.1 million in 2019. The lower Interest Expense in 2020 was primarily due to carrying a lower level of debt due to debt paydowns, as further described in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section that follows.
Net Foreign Currency Transaction Losses - Net Foreign Currency Transaction Losses were $5.3 million in 2020 as compared to $0.7 million of losses in 2019. The unfavorable change in the impact from foreign currency transactions in 2020 was primarily due to fluctuations in foreign currency rates, specifically between the Brazilian real, Mexican peso and the U.S. dollar, and settlements of transactional hedging activity in the normal course of business.
Other Income (Expense), Net - Other Income (Expense), Net was $0.1 million of income in 2020 as compared to $0.7 million of income in 2019.
Income Taxes
The overall effective income tax rate was 17.9% and 15.1% in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The expense for 2020 included $2.2 million of tax benefits associated with $7.5 million of non-recurring expenses, which reduced the effective tax rate by 1.6 percentage points.
Our effective tax rate fluctuates from year to year due to the global nature of our operations. The effective tax rate increased to 17.9% in 2020 from 15.1% in 2019 primarily due to the mix in full year taxable earnings by country, fewer tax benefits related to the exercise of stock options, and a non-recurring benefit in 2019 related to a change in valuation allowances in The Netherlands and the U.S.
Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
Foreign Currency Translation Adjustments - For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded a pre-tax foreign currency translation gain of $16.4 million and a loss of $4.5 million, respectively. These adjustments resulted from translating the financial statements of our non-U.S. dollar functional currency subsidiaries into our reporting currency, which is the U.S. dollar, as well as other adjustments permitted by foreign currency accounting rules.
During 2020, we recorded a pre-tax currency translation gain of $16.4 million. This gain was caused primarily by the weakening of the U.S. dollar to most currencies. In 2020, the U.S. dollar weakened by approximately 9% to the euro and 7% to the Chinese renminbi. Currency translation gains were partially offset by a loss in Brazilian real denominated net assets due to a 23% strengthening of the U.S dollar to the Brazilian real.
Pension and Postretirement Medical Benefits - The summarized changes in Accumulated Other Comprehensive (Income) Loss for the three years ended December 31 were as follows (in millions):
The $1.3 million loss in 2020 was primarily due to a $1.3 million actuarial loss relating to an annual actuarial analysis resulting from a 95 basis point decrease in the U.S. pension discount rate, a 37 basis point decrease in the non-U.S. discount rate and a 99 basis point decrease in the postretirement discount rate.
Cash Flow Hedging - For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded pre-tax adjustments on cash flow hedge financial instruments of a gain of $2.9 million and a gain of $4.6 million, respectively, in Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) as further disclosed in Note 11 to the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements.
The $2.9 million gain in 2020 was primarily due to the fall in interest rates in the U.S. and Europe during 2020 and the impact on hedge derivatives held in the Company's cross currency swap hedge program. Gains of hedge derivatives were partially offset by the weakening of the U.S. dollar relative to the euro. During 2020, the U.S. dollar weakened approximately 9% to the euro.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity - Cash, Cash Equivalents and Restricted Cash totaled $141.0 million at December 31, 2020, as compared to $74.6 million as of December 31, 2019. Cash, Cash Equivalents and Restricted Cash held by our foreign subsidiaries totaled $76.2 million as of December 31, 2020, as compared to $45.7 million as of December 31, 2019. Wherever possible, cash management is centralized and intercompany financing is used to provide working capital to subsidiaries as needed. At the end of March 2020, we borrowed $125 million from our revolving credit line as a precaution to ensure we would be able to cover our cash requirements if the COVID-19 pandemic were to continue for an extended period of time. In the second quarter of 2020, we repaid the entire $125 million borrowed in March 2020 as we determined our existing cash and cash flows were sufficient for our business needs. Our current ratio was 1.9 as of December 31, 2020, and 1.7 as of December 31, 2019, and our working capital was $239.3 million and $206.1 million, respectively.
Our Debt-to-Capital ratio was 43.2% as of December 31, 2020, compared with 48.5% as of December 31, 2019. Our capital structure was comprised of $308.5 million of Debt and $404.8 million of Tennant Company Shareholders’ Equity as of December 31, 2020.
Operating Activities - Cash provided by operating activities was $133.8 million in 2020 and $71.9 million in 2019. In 2020, cash provided by operating activities was driven primarily by net earnings adding back non-cash items of $59.6 million, a $26.0 million decrease in Net Receivables, an $18.3 million decrease in Inventories and an $8.5 million increase in Accounts Payable. These cash inflows were partially offset by cash outflows from a $10.0 million decrease in Employee Compensation and Benefits liabilities, primarily related to 2019 incentive payments to employees.
Investing Activities - Net cash used in investing activities was $29.9 million in 2020 and $55.6 million in 2019. In 2020, we used $29.8 million for net capital expenditures. Net capital expenditures included investments in a new administrative building, information technology process improvement projects, tooling related to new product development and manufacturing equipment.
Financing Activities - Net cash used in financing activities was $42.8 million in 2020 and $27.4 million in 2019. In 2020, we made $157.5 million of Debt payments and dividend payments of $16.3 million. Our annual cash dividend payout increased for the 49th consecutive year to $0.89 per share in 2020, an increase of $0.01 per share over 2019. These cash outflows were partially offset by proceeds from Borrowings of $126.4 million and proceeds from the issuance of Common Stock of $4.9 million.
At December 31, 2020, there were 1,392,363 remaining shares authorized for repurchase.
There were no shares repurchased in 2020, 2019 or 2018. Our 2017 Credit Agreement, as defined below, restricts the payment of dividends or repurchasing of stock if, after giving effect to such payments and assuming no default exists or would result from such payment, our leverage ratio is greater than 2.50 to 1, in such case limiting such payments to an amount ranging from $50.0 million to $75.0 million during any fiscal year based on our leverage ratio after giving effect to such payment. Our Senior Notes due 2025 (the "Notes") also contain certain restrictions, which are generally less restrictive than those contained in the 2017 Credit Agreement.
Indebtedness - During 2017, the Company and certain of our foreign subsidiaries entered into a Credit Agreement (the “2017 Credit Agreement”) with JPMorgan, as administrative agent, Goldman Sachs Bank USA, as syndication agent, Wells Fargo, National Association, U.S. Bank National Association, and HSBC Bank USA, National Association, as co-documentation agents, and the lenders (including JPMorgan) from time to time party thereto.
Borrowings denominated in U.S. dollars under the 2017 Credit Agreement bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the adjusted London interbank offered rate ("LIBOR") for a one month period and do not have fallback language for when LIBOR is no longer available. Uncertainty related to the LIBOR phase out at the end of 2021 may adversely impact the value of, and our obligations under, the 2017 Credit Agreement. We may need to renegotiate our financial obligations that utilize LIBOR. The Company continues to assess and monitor regulatory developments during the transition period.
For further details regarding our indebtedness, see Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contractual Obligations - Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020, are summarized by period due in the following table (in millions):
(1)
Long-term debt represents borrowings through the Notes and the 2017 Credit Agreement with JPMorgan. Interest on the Notes accrues at the rate of 5.625% per annum and is payable semiannually in cash on each May 1 and November 1. Repayment of the principal amount of the Senior Notes is due upon expiration of the agreement in 2025. Interest payments on our 2017 Credit Agreement with JPMorgan were calculated using the December 31, 2020 30-day LIBOR rate plus a spread.
(2)
Our retirement benefit plans, as described in Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, require us to make contributions to the plans from time to time. Contributions to the various plans are dependent upon a number of factors including the market performance of plan assets, if any, and future changes in interest rates, which impact the actuarial measurement of plan obligations. As a result, we have only included our 2021 expected contribution in the contractual obligations table.
(3)
The unfunded deferred compensation arrangements covering certain current and retired management employees totaled $3.8 million as of December 31, 2020. Our estimated distributions in the contractual obligations table are based upon a number of assumptions including termination dates and participant distribution elections.
(4)
Operating lease commitments consist primarily of office and warehouse facilities, vehicles and office equipment as well as the estimated liability for residual value guarantee as discussed in Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(5)
Purchase obligations include all known open purchase orders, contractual purchase commitments and contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
Total contractual obligations exclude our gross unrecognized tax benefits of $6.4 million and accrued interest and penalties of $0.7 million as of December 31, 2020. We expect to make cash outlays in the future related to uncertain tax positions. However, due to the uncertainty of the timing of future cash flows, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of cash settlement, if any, with the respective taxing authorities. For further information related to unrecognized tax benefits, see Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Newly Issued Accounting Guidance
See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information on new accounting pronouncements.
No other new accounting pronouncements issued but not yet effective have had, or are expected to have, a material impact on our results of operations or financial position.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are based on the selection and application of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which require us to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Future events and their effects cannot be determined with absolute certainty. Therefore, the determination of estimates requires the exercise of judgment. Actual results could differ from those estimates, and any such differences may be material to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We believe that the following policies may involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity in their application and represent the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements. If different assumptions or conditions were to prevail, the results could be materially different from our reported results.
Goodwill - Goodwill represents the excess of cost over the fair value of net assets of businesses acquired and is allocated to our reporting units at the time of the acquisition. We analyze goodwill on an annual basis and when an event occurs or circumstances change that may reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. We have the option of first analyzing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of any reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. However, we may elect to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test in lieu of the qualitative test. An entity must recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value. Subsequent reversal of goodwill impairment charges is not permitted.
When we perform a qualitative goodwill test, we analyze qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. If the qualitative test indicates there may be an impairment, we perform the quantitative test, which measures the amount of the goodwill impairment, if any. To perform the quantitative test, we calculate the fair value of each reporting unit, primarily utilizing the income approach. The income approach is based on discounted cash flow models that use reporting unit estimates for forecasted future financial performance, including revenues, margins, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation, amortization, tax and discount rates. These estimates are developed as part of our planning process based on assumed growth rates, along with historical data and various internal estimates. Projected future cash flows are then discounted to a present value employing a discount rate that properly accounts for the estimated risk-adjusted weighted-average cost of capital relevant to each reporting unit.
We perform our annual goodwill impairment analysis as of October 1 and when an event occurs or circumstances change that may reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. In 2020, we changed the goodwill impairment assessment date from December 31 to October 1 to better align with the timing of our annual planning process. The change did not result in any adjustments to our consolidated financial statements.
In 2020, we elected to perform the quantitative goodwill test, which indicated that there was no goodwill impairment in any of our reporting units as of our annual assessment date. The EMEA reporting unit was the only reporting unit for which the fair value was not substantially in excess of its carrying value. The EMEA reporting unit, with $168.8 million of carrying value of goodwill at December 31, 2020, had an excess of reporting unit fair value over carrying value of 7% as of our annual assessment date.
We had goodwill of $207.8 million as of December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes - We are required to estimate our income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This process involves estimating our actual current tax obligations based on expected income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities in the various jurisdictions. We also establish reserves for uncertain tax matters that are complex in nature and uncertain as to the ultimate outcome. Although we believe that our tax return positions are fully supportable, we consider our ability to ultimately prevail in defending these matters when establishing these reserves. We adjust our reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit. We believe that our current reserves are adequate. However, the ultimate outcome may differ from our estimates and assumptions and could impact the income tax expense reflected in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Tax law requires certain items to be included in our tax return at different times than the items are reflected in our results of operations. Some of these differences are permanent, such as expenses that are not deductible in our tax returns, and some differences will reverse over time, such as depreciation expense on property, plant and equipment. These temporary differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included within our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Deferred tax assets generally represent items that can be used as a tax deduction or credit in our tax returns in future years but have already been recorded as an expense in our Consolidated Statements of Operations. We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income, and, based on management’s judgment, to the extent we believe that recovery is not more likely than not, we establish a valuation reserve against those deferred tax assets. The deferred tax asset valuation allowance could be materially different from actual results because of changes in the mix of future taxable income, the relationship between book and taxable income and our tax planning strategies. As of December 31, 2020, a valuation allowance of $7.5 million was recorded against foreign tax loss carryforwards, foreign tax credit carryforwards and state credit carryforwards.
Cautionary Factors Relevant to Forward-Looking Information
This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7, contains certain statements that are considered “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements generally can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “intend,” “estimate,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “project,” or “continue” or similar words or the negative thereof. These statements do not relate to strictly historical or current facts and provide current expectations of forecasts of future events. Any such expectations or forecasts of future events are subject to a variety of factors. Particular risks and uncertainties presently facing us include:
•
Geopolitical and economic uncertainty throughout the world.
•
Uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic.
• Ability to comply with global laws and regulations.
• Ability to adapt to price sensitivity.
• Competition in our business.
• Fluctuations in the cost, quality or availability of raw materials and purchased components.
• Ability to adjust pricing to respond to cost pressures.
• Unforeseen product liability claims or product quality issues.
• Ability to attract, retain and develop key personnel and create effective succession planning strategies.
• Ability to effectively manage strategic plan or growth processes.
• Ability to successfully upgrade and evolve our information technology systems.
• Ability to successfully protect our information technology systems from cybersecurity risks.
• Occurrence of a significant business interruption.
• Ability to maintain the health and safety of our workforce.
• Ability to integrate acquisitions.
•
Ability to develop and commercialize new innovative products and services.
We caution that forward-looking statements must be considered carefully and that actual results may differ in material ways due to risks and uncertainties both known and unknown. Information about factors that could materially affect our results can be found in Part I, Item 1A "Risk Factors" of this Form 10-K. Shareholders, potential investors and other readers are urged to consider these factors in evaluating forward-looking statements and are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements.
We undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. Investors are advised to consult any further disclosures by us in our filings with the SEC and in other written statements on related subjects. It is not possible to anticipate or foresee all risk factors, and investors should not consider any list of such factors to be an exhaustive or complete list of all risks or uncertainties.