ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to the “Company,” “BCTG Acquisition Corp.,” “BCTG,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to BCTG Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on May 21, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). Although we are not limited to a particular industry or sector for purposes of consummating a Business Combination, intend to focus on businesses that have their primary operations located in North America and Europe in the biotechnology industry. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is BCTG Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) was declared effective on September 2, 2020. On September 8, 2020, we consummated an Initial Public Offering of 16,675,000 shares of common stock (the “Public Shares”), which includes 2,175,000 Public Shares as a result of the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option, at an offering price of $10.00 per Public Share, generating gross proceeds of approximately $166.8 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $9.6 million, inclusive of approximately $5.8 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 533,500 shares of common stock (the “Private Placement Shares”), at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Share to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $5.3 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement (including the exercise of the over-allotment) $166.8 million, representing the net proceeds of the sale of the Public Shares in the Initial Public Offering and certain proceeds of the Private Placement, was placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer& Trust Company acting as trustee, and held as cash or invested only in U.S. “government securities,” within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
We will have 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or September 8, 2022, to complete our initial Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). If we do not complete a Business Combination within this period of time (and stockholders do not approve an amendment to the amended and restated certificate of incorporation to extend this date) we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the outstanding Public Shares and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject (in the case of (ii) and (iii) above) to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. The initial stockholders have agreed to waive their liquidation rights with respect to the Founder Shares if we fail to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period. However, if the Initial Stockholders should acquire Public Shares in or after the Initial Public Offering, they will be entitled to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to such Public Shares if we fail to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period. The underwriters have agreed to waive their rights to their deferred underwriting commission held in the Trust Account in the event we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period and, in such event, such amounts will be included with the funds held in the Trust Account that will be available to fund the redemption of our Public Shares. In the event of such distribution, it is possible that the per share value of the residual assets remaining available for distribution (including Trust Account assets) will be only $10.00 per share initially held in the Trust Account.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2020 was in preparation for our formation, the Initial Public Offering, and, since the closing of our Initial Public Offering, a search for business combination candidates. We will not be generating any operating revenues until after the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination.
For the period from May 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $123,000, which consisted of approximately $109,000 in general and administrative expenses, approximately $40,000 in general and administrative expenses - related party, and approximately $39,000 in franchise and income tax expense, offset by approximately $65,000 in interest income earned on investments held in the Trust Account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.3 million in cash available for operating expenses and approximately $1.4 million of working capital.
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs were satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from our Sponsor in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares (as defined below), and the loans under the Note (as defined below) of approximately $127,000 to us to cover for offering costs in connection with the Initial Public Offering. We fully repaid the Notes on September 10, 2020. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering on September 8, 2020, the liquidity needs have been satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our officers, directors and initial stockholders may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans (as defined below). As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statement does not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On June 4, 2020, we issued 3,593,750 shares of common stock to our Sponsor in exchange for a payment of $25,000 (the “Founder Shares”). On September 2, 2020, we declared a dividend of 0.16 shares for each outstanding share of common stock (an aggregate of 575,000 shares), resulting in an aggregate of 4,168,750 shares outstanding. All shares and associated amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the share dividend. Our Sponsor currently owns an aggregate of 4,493,450 shares of common stock, and our independent directors and advisors collectively own 208,800 shares of common stock. Our Sponsor had agreed to forfeit up to an aggregate of 543,750 Founder Shares, so that the Founder Shares would represent 20% of our issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering, to the extent the underwriters’ over-allotment option was not exercised in full or in part. On September 8, 2020, the underwriters exercised their 15% over-allotment option in full; thus, the Founder Shares were no longer subject to forfeiture.
The Initial Stockholders agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Founder Shares (except to certain permitted transferees) until the earlier of (i) one year after the date of the consummation of the initial Business Combination or (ii) the date on which the closing price of our common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations and recapitalizations) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination, or earlier if, subsequent to the initial Business Combination, we consummate a subsequent liquidation, merger, stock exchange or other similar transaction which results in all of the stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Shares
Concurrently with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, our Sponsor purchased 533,500 Private Placement Shares, at a price of $10.00 per share, in a private placement for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $5.3 million. The Private Placement Shares are identical to the shares of common stock sold in the Initial Public Offering, subject to certain limited exceptions as described in Note 1 of our financial statements.
Our Sponsor and our officers and directors have agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Private Placement Shares until 30 days after the completion of the Initial Business Combination.
Related Party Loans
On May 21, 2020 and June 10, 2020, our Sponsor agreed to loan us up to $25,025 and $274,975, respectively, for an aggregate amount of $300,000 to be used for the payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to a promissory note (each, a “Note” and, collectively, the “Notes”). The Notes were non-interest bearing, unsecured and due upon the date we consummate the Initial Public Offering. We borrowed approximately $127,000 under the Notes and repaid the Notes in full on September 10, 2020.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial Business Combination, the initial stockholders, officers and directors and their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). Each loan would be evidenced by a promissory note. The notes would either be paid upon consummation of the initial Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of the notes may be converted upon consummation of the Business Combination into additional private placement shares at a conversion price of $10.00 per share. If we do not complete a Business Combination, the loans will not be repaid. Such private placement shares would be identical to the Private Placement Shares. We did not have any borrowings under the Working Capital Loans as of December 31, 2020.
Administrative Support Agreement
Commencing on the date of our prospectus, we agreed to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space and certain office and secretarial services. Upon completion of the Initial Business Combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. For the period from May 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, the Company incurred $40,000 related to these services. As of December 31, 2020, no amounts were payable related to this agreement.
Share Purchase Commitment
Our Sponsor entered into an agreement to purchase an aggregate of at least 2,500,000 shares of common for an aggregate purchase price of $25.0 million, or $10.00 per share, prior to, concurrently with, or following the closing of the initial Business Combination in a private placement. The funds from such private placement may be used as part of the consideration to the sellers in the initial Business Combination, and any excess funds from such private placement may be used for working capital in the post-transaction company.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Shares and shares that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The holders of a majority of these securities are entitled to make up to two demands that we register such securities. The holders of the majority of the Founder Shares can elect to exercise these registration rights at any time commencing three months prior to the date on which these shares of common stock are to be released from escrow. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the consummation of a Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per share, or approximately $3.3 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, the underwriters will be entitled to a deferred underwriting commission of $0.35 per share, or approximately $5.8 million in the aggregate if the underwriters’ over-allotment option is exercised in full. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account on the accompanying statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Shares of conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020, 15,736,221 shares of common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the accompanying balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net loss per share of common stock is computed by dividing net loss applicable to stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the periods. Weighted average share were reduced for the effect of an aggregate of 543,750 shares of common stock that were subject to forfeiture if the over-allotment option was not exercised by the underwriters. The underwriters exercised their over-allotment option in full on September 8, 2020; thus, these Founder Shares were no longer subject to forfeiture (see Note 6). At December 31, 2020, we did not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into shares of common stock and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted loss per share is the same as basic loss per share for the periods presented.
Our statement of operations includes a presentation of loss per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net loss per share, basic and diluted for Public Shares is calculated by dividing the investment income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable income and franchise taxes of approximately $26,000 for the period from May 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, by the weighted average number of shares of Public Shares outstanding for the period. Net loss per share, basic and diluted for Founder Shares is calculated by dividing the net loss of approximately $123,000, less income attributable to Founder Shares, by the weighted average number of shares of Founder Shares outstanding for the periods.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We have elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, that would have a material effect on our financial statements.