ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
References to the “Company,” “DFP Healthcare Acquisitions Corp.,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to DFP Healthcare Acquisitions Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to the Risk Factors section of the Company’s final prospectus for its initial public offering filed with the SEC. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on November 1, 2019 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We intend to focus our investment effort broadly across the entire healthcare industry, which encompasses services, therapeutics, devices, diagnostics and animal health. We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of this offering and the private placement of the private placement warrants, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial Business Combination (pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into following the consummation of our initial public offering or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing. Our sponsor is DFP Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”).
Our registration statement for our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) was declared effective by the SEC on March 10, 2020. On March 13, 2020, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 23,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A common stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), including 3,000,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments (the “Over-Allotment Units”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $230.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $10.4 million, inclusive of approximately $6.3 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 3,733,334 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to our Sponsor, generating proceeds of $5.6 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $230.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”) and was invested in permitted United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, which we refer to as the Investment Company Act, having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act that invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
We will only have 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or March 13, 2022, to complete our initial Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). If we do not complete a Business Combination within this period of time, it will (i) cease all operations except for the purposes of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible, but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares for a per share pro rata portion of the Trust Account, including interest and not previously released to us to fund our working capital requirements (subject to an annual limit of $500,000) (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of such net interest to pay dissolution expenses) and (iii) as promptly as possible following such redemption, liquidate and dissolve the balance of our net assets to our remaining stockholders, as part of our plan of dissolution and liquidation.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with a Business Combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
· may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in this offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of Class A common stock on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B common stock;
· may subordinate the rights of holders of Class A common stock if shares of preferred stock are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A common stock;
· could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our Class A common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
· may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
· may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our units, Class A common stock and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
· default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial Business Combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
· acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
· our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
· our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt is outstanding;
· our inability to pay dividends on our Class A common stock;
· using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our Class A common stock if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
· limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
· increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
· limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2020, we had approximately $0.9 million in our operating bank account. We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from inception through December 31, 2020 related to our formation, the preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and, since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on our investments held in the Trust Account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $441,000, which consisted of approximately $309,000 in general and administrative expenses, $175,000 in administrative expenses - related party, approximately $200,000 in franchise tax expense, and approximately $11,000 in income tax expense, partly offset by approximately $254,000 of interest income from investments in Trust Account.
For the period November 1, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, our only activities had been organization activities and those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering.
Going Concern
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $0.9 million in our operating bank account, working capital of approximately $0.8 million, and approximately $254,000 of interest income available in the Trust Account for our tax obligations.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a $25,000 contribution from our Sponsor in exchange for the issuance of our founder shares to our Sponsor, the promissory note of $200,000 from our Sponsor, and the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. On March 13, 2020, we repaid the promissory note in full to our Sponsor. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2020, there were no Working Capital Loans outstanding.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was approximately $583,000. Net loss from operations of approximately $441,000 was affected by interest income on the investments held in Trust Account of approximately $254,000 and changes in operating assets and liabilities which provided approximately $112,000.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our industry and has concluded that, while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on the Company’s financial position, results of its operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 205-40, "Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern," management has determined that the liquidity condition and date for mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after March 13, 2022.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay our Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, secretarial and administrative services and an agreement to pay our Chief Financial Officer, Christopher Wolfe, $7,500 per month for his services prior to the initial Business Combination.
Registration Rights
The initial stockholders and holders of the Private Placement Warrants are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The initial stockholders and holders of the Private Placement Warrants will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that the Company register such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders will have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by the Company. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option to purchase up to 3,000,000 additional Units to cover any over-allotments, at the initial public offering price of $10.00 per Unit, less the underwriting discounts and commissions. The warrants that were be issued in connection with the 3,000,000 over-allotment Units are identical to the public warrants and have no net cash settlement provisions. The underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full on March 13, 2020.
The underwriters did not receive any underwriting discounts or commission on the 5,000,000 Units purchased in the Initial Public Offering by certain domestic private pooled investment vehicles managed by Deerfield Management Company, L.P. We paid an underwriting discount of 2.0% of the per Unit offering price, or $3.6 million, at the closing of the Initial Public Offering, with an additional fee (the “Deferred Underwriting Fees”) of 3.5% of the gross offering proceeds, or $6.3 million, payable upon the Company's completion of an Initial Business Combination. The Deferred Underwriting Fees will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event we complete our initial Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included as interest income on investments in the Trust Account in the accompanying statements of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 21,975,605 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share
Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of common stock outstanding during the period. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 9,483,334 of the Company’s Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method.
Our statements of operations include a presentation of loss per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per share.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net loss per common stock, basic and diluted for Class A common stock are calculated by dividing the interest income from investments held in the Trust Account of approximately $254,000, less approximately $211,000 of maximum allowance for tax obligations, minus approximately $43,000 for working capital, resulting in no income for Class A common stock for the year ended December 31, 2020, by the weighted average number of Class A common stock outstanding for the period. Net loss per common stock, basic and diluted for Class B common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss of approximately $441,000, less income attributable to Class A common stock of $0, resulting in a net loss of approximately $441,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, by the weighted average number of Class B common stock outstanding for the period.
For the period from November 1, 2019, through December 31, 2019, net loss per common stock, basic and diluted for Class B common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss of approximately $2,300, by the weighted average number of Class B common stock outstanding for the period excluding 750,000 shares that were subject to forfeiture.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.