ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (“MD&A”)
This discussion and analysis is based on, should be read together with, and is qualified in its entirety by, the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto in Item 15(a)1 of this Form 10-K, beginning at page. It also should be read in conjunction with the disclosure under “Forward-Looking Statements” in Part I of this Form 10-K.
When this report uses the words “we,” “us,” “our,” and the “Company,” they refer to Toll Brothers, Inc. and its subsidiaries, unless the context otherwise requires. References herein to fiscal year refer to our fiscal years ended or ending October 31.
Unless otherwise stated in this report, net contracts signed represents a number or value equal to the gross number or value of contracts signed during the relevant period, less the number or value of contracts canceled during the relevant period, which includes contracts that were signed during the relevant period and in prior periods. Backlog consists of homes under contract but not yet delivered to our home buyers (“backlog”). Backlog conversion represents the percentage of homes delivered in the period from backlog at the beginning of the period (“backlog conversion”).
OVERVIEW
Our Business
We design, build, market, sell, and arrange financing for an array of luxury residential single-family detached, attached, master-planned, resort-style golf, and urban low-, mid-, and high-rise communities, principally on land we develop and improve, as we continue to pursue our strategy of broadening our product lines, price points and geographic footprint. We cater to luxury first-time, move-up, empty-nester, active-adult, and second-home buyers in the United States (“Traditional Home Building Product”), as well as urban and suburban renters. We also design, build, market, and sell urban low-, mid-, and high-rise condominiums through Toll Brothers City Living® (“City Living”). At October 31, 2021, we were operating in 24 states, and in the District of Columbia.
In the five years ended October 31, 2021, we delivered 42,005 homes from 835 communities, including 9,986 homes from 497 communities in fiscal 2021. At October 31, 2021, we had 995 communities in various stages of planning, development or operations containing approximately 80,900 home sites that we owned or controlled through options.
We operate our own architectural, engineering, mortgage, title, land development, insurance, smart home technology, and landscaping subsidiaries. In addition, in certain regions we operate our own lumber distribution, house component assembly and component manufacturing operations.
We are developing several land parcels for master-planned communities in which we intend to build homes on a portion of the lots and sell the remaining lots to other builders. Two of these master-planned communities are being developed 100% by us, and the remaining communities are being developed through joint ventures with other builders or financial partners.
In addition to our residential for-sale business, we also develop and operate for-rent apartments through joint ventures. See the section entitled “Toll Brothers Apartment Living/Toll Brothers Campus Living” below.
We have investments in various unconsolidated entities, including our Land Development Joint Ventures, Home Building Joint Ventures, Rental Property Joint Ventures and Gibraltar Joint Ventures.
Financial Highlights
In fiscal 2021, we recognized $8.43 billion of home sales revenues and net income of $833.6 million, as compared to $6.94 billion of revenues and net income of $446.6 million in fiscal 2020.
In fiscal 2021 and 2020, the value of net contracts signed was $11.54 billion (12,472 homes) and $8.00 billion (9,932 homes), respectively. The value of our backlog at October 31, 2021 was $9.50 billion (10,302 homes), as compared to our backlog at October 31, 2020 of $6.37 billion (7,791 homes).
At October 31, 2021, we had $1.64 billion of cash and cash equivalents and approximately $1.81 billion available for borrowing under our $1.905 billion revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”), substantially all of which matures in November 2026. At October 31, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility and had outstanding letters of credit of approximately $94.5 million.
At October 31, 2021, our total equity and our debt to total capitalization ratio were $5.34 billion and 0.40 to 1.00, respectively.
Acquisitions
As part of our strategy to expand our geographic footprint and product offerings, in fiscal 2021, we acquired substantially all of the assets and operations of StoryBook Homes, LLC (“StoryBook”), a privately-held home builder serving the Las Vegas, Nevada market, for approximately $38.8 million in cash. The assets acquired were primarily inventory for future communities, including approximately 550 home sites owned or controlled through land purchase agreements.
Our Business Environment and Current Outlook
During fiscal year 2021, we continued to experience very strong demand for our homes as the overall housing market remained robust. During the year, we signed 12,472 net contracts with a value of $11.54 billion, up 26% in units and 44% in dollars compared to fiscal 2020. The strength in demand continued in our fourth quarter, as we signed net contracts of 2,957 homes and $3.00 billion, down 13% in homes compared to a very strong fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, and up 10% in dollars compared to the same period. Signed contracts, in both units and dollars, were the second highest totals for any quarter in our history (behind only the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020). In response to the strong demand and in an effort to drive profitability and manage growth, we continued to raise prices in substantially all of our communities during the fourth quarter. We have also limited lot releases in some of our communities in order to better align sales with our production capacity. We continue to attribute the strong demand for new homes to a number of factors, including a supply-demand imbalance resulting from over a decade of underproduction of new homes, low mortgage rates, a tight supply of resale homes, favorable demographics, and a renewed appreciation for the importance of home. We believe many of these factors will continue to support demand in the foreseeable future.
Our backlog at October 31, 2021 was 10,302 homes and $9.50 billion, up 32% in units and 49% in dollars, as compared to our backlog at October 31, 2020. This was our highest year-end backlog in both units and dollars. We, like many other home builders, are currently experiencing shortages for certain building materials and tightness in labor markets for a number of reasons, including the strong demand environment and disruptions to global supply chains caused by the pandemic and other factors. These disruptions have extended our build times (the time it takes from contract signing to delivery of the completed home) by up to eight weeks as compared to our more typical build time of 9 to 12 months. We continue to work with our suppliers and trade partners to resolve these issues, but we do not expect material or labor conditions to significantly improve in the near term. Continued supply chain disruptions and labor and material shortages could further elongate delivery times and increase cost pressures.
Although housing market demand has remained strong over the past year and as we enter fiscal 2022, future economic conditions and the demand for homes are subject to continued uncertainty due to many factors, including the impacts of inflation, supply chain disruptions and labor shortages, the ongoing impact of the pandemic and government directives, actions and economic relief efforts related thereto, and the further impact of these actions on the economy, mortgage rates and markets, employment levels, consumer confidence, and financial markets, among other things. The potential effect of these factors on our future operational and financial performance is highly uncertain, unpredictable and outside our control. As a result, our past performance may not be indicative of future results.
Competitive Landscape
The home building business is highly competitive and fragmented. We compete with numerous home builders of varying sizes, ranging from local to national in scope, some of which have greater sales and financial resources than we do. Sales of existing homes, whether by a homeowner or by a financial institution that may have acquired a home through a foreclosure, also provide competition. We compete primarily based on price, location, design, quality, service, and reputation. We believe our financial stability, relative to many others in our industry, provides us with a competitive advantage.
Land Acquisition and Development
Our business is subject to many risks because of the extended length of time that it takes to obtain the necessary approvals on a property, complete the land improvements on it, and build and deliver a home after a home buyer signs an agreement of sale. We attempt to reduce some of these risks and improve our capital efficiency by utilizing one or more of the following methods: controlling land for future development through options, which enables us to obtain necessary governmental approvals before acquiring title to the land; generally commencing construction of a detached home only after executing an agreement of sale and receiving a substantial down payment from the buyer; and using subcontractors to perform home construction and land development work on a fixed-price basis.
During fiscal 2021 and 2020, we acquired control of approximately 27,700 and 12,400 home sites, respectively, net of options terminated and home sites sold. At October 31, 2021, we controlled approximately 80,900 home sites, as compared to approximately 63,200 home sites at October 31, 2020, and approximately 59,200 home sites at October 31, 2019. In addition, at
October 31, 2021, we expect to purchase approximately 5,800 additional home sites from several Land Development Joint Ventures in which we have an interest, at prices not yet determined.
Of the approximately 80,900 total home sites that we owned or controlled through options at October 31, 2021, we owned approximately 36,100 and controlled approximately 44,800 through options. Of the 80,900 home sites, approximately 17,200 were substantially improved.
In addition, at October 31, 2021, our Land Development Joint Ventures owned approximately 23,700 home sites (including 190 home sites included in the 44,800 controlled through options).
At October 31, 2021, we were selling from 340 communities, compared to 317 communities at October 31, 2020, and 333 communities at October 31, 2019.
Customer Mortgage Financing
We maintain relationships with a diversified group of mortgage financial institutions, many of which are among the largest in the industry. We believe that national, regional and community banks continue to recognize the long-term value in creating relationships with our home buyers, and these banks continue to provide these customers with financing.
We believe that our home buyers generally are, and should continue to be, well-positioned to secure mortgages due to their typically lower loan-to-value ratios and attractive credit profiles, as compared to the average home buyer.
Toll Brothers Apartment Living/Toll Brothers Campus Living
In addition to our residential for-sale business, we also develop and operate for-rent apartments through joint ventures. At October 31, 2021, we or joint ventures in which we have an interest, controlled 59 land parcels that are planned as for-rent apartment projects containing approximately 19,500 units. These projects, which are located in multiple metropolitan areas throughout the country, are being operated, are being developed, or will be developed with partners under the brand names Toll Brothers Apartment Living and Toll Brothers Campus Living.
In fiscal 2021, we announced a strategic partnership with Equity Residential, to selectively acquire and develop sites for new rental apartment communities in metro Boston, MA; Atlanta, GA; Austin, TX; Denver, CO; Orange County/San Diego, CA; Seattle, WA; and Dallas-Fort Worth, TX. The strategic partnership has an initial term of three years. For selected projects, Equity Residential is expected to invest 75% of the equity and we are expected to invest the remaining 25% of the equity. It is expected that each project will also be financed with approximately 60% leverage. Equity Residential will have the option to acquire each property upon stabilization. The parties have targeted an initial minimum co-investment of $733.0 million in combined equity, or $1.83 billion in aggregate value, assuming 60% leverage. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, we entered into three joint ventures with Equity Residential under this arrangement. We also continue to evaluate potential strategic partnerships for our apartment projects in metro markets that are not designated to be developed exclusively with Equity Residential.
In fiscal 2021, five of our Rental Property Joint Ventures sold their assets to unrelated parties, resulting in an aggregate gain of $177.6 million recognized by the joint ventures. From our investments in these joint ventures, we received cash and recognized an aggregate gain of $74.8 million in fiscal 2021. In fiscal 2020, we sold all of our ownership interest in one of our Rental Property Joint Ventures to our partner for cash of $16.8 million, net of closing costs. The joint venture had owned, developed, and operated multifamily residential apartments in northern New Jersey. We recognized a gain of $10.7 million in fiscal 2020 from this sale. The gains recognized from these sales are included in “Income from unconsolidated entities” in our Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Income included in Item 15(a)1 of this Form 10-K.
At October 31, 2021, we had approximately 3,200 units in for-rent apartment projects that were occupied or ready for occupancy, 1,500 units in the lease-up stage, 9,200 units in the design phase or under development, and 5,600 units in the planning stage. Of the 19,500 units at October 31, 2021, 11,000 were owned by joint ventures in which we have an interest; approximately 3,600 were owned by us; and 4,900 were under contract to be purchased by us.
Contracts and Backlog
The aggregate value of net sales contracts signed increased 44% in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020. The value of net sales contracts signed was $11.54 billion (12,472 homes) in fiscal 2021 and $8.00 billion (9,932 homes) in fiscal 2020. The increase in the aggregate value of net contracts signed in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was due to a 26% increase in the number of net contracts signed and a 15% increase in the average value of each contract signed. The increase in the number of net contracts signed in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, reflects an overall increase in demand in the housing market, including a resurgence in demand for our homes that began at the outset of our fiscal 2020 third quarter. We attribute the increase in demand to a number of factors, including low interest rates, a continued undersupply of homes, favorable
demographics, and consumers’ increased focus on the importance of home. The increase in average price of net contracts signed in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was principally due to price increases in many of our markets, partially offset by a shift in mix to lower price product types.
The value of our backlog at October 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 was $9.50 billion (10,302 homes), $6.37 billion (7,791 homes), and $5.26 billion (6,266 homes), respectively. Approximately 90% of the homes in backlog at October 31, 2021 are expected to be delivered by October 31, 2022. The 49% increase in the value of homes in backlog at October 31, 2021, as compared to October 31, 2020, was due to an increase in the value of net contracts signed and higher home sales revenues in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020.
For more information regarding revenues, net contracts signed, and backlog by geographic segment, see “Segments” in this MD&A.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) require us to make estimates and assumptions that affect our reported amounts in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Our estimates are based on (i) currently known facts and circumstances, (ii) prior experience, (iii) assessments of probability, (iv) forecasted financial information, and (v) assumptions that management believes to be reasonable but that are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. We use our best judgment when measuring these estimates, and if warranted, use external advice. On an ongoing basis, we review the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material. In times of economic disruption when uncertainty regarding future economic conditions is heightened, these estimates and assumptions are subject to greater variability.
For a discussion of all our significant accounting policies, including our critical accounting policies, refer to Note 1,“Significant Accounting Policies” of the Consolidated Financial Statements. We believe that the accounting estimates and assumptions described below involve significant subjectivity and judgment, and changes to such estimates or assumptions could have a material impact on our financial condition or operating results. Therefore, we consider an understanding of the variability and judgment required in making these estimates and assumptions to be critical in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
We believe the following critical accounting estimates reflect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Inventory
Inventory is stated at cost unless an impairment exists, in which case it is written down to fair value in accordance with GAAP. In addition to direct land acquisition, land development, and home construction costs, costs also include interest, real estate taxes, and direct overhead related to development and construction, which are capitalized to inventory during periods beginning with the commencement of development and ending with the completion of construction. Because our inventory is considered a long-lived asset under GAAP, we are required to regularly review the carrying value of each of our communities and write down the value of those communities when we believe the values are not recoverable.
Operating Communities: When the profitability of an operating community deteriorates, the sales pace declines significantly, or some other factor indicates a possible impairment in the recoverability of the asset, the asset is reviewed for impairment by comparing the estimated future undiscounted cash flow for the community to its carrying value. If the estimated future undiscounted cash flow is less than the community’s carrying value, the carrying value is written down to its estimated fair value. Estimated fair value is primarily determined by discounting the estimated future cash flow of each community. During the year ended October 31, 2021, we utilized a discount rate of approximately 14% in our valuations. The discount rate used in determining each asset’s fair value reflects inherent risks associated with the related estimated cash flows, as well as current risk-free rates available in the market and estimated market risk premiums. In estimating the future undiscounted cash flow of a community, we use various estimates such as (i) the expected sales pace in a community, based upon general economic conditions that will have a short-term or long-term impact on the market in which the community is located and on competition within the market, including the number of home sites available and pricing and incentives being offered in other communities owned by us or by other builders; (ii) the expected sales prices and sales incentives to be offered in a community; (iii) costs expended to date and expected to be incurred in the future, including, but not limited to, land and land development costs, home construction, interest, and overhead costs; (iv) alternative product offerings that may be offered in a community that will have an impact on sales pace, sales price, building cost, or the number of homes that can be built in a particular community; and (v) alternative uses for the property, such as the possibility of a sale of the entire community to another builder or the sale of individual home sites. Any impairment is charged to cost of home sales revenues in the period in which the impairment is determined.
Future Communities: We evaluate all land held for future communities or future sections of operating communities, whether owned or optioned, to determine whether or not we expect to proceed with the development of the land as originally contemplated. This evaluation encompasses the same types of estimates used for operating communities described above, as well as an evaluation of the regulatory environment in which the land is located and the estimated probability of obtaining the necessary approvals, the estimated time and cost it will take to obtain those approvals, alternative land uses and the possible concessions that may be required to be given in order to obtain them. Concessions may include cash payments to fund improvements to public places such as parks and streets, dedication of a portion of the property for use by the public or as open space, or a reduction in the density or size of the homes to be built or commitment to build or fund certain dedicated workforce and affordable housing units. Based upon this review, we decide (i) as to land under contract to be purchased, whether the contract will likely be terminated or renegotiated, and (ii) as to land we own, whether the land will likely be developed as contemplated or in an alternative manner, or should be sold. We then further determine whether costs that have been capitalized to the community are recoverable or should be written off. The write-off is charged to cost of home sales revenues in the period in which the need for the write-off is determined.
The estimates used in the determination of the estimated cash flows and fair value of both current and future communities are based on factors known to us at the time such estimates are made and our expectations of future operations and economic conditions. Should the estimates or expectations used in determining estimated fair value deteriorate in the future, we may be required to recognize additional impairment charges and write-offs related to current and future communities and such amounts could be material.
We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology we use to assess possible impairments during the past three fiscal years.
We recognized inventory impairment charges and the expensing of costs that we believed not to be recoverable in each of the three fiscal years ended October 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, as shown in the table below (amounts in thousands):
Cost of Revenue Recognition
Cost of revenues from home sales are recognized at the time each home is delivered and title and possession are transferred to the buyer.
For our standard attached and detached homes, land, land development, and related costs, both incurred and estimated to be incurred in the future, are amortized to the cost of homes closed based upon the total number of homes expected to be constructed in each community. Any changes resulting from a change in the estimated number of homes to be constructed or in the estimated costs subsequent to the commencement of delivery of homes are allocated to the remaining undelivered homes in the community. Home construction and related costs are charged to the cost of homes closed under the specific identification method. For our master-planned communities, the estimated land, common area development, and related costs, including the cost of golf courses, net of their estimated residual value, are allocated to individual communities within a master-planned community on a relative sales value basis. Any changes resulting from a change in the estimated number of homes to be constructed or in the estimated costs are allocated to the remaining home sites in each of the communities of the master-planned community.
For high-rise/mid-rise projects, land, land development, construction, and related costs, both incurred and estimated to be incurred in the future, are generally amortized to the cost of units closed based upon an estimated relative sales value of the units closed to the total estimated sales value. Any changes resulting from a change in the estimated total costs or revenues of the project are allocated to the remaining units to be delivered.
We rely on certain estimates to determine our construction and land development costs. Construction and land costs are comprised of direct and allocated costs, including estimated future costs. In determining these costs, we compile community budgets that are based on a variety of assumptions, including future construction schedules and costs to be incurred. Actual results can differ from budgeted amounts for various reasons, including construction delays, labor or material shortages, slower absorptions, increases in costs that have not yet been committed, changes in governmental requirements, or other unanticipated issues encountered during construction and development and other factors beyond our control. To address uncertainty in these budgets, we assess, update and revise community budgets on a regular basis, utilizing the most current information available to estimate home construction and land costs.
We have not made any material changes in the methodology used in developing and revising community budgets over the past three fiscal years.
Warranty and Self-Insurance
Warranty: We provide all of our home buyers with a limited warranty as to workmanship and mechanical equipment. We also provide many of our home buyers with a limited 10-year warranty as to structural integrity. We accrue for expected warranty costs at the time each home is closed and title and possession are transferred to the home buyer. Warranty costs are accrued based upon historical experience related to product type, geographic location and other community specific factors. Adjustments to our warranty liabilities related to homes delivered in prior years are recorded in the period in which a change in our estimate occurs. Over the past several years, we have had a significant number of warranty claims related primarily to homes built in Pennsylvania and Delaware. See Note 7, “Accrued Expenses” in Item 15(a)1 of this Form 10-K for additional information regarding these warranty charges. We have not made any material changes in our methodology or significant assumptions used to establish our warranty reserves during the past three fiscal years.
Self-Insurance: We maintain, and require the majority of our subcontractors to maintain, general liability insurance (including construction defect and bodily injury coverage) and workers’ compensation insurance. These insurance policies protect us against a portion of our risk of loss from claims related to our home building activities, subject to certain self-insured retentions, deductibles and other coverage limits (“self-insured liability”). We also provide general liability insurance for our subcontractors in Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, Washington, and certain areas of Texas, where eligible subcontractors are enrolled as insureds under our general liability insurance policies in each community in which they perform work. For those enrolled subcontractors, we absorb their general liability associated with the work performed on our homes within the applicable community as part of our overall general liability insurance and our self-insurance through our captive insurance subsidiary.
We record expenses and liabilities based on the estimated costs required to cover our self-insured liability and the estimated costs of potential claims and claim adjustment expenses that are not covered by our insurance policies. These estimated costs are based on an analysis of our historical claims and industry data, and include an estimate of claims incurred but not yet reported (“IBNR”).
We engage a third-party actuary that uses our historical claim and expense data, input from our internal legal and risk management groups, as well as industry data, to estimate our liabilities related to unpaid claims, IBNR associated with the risks that we are assuming for our self-insured liability and other required costs to administer current and expected claims. These estimates are subject to uncertainty due to a variety of factors, the most significant being the long period of time between the delivery of a home to a home buyer and when a structural warranty or construction defect claim is made, and the ultimate resolution of the claim. Though state regulations vary, construction defect claims are reported and resolved over a prolonged period of time, which can extend for 10 years or longer. As a result, the majority of the estimated liability relates to IBNR. Adjustments to our liabilities related to homes delivered in prior years are recorded in the period in which a change in our estimate occurs.
The projection of losses related to these liabilities requires actuarial assumptions that are subject to variability due to uncertainties regarding construction defect claims relative to our markets and the types of product we build, insurance industry practices and legal or regulatory actions and/or interpretations, among other factors. Key assumptions used in these estimates include claim frequencies, severity and settlement patterns, which can occur over an extended period of time. In addition, changes in the frequency and severity of reported claims and the estimates to settle claims can impact the trends and assumptions used in the actuarial analysis, which could be material to our consolidated financial statements. Due to the degree of judgment required, and the potential for variability in these underlying assumptions, our actual future costs could differ from those estimated, and the difference could be material to our consolidated financial statements.
We have not made any material changes in our methodology used to establish our self-insurance reserves during the past three fiscal years. Over the past three fiscal years adjustments to our estimates have not been material.
Investments in Unconsolidated Entities
We evaluate our investments in unconsolidated entities for indicators of impairment on a quarterly basis. A series of operating losses of an investee, the inability to recover our invested capital, or other factors may indicate that a loss in value of our investment in the unconsolidated entity has occurred. If a loss exists, we further review to determine if the loss is other than temporary, in which case we write down the investment to its estimated fair value. The amount of impairment recognized is the excess of the investment’s carrying amount over its estimated fair value.
The evaluation of our investments in unconsolidated entities for other-than-temporary impairment entails a detailed cash flow analysis using many estimates, including but not limited to: (1) projected future distributions from the unconsolidated entities,
(2) discount rates applied to the future distributions and (3) various other factors. For our unconsolidated entities that develop for-sale homes and condominiums these other factors include those that are similar to how we evaluate our inventory for impairment as described above, such as expected sales pace, expected sales price, and costs incurred and anticipated. For our unconsolidated entities that own, develop and manage for-rent residential apartments, these other factors may include rental trends, expected future expenses and cap rates. Our assumptions on the projected future distributions from unconsolidated entities are also dependent on market conditions, sufficiency of financing and capital and competition.
We believe our assumptions on discount rates require significant judgment because the selection of the discount rate may significantly impact the estimated fair value of our investments in unconsolidated entities. A higher discount rate reduces the estimated fair value of our investments in unconsolidated entities, while a lower discount rate increases the estimated fair value of our investments in unconsolidated entities. During the year ended October 31, 2021, we utilized discount rates ranging from 9% to 15% in our valuations. Because of changes in economic conditions, actual results could differ materially from management’s assumptions and may require material valuation adjustments to our investments in unconsolidated entities to be recorded in the future.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table compares certain items in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income and other supplemental information for fiscal 2021 and 2020 ($ amounts in millions, unless otherwise stated). For more information regarding results of operations by operating segment, see “Segments” in this MD&A.
Note: Amounts may not add due to rounding.
NM - Not Meaningful
A discussion and analysis regarding Results of Operations and Analysis of Financial Condition for the year ended October 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended October 31, 2019, is included in Part II, Item 7, “MD&A” to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on December 22, 2020.
FISCAL 2021 COMPARED TO FISCAL 2020
Home Sales Revenues and Home Sales Cost of Revenues
The increase in home sales revenues in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was attributable to an 18% increase in the number of homes delivered and a 3% increase in the average price of the homes delivered. The increase in the number of homes delivered in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, is principally due to an increase in the number of homes in backlog at October 31, 2020, as compared to the number of homes in backlog at October 31, 2019, as a result of increased demand for our homes partially offset by lower backlog conversion in fiscal 2021. In addition, restrictions and related impacts on economic activity from the COVID-19 pandemic adversely impacted our ability to construct and deliver homes in certain markets in the second half of fiscal 2020, including New Jersey, New York City, metro Seattle and California. The increase in the average delivered home price was mainly due to sales price increases, partially offset by a shift in mix to lower price product types.
Home sales cost of revenues, as a percentage of homes sales revenues, in fiscal 2021 was 77.5%, as compared to 79.8% in fiscal 2020. The decrease in fiscal 2021 was principally due to a shift in the mix of revenues to higher margin products/areas, higher sales prices outpacing cost increases, lower inventory impairment charges and lower interest expense as a percentage of home sales revenues. Interest cost in fiscal 2021 was $187.2 million or 2.2% of home sales revenues, as compared to $174.4 million or 2.6% of home sales revenues in fiscal 2020. We recognized inventory impairments and write-offs of $26.5 million or 0.3% of home sales revenues and $55.9 million or 0.8% of home sales revenues in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Land Sales and Other Revenues and Land Sales and Other Cost of Revenues
Our revenues from land sales and other generally consist of the following: (1) land sales to joint ventures in which we retain an interest; (2) lot sales to third-party builders within our master-planned communities; (3) bulk land sales to third parties of land we have decided no longer meets our development criteria: and (4) sales of commercial and retail properties generally located at our City Living buildings. Land sales to joint ventures in which we retain an interest are generally sold at our land basis and therefore little to no gross margin is earned on these sales.
In fiscal 2021, we sold a parking garage and retail space associated with our Hoboken, New Jersey condominium projects for $82.4 million and we recognized gains of $38.3 million. In addition, we sold ten land parcels to newly formed Rental Property Joint Ventures in which we have an interest for $227.8 million. No gains were recognized on these land sales to joint ventures. During fiscal 2020, we sold six land parcels to newly formed Rental Property Joint Ventures in which we retained an interest for approximately $74.1 million. Minimal gains were recognized on these land sales to joint ventures.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (“SG&A”)
SG&A spending increased by $54.6 million in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020. As a percentage of home sales revenues, SG&A was 10.9% and 12.5% in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. The dollar increase in SG&A was due primarily to higher commissions and insurance costs incurred due to the 22% increase in home sales revenues, increased compensation costs due to a higher number of employees and normal compensation increases, partially offset by lower sales and marketing expenses being incurred in a high demand environment. The decrease in SG&A as a percentage of revenues was due to a 22% increase in revenues partially offset by a 6% increase in SG&A spending in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020.
Income from Unconsolidated Entities
We recognize our proportionate share of the earnings and losses from the various unconsolidated entities in which we have an investment. Many of our unconsolidated entities are land development projects, high-rise/mid-rise condominium construction projects, or for-rent apartments projects, which do not generate revenues and earnings for a number of years during the development of the property. Once development is complete for land development projects and high-rise/mid-rise condominium construction projects, these unconsolidated entities will generally, over a relatively short period of time, generate revenues and earnings until all of the assets of the entity are sold. Further, once for-rent apartments projects are complete and stabilized, we may monetize a portion of these projects through a recapitalization or a sale of all or a portion of our ownership interest in the joint venture, resulting in an income producing event. Because of the long development periods associated with these entities, the earnings recognized from these entities may vary significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year. For our Rental Property Joint Ventures specifically, these entities typically generate operating losses until the related property reaches stabilization. For the fiscal years 2021 and 2020, our earnings related to the Rental Property Joint Ventures include approximately $18.1 million and $1.1 million of our share of net operating losses incurred by these joint ventures, respectively, of which approximately $17.8 million and $11.3 million was our share of the depreciation expense recognized by these joint ventures, respectively.
The increase in income from unconsolidated entities from $0.9 million in fiscal 2020 to $74.0 million in fiscal 2021, was due mainly to $74.8 million of gains recognized in the fiscal 2021 period related to property sales by five of our Rental Property
Joint Ventures, a $6.0 million gain recognized in the fiscal 2021 period related to asset sales of commercial properties by one of our Land Development Joint Ventures, increased earnings at two of our Land Development Joint Ventures due to lot sales and a decrease in other than temporary impairment charges recognized. These increases are partially offset by a $10.7 million gain recognized in the fiscal 2020 period from the sale of our investment in one of our Rental Property Joint Ventures to our joint venture partner and lower income from a Home Building Joint Venture and Land Development Joint Venture which are delivering their final lots/units.
Other Income - Net
The table below provides the components of “Other Income - net” for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 (amounts in thousands):
The increase in income from ancillary businesses in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was principally due to higher income from our mortgage and title operations due to increased volume, as well as lower losses incurred in our apartment living operations. These increases were partially offset by gains of $13.0 million recognized in fiscal 2020 from the sale of golf club properties with no similar sales in fiscal 2021, coupled with losses generated from our City Living commercial operations. In fiscal 2021 and 2020, our apartment living operations incurred $28.3 million and $28.6 million of expenses, respectively, offset by $20.2 million and $14.0 million of management fee income, respectively.
Management fee income from home building unconsolidated entities presented above includes fees earned by our City Living and Traditional Home Building operations. The decrease in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was primarily related to the decrease in the number of communities. Fees earned by our apartment living operations are included in income from ancillary businesses.
The decrease in “Other” in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was principally due to lower interest income earned.
Expenses Related to Early Retirement of Debt
In fiscal 2021, we redeemed, prior to maturity, all $250.0 million aggregate principal amount of our then-outstanding 5.625% Senior Notes due 2024. In connection with this redemption, we incurred a pre-tax charge of $34.2 million, inclusive of the write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs, which is recorded in our Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Income. No similar charges were incurred in fiscal 2020.
Income Before Income Taxes
In fiscal 2021, we reported income before income taxes of $1.10 billion or 12.5% of revenues, as compared to $586.9 million, or 8.3% of revenues in fiscal 2020.
Income Tax Provision
We recognized a $266.7 million income tax provision in fiscal 2021. Based upon the federal statutory rate of 21.0% for fiscal 2021, our federal tax provision would have been $231.1 million. The difference between the tax provision recognized and the tax provision based on the federal statutory rate was mainly due to the provision for state income taxes of $50.2 million and $8.4 million of other permanent differences, offset, in part, by a $24.3 million benefit of federal energy efficient home credits; a benefit of $4.7 million from excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation; and the reversal of $1.0 million of previously accrued tax provisions on uncertain tax positions that were no longer necessary due to the expiration of the statute of limitations.
We recognized a $140.3 million income tax provision in fiscal 2020. Based upon the federal statutory rate of 21.0% for fiscal 2020, our federal tax provision would have been $123.2 million. The difference between the tax provision recognized and the tax provision based on the federal statutory rate was mainly due to the provision for state income taxes of $25.8 million and $4.8 million of other permanent differences, offset, in part, by a $11.5 million benefit of federal energy efficient home credits; a benefit of $3.3 million from excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation; and the reversal of $1.7 million of previously accrued tax provisions on uncertain tax positions that were no longer necessary due to the expiration of the statute of limitations.
CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY
Funding for our business has been, and continues to be, provided principally by cash flow from operating activities before inventory additions, unsecured bank borrowings, and the public debt markets.
Our cash flows from operations generally provide us with a significant source of liquidity. Our cash flows provided by operating activities, supplemented with our short-term borrowings and long-term debt, have been sufficient to fund our operations while allowing us to invest in activities that support the long-term growth of our operations. Our primary uses of cash include inventory additions in the form of land acquisitions and deposits to obtain control of land, land development, working capital to fund day to day operations, and investments in existing and future unconsolidated joint ventures. We may also use cash to fund capital expenditures such as investments in our information technology systems. From time to time we use some or all of the remaining available cash flow to repay debt, and to fund share repurchases and dividends on our common stock. We believe our sources of cash and liquidity will continue to be adequate to fund operations, finance our strategic operating initiatives, repay debt, fund our share repurchases and pay dividends for the foreseeable future.
At October 31, 2021, we had $1.64 billion of cash and cash equivalents on hand and approximately $1.81 billion available for borrowing under our Revolving Credit Facility.
Short-term Liquidity and Capital Resources
For at least the next twelve months, we expect our principal demand for funds will be for inventory additions in the form of land acquisition, deposits to control land and land development, operating expenses, including our general and administrative expenses, investments and funding of capital improvements, investments in existing and future unconsolidated joint ventures, debt repayment, common stock repurchases, and dividend payments. Demand for funds include interest and principal payments on current and future debt financing, including the $409.9 million principal payment on our 5.875% Senior Notes due February 15, 2022, which we repaid at par, plus accrued interest, on November 15, 2021. We expect to meet our short-term liquidity requirements primarily through our cash and cash equivalents on hand and net cash flows provided by operations. Additional sources of funds include distributions from our unconsolidated joint ventures, borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility and our mortgage company loan facility, and borrowings from banks and other lenders.
We believe we will have sufficient liquidity available to fund our business needs, commitments and contractual obligations in a timely manner for the next twelve months. We may, however, seek additional financing to fund future growth or refinance our existing indebtedness through the debt capital markets, but we cannot be assured that such financing will be available on favorable terms, or at all.
Long-term Liquidity and Capital Resources
Beyond the next twelve months, our principal demands for funds will be for the payments of the principal amount of our long-term debt as it becomes due or matures, land purchases and inventory additions needed to grow our business, long-term capital investments and investments in unconsolidated joint ventures, common stock repurchases, and dividend payments.
Over the longer term, to the extent the sources of capital described above are insufficient to meet our needs, we may also conduct additional public offerings of our securities, refinance debt or dispose of certain assets to fund our operating activities, debt service, dividends and common stock repurchases. We expect these resources will be adequate to fund our ongoing operating activities as well as providing capital for investment in future land purchases and related development activities and future joint ventures.
Material Cash Requirements
We are a party to many contractual obligations involving commitments to make payments to third parties. These obligations impact our short-term and long-term liquidity and capital resource needs. Certain contractual obligations are reflected on the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of October 31, 2021, while others are considered future commitments. Our contractual obligations primarily consist of long-term debt and related interest payments, payments due on our Mortgage Company Loan Facility, purchase obligations related to expected acquisition of land under purchase agreements and land development agreements (many of which are secured by letters of credit or surety bonds), operating leases, and obligations under our deferred compensation plan, supplemental executive retirement plans, and 401(k) savings plans. We also enter into certain short-term lease commitments, commitments to fund our existing or future unconsolidated joint ventures, letters of credit and other purchase obligations in the normal course of business. For more information regarding our primary obligations, refer to Note 6, “Loans Payable, Senior Notes, and Mortgage Company Loan Facility,” and Note 15, “Commitments and Contingencies,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for amounts outstanding as of October 31, 2021, related to debt and commitments and contingencies, respectively.
We also operate through a number of joint ventures and have undertaken various commitments as a result of those arrangements. At October 31, 2021, we had investments in these entities of $599.1 million, and were committed to invest or advance up to an additional $248.0 million to these entities if they require additional funding. We expect to purchase approximately 5,800 home sites over a number of years from several of these joint ventures. The purchase price of these home sites will be determined at a future date.
The unconsolidated joint ventures in which we have investments generally finance their activities with a combination of partner equity and debt financing. In some instances, we and our joint venture partner have guaranteed debt of unconsolidated entities. These guarantees may include any or all of the following: (i) project completion guarantees, including any cost overruns; (ii) repayment guarantees, generally covering a percentage of the outstanding loan; (iii) carry cost guarantees, which cover costs such as interest, real estate taxes, and insurance; (iv) an environmental indemnity provided to the lender that holds the lender harmless from and against losses arising from the discharge of hazardous materials from the property and non-compliance with applicable environmental laws; and (v) indemnification of the lender from “bad boy acts” of the unconsolidated entity.
In these situations where we have joint and several guarantees with our joint venture partner, we generally seek to implement a reimbursement agreement with our partner that provides that neither party is responsible for more than its proportionate share or agreed-upon share of the guarantee; however, we are not always successful. In addition, if the joint venture partner does not have adequate financial resources to meet its obligations under such a reimbursement agreement, we may be liable for more than our proportionate share. We believe that as of October 31, 2021, in the event we become legally obligated to perform under a guarantee of the obligation of an unconsolidated entity due to a triggering event, the collateral should be sufficient to repay all or a significant portion of the obligation. If it is not, we and our partners would need to contribute additional capital to the entity. At October 31, 2021, we had guaranteed the debt of certain unconsolidated entities with loan commitments aggregating $2.20 billion, of which, if the full amount of the debt obligations were borrowed, we estimate $418.8 million to be our maximum exposure related to repayment and carry cost guarantees. At October 31, 2021, the unconsolidated entities had borrowed an aggregate of $1.09 billion, of which we estimate $222.0 million to be our maximum exposure related to repayment and carry cost guarantees. These maximum exposure estimates do not take into account any estimates related to the environmental or “bad boy acts” indemnifications provided to the lenders or recoveries from the underlying collateral or any reimbursement from our partners.
For more information regarding these joint ventures, see Note 4, “Investments in Unconsolidated Entities” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15(a)1 of this Form 10-K.
Debt Service Requirements
Our financing strategy is to ensure liquidity and access to capital markets, to maintain a balanced profile of debt maturities, and to manage our exposure to floating interest rate volatility.
Outside of the normal course of operations, one of our principal liquidity needs is the payment of principal and interest on outstanding indebtedness. We are required by the terms of certain loan documents to meet certain covenants, such as financial ratios and reporting requirements. As of October 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all such covenants and requirements on our term loan, credit facility and other loans payable. Refer to Note 6, “Loans Payable, Senior Notes, and Mortgage Company Loan Facility” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15(a)1 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2021 was $1.30 billion. Cash provided by operating activities was generated primarily from $833.6 million of net income plus $23.2 million of stock-based compensation, $76.3 million of depreciation and amortization, $26.5 million of inventory impairments and write-offs, and a net deferred tax benefit of $11.8 million; an increase of $214.8 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses; an increase of $165.6 million in net customer deposits; and a decrease of $135.8 million in receivables, prepaid assets, and other assets. This activity was offset, in part, by an increase of $196.2 million in inventory; an increase of $18.6 million in mortgage loans held for sale; and a $38.7 million gain from the sale of assets.
Cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2020 was $1.01 billion. Cash provided by operating activities was generated primarily from $446.6 million of net income plus $24.3 million of stock-based compensation, $68.9 million of depreciation and amortization, $55.9 million of inventory impairments and write-offs, and a net deferred tax benefit of $97.8 million; a $352.9 million decrease in inventory; an increase of $71.8 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses; and an increase of $70.4 million in net customer deposits. This activity was offset, in part, by an increase of $176.3 million in receivables, prepaid assets, and other assets and an increase of $9.5 million in mortgage loans held for sale.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2021 was $4.2 million, primarily related to $221.9 million used to fund investments in unconsolidated entities and $66.9 million for the purchase of property and equipment. This activity was offset, in part, by $203.5 million of cash received as returns on our investments in unconsolidated entities and proceeds of $80.4 million of cash received from sales of certain commercial properties.
Cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2020 was $177.8 million, primarily related to $109.6 million for the purchase of property and equipment; $71.7 million used to fund investments in unconsolidated entities; and $60.3 million used to acquire Thrive. This activity was offset, in part, by $49.2 million of cash received as returns on our investments in unconsolidated entities, foreclosed real estate, and distressed loans and proceeds of $15.6 million of cash received from sales of a golf club property.
Financing Activities
We used $1.01 billion of cash from financing activities in fiscal 2021, primarily for the repurchase of $378.3 million of our common stock; repayments of $267.0 million of other loans payable, net of new borrowings; $294.2 million of redemption of senior notes, and payment of $76.6 million of dividends on our common stock, offset, in part, by the proceeds of $10.5 million from our stock-based benefit plans.
We used $753.3 million of cash from financing activities in fiscal 2020, primarily for the repurchase of $634.1 million of our common stock; repayments of $85.8 million of other loans payable, net of new borrowings; and payment of $56.6 million of dividends on our common stock, offset, in part, by the proceeds of $24.9 million from our stock-based benefit plans.
INFLATION
The long-term impact of inflation on us is manifested in increased costs for land, land development, construction, and overhead. We generally enter into contracts to acquire land a significant period of time before development and sales efforts begin. Accordingly, to the extent land acquisition costs are fixed, subsequent increases or decreases in the sales prices of homes will affect our profits. Because the sales price of each of our homes is fixed at the time a buyer enters into a contract to purchase a home and because we generally contract to sell our homes before we begin construction, any inflation of costs in excess of those anticipated may result in lower gross margins. We generally attempt to minimize that effect by entering into fixed-price contracts with our subcontractors and material suppliers for specified periods of time, which generally do not exceed one year.
In general, housing demand is adversely affected by increases in interest rates and housing costs. Interest rates, the length of time that land remains in inventory, and the proportion of inventory that is financed affect our interest costs. If we are unable to raise sales prices enough to compensate for higher costs, or if mortgage interest rates increase significantly, affecting prospective buyers’ ability to adequately finance home purchases, our home sales revenues, gross margins, and net income could be adversely affected. Increases in sales prices, whether the result of inflation or demand, may affect the ability of prospective buyers to afford new homes.
SUPPLEMENTAL GUARANTOR INFORMATION
At October 31, 2021, our 100%-owned subsidiary, Toll Brothers Finance Corp. (the “Subsidiary Issuer”), had issued and outstanding $2.41 billion aggregate principal amount of senior notes maturing on various dates between February 15, 2022 and November 1, 2029 (the “Senior Notes”), although all $409.9 million in outstanding principal amount of Senior Notes due February 15, 2022 was repaid subsequent to October 31, 2021. For further information regarding the Senior Notes, see Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements under the caption “Senior Notes.”
The obligations of the Subsidiary Issuer to pay principal, premiums, if any, and interest are guaranteed jointly and severally on a senior basis by us and substantially all of our 100%-owned home building subsidiaries (the “Guarantor Subsidiaries” and, together with us, the “Guarantors”). The guarantees are full and unconditional, and the Subsidiary Issuer and each of the Guarantor Subsidiaries are consolidated subsidiaries of Toll Brothers, Inc. Our non-home building subsidiaries and several of our home building subsidiaries (together, the “Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries”) do not guarantee the Senior Notes. The Subsidiary Issuer generates no operating revenues and does not have any independent operations other than the financing of our other subsidiaries by lending the proceeds of its public debt offerings, including the Senior Notes. Our home building operations are conducted almost entirely through the Guarantor Subsidiaries. Accordingly, the Subsidiary Issuer’s cash flow and ability to service the Senior Notes is dependent upon the earnings of the Company’s subsidiaries and the distribution of those earnings to the Subsidiary Issuer, whether by dividends, loans or otherwise. Holders of the Senior Notes have a direct claim only against the Subsidiary Issuer and the Guarantors. The obligations of the Guarantors under their guarantees will be limited as necessary to recognize certain defenses generally available to guarantors (including those that relate to fraudulent conveyance or transfer, voidable preference or similar laws affecting the rights of creditors generally) under applicable law.
The indentures under which the Senior Notes were issued provide that any of our subsidiaries that provide a guarantee of our obligations under the Revolving Credit Facility will guarantee the Senior Notes. The indentures further provide that any Guarantor Subsidiary may be released from its guarantee so long as (i) no default or event of default exists or would result from release of such guarantee; (ii) the Guarantor Subsidiary being released has consolidated net worth of less than 5% of the Company’s consolidated net worth as of the end of our most recent fiscal quarter; (iii) the Guarantor Subsidiaries released from their guarantees in any fiscal year comprise in the aggregate less than 10% (or 15% if and to the extent necessary to permit the cure of a default) of our consolidated net worth as of the end of our most recent fiscal quarter; (iv) such release would not have a material adverse effect on ours and our subsidiaries’ home building business; and (v) the Guarantor Subsidiary is released from its guaranty under the Revolving Credit Facility. If there are no guarantors under the Revolving Credit Facility, all Guarantor Subsidiaries under the indentures will be released from their guarantees.
The following summarized financial information is presented for Toll Brothers, Inc., the Subsidiary Issuer, and the Guarantor Subsidiaries on a combined basis after intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated among Toll Brothers, Inc., the Subsidiary Issuer and the Guarantor Subsidiaries, as well as their investment in, and equity in earnings from the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries.
Summarized Balance Sheet Data (amounts in millions)
Summarized Statement of Operations Data (amounts in millions)
SEGMENTS
We operate in two segments: Traditional Home Building and City Living, our urban development division. Within Traditional Home Building, we operate in five geographic segments around the United States as follows:
Eastern Region:
•The North region: Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania;
•The Mid-Atlantic region: Georgia, Maryland, North Carolina, Tennessee and Virginia;
•The South region: Florida, South Carolina and Texas;
Western Region:
•The Mountain region: Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Nevada and Utah; and
•The Pacific region: California, Oregon and Washington.
Our geographic reporting segments are consistent with how our chief operating decision makers are assessing operating performance and allocating capital. The following tables summarize information related to revenues, net contracts signed, and income (loss) before income taxes by segment for fiscal years 2021 and 2020. Information related to backlog and assets by segment at October 31, 2021 and 2020, has also been provided.
Units Delivered and Revenues:
Net Contracts Signed:
Backlog at October 31:
Income (Loss) Before Income Taxes ($ amounts in millions):
“Corporate and other” is comprised principally of general corporate expenses such as our executive offices; the corporate finance, accounting, audit, tax, human resources, risk management, information technology, marketing, and legal groups; interest income; income from certain of our ancillary businesses, and income from our Rental Property Joint Ventures and Gibraltar Joint Ventures.
Total Assets ($ amounts in millions):
“Corporate and other” is comprised principally of cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash, income taxes receivable, properties held for rental apartments, investments in our Rental Property Joint Ventures, expected recoveries from insurance carriers and suppliers, our Gibraltar investments and operations, manufacturing facilities, and our mortgage and title subsidiaries.
A discussion and analysis regarding our Segments’ Results of Operations and Analysis of Financial Condition for the year ended October 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended October 31, 2019 is included in Part II, Item 7, “MD&A” to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on December 22, 2020.
FISCAL 2021 COMPARED TO FISCAL 2020
Traditional Home Building
North
The increase in the number of homes delivered in fiscal 2021 was mainly due to an increase in the number of homes in backlog at October 31, 2020, as compared to the number of homes in backlog at October 31, 2019. The increase in the average price of homes delivered in fiscal 2021 was principally due to sales price increases.
The decrease in the number of net contracts signed in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was principally due to a decrease in the average number of selling communities, offset, in part, by an increase in demand in fiscal 2021. The increase in the average value of each contract signed in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was mainly due to shifts in the number of contracts signed to more expensive areas and/or products and price increases.
The increase in income before income taxes in fiscal 2021 was principally attributable to higher earnings from increased revenues and lower home sales cost of revenues, as a percentage of home sales revenues. The decrease in home sales cost of revenues, as a percentage of home sales revenues in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to a shift in product mix/areas to higher-margin areas, sales price increases and lower inventory impairment charges.
Inventory impairment charges were $12.2 million in fiscal 2021, as compared to $28.4 million in fiscal 2020. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, we decided to sell the remaining lots in two communities, one in Connecticut and one in Illinois, in bulk sales. Based on our current estimates of bulk sale prices for these communities, we recognized impairment charges of $8.7 related to these communities. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we changed our strategy with respect to our land in the Delaware beach markets and the Chicago market. As a result, the carrying values of our land and communities were written down to their estimated fair values, which resulted in a charge to income before income taxes of $18.0 million in fiscal 2020 related to this land. In addition, in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, due to a loss in lot density at one community located in New Jersey, the carrying value was written down to its estimated fair value, which resulted in a charge to income of $6.4 million.
Mid-Atlantic
The increase in the number of homes delivered in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was mainly due to an increase in the number of homes in backlog at October 31, 2020, as compared to the number of homes in backlog at October 31, 2019, partially offset by lower backlog conversion in fiscal 2021. The increase in the average delivered price in fiscal 2021 was primarily due a shift in the number of homes delivered to more expensive areas and/or products, as well as sales price increases.
The decrease in the number of net contracts signed in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was principally due to a decrease in the average number of selling communities, offset, in part, by an increase in demand. The increase in the average value of each contract signed in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to shifts in the number of contracts signed to more expensive areas and/or products, as well as sales price increases in fiscal 2021.
The increase in income before income taxes in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was mainly due to higher earnings from increased revenues, coupled with lower home sales costs of revenues, as a percentage of home sale revenues. The decrease in home sales costs of revenues, as a percentage of home sale revenues, in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to a shift in product mix/areas to higher-margin areas, lower interest costs as a percentage of home sales revenue and reduced inventory impairment charges. A $6.0 million gain recognized from an asset sale of a commercial property by one of our Land Development Joint Ventures was also recognized during fiscal 2021 with no similar gain in fiscal 2020.
Inventory impairment charges were $10.9 million and $17.9 million in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. In the third quarter of fiscal 2021, we decided to sell the remaining lots in one community located in Maryland in a bulk sale. As a result, we wrote down the carrying value of inventory in this community to its estimated fair value. This resulted in an impairment charge of $10.1 million in fiscal 2021 related to this community. In the second quarter of fiscal 2020, following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we terminated a land purchase agreement in Virginia and wrote-off the deposits and soft costs incurred. In addition, in the third quarter of fiscal 2020, we decided to sell the remaining lots in one community located in Maryland in a bulk sale. As a result, we wrote down the carrying value of inventory in this community to its estimated fair value, resulting in an impairment charge of $13.5 million in fiscal 2020 .
South
The increase in the number of homes delivered in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was mainly due to an increase in the number of homes in backlog at October 31, 2020, as compared to the number of homes in backlog at October 31, 2019, partially offset by lower backlog conversion in fiscal 2021.
The increase in the number of net contracts signed in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was principally due to an increase in demand from our homes and an increase in the average number of selling communities in fiscal 2021, offset by our limiting of lot releases in certain communities. The increases in the average value of each contract signed in the fiscal 2021 periods were primarily due to sales price increases in fiscal 2021 and a shift in the number of contracts signed to more expensive areas and/or products.
The increase in income before income taxes in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was principally due to higher earnings from increased home sales revenues and lower home sales costs of revenues, as a percentage of home sales revenues, offset, in part, by higher SG&A costs due to increased sales volume. The decrease in home sales cost of revenues, as a percentage of home sales revenues, was mainly due to a shift in product mix/areas to higher-margin areas, lower interest costs as a percentage of home sales revenue and lower inventory impairment changes in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020. Inventory impairment charges were $0.7 million and $2.9 million in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Mountain
The increase in the number of homes delivered in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was mainly due to an increase in the number of homes in backlog at October 31, 2020, as compared to the number of homes in backlog at October 31, 2019,
partially offset by lower backlog conversion in fiscal 2021. The increase in the average price of homes delivered in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to a shift in the number of homes delivered to more expensive areas and/or products and sales price increases.
The increase in the number of net contracts signed in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was principally due to increased demand for our homes and an increase in the average number of selling communities. The increases in the average value of each contract signed in fiscal 2021 was mainly due to shifts in the number of contracts signed to more expensive areas and/or products and price increases.
The increase in income before income taxes in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was mainly due to higher earnings from increased revenues coupled with lower home sales cost of revenues, as a percentage of home sales revenues, offset in part by higher SG&A costs due to increased volume. The decrease in home sales cost of revenues, as a percentage of home sales revenues, was primarily due to a shift in product mix/areas to higher-margin areas.
Pacific
The increase in the number of homes delivered in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was mainly due to an increase in the number of homes in backlog at October 31, 2020, as compared to the number of homes in backlog at October 31, 2019, coupled with higher backlog conversion in fiscal 2021. The decrease in the average price of homes delivered in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to a shift in the number of homes delivered to less expensive areas and/or products.
The increase in the number of net contracts signed in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was principally due to an increase in demand, as well as an increase in the number of selling communities. The increase in the average value of each contract signed in fiscal 2021 was mainly due to price increases, partially offset by a shift in the number of contracts signed in less expensive areas.
The increase in income before income taxes in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was primarily due to higher earnings from increased revenues, lower SG&A costs and lower inventory impairment charges. Inventory impairment charges were $1.3 million and $6.0 million in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. The fiscal 2020 impairment charge relates primarily to a land purchase agreement where we no longer expected to purchase the land and, accordingly, wrote-off soft costs incurred.
City Living
The increase in the number of homes delivered in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was mainly attributable to the low number of deliveries in fiscal 2020 due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, in particular in New York City and northern New Jersey, during the second half of fiscal 2020. The increase in the average price of homes delivered in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was primarily due to a shift in the number of homes delivered to more expensive areas and/or products.
The increase in the number of net contracts signed in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was primarily due to an increase in demand in fiscal 2021 coupled with the low number of net contracts signed in the second half of fiscal 2020 following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The increase in income before income taxes in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020, was mainly due to higher earnings from increased revenues and decreases in losses from our investments in unconsolidated entities.
In fiscal 2021, losses from our investments in unconsolidated entities in City Living decreased $7.0 million as compared to fiscal 2020. This decrease was primarily due to $6.0 million of other than temporary impairment charges that we recognized on one of our Home Building Joint Ventures in fiscal 2020.
Corporate and Other
In fiscal 2021 and 2020, loss before income taxes was $154.9 million and $180.1 million respectively. The decrease in the loss before income taxes in fiscal 2021 was principally attributable to higher income generated by our Rental Property Joint Ventures primarily as a result of $74.8 million of gains recognized in the fiscal 2021 period related to property sales by five of our Rental Property Joint Ventures; higher earnings from our mortgage company and title company operations due to an increase in volumes and improved interest spreads in fiscal 2021; lower losses incurred in our apartment living operations; and directly expensed interest of $2.4 million in the fiscal 2020 period with no similar charges in fiscal 2021. These increases were offset, in part by a $35.2 million charge incurred related to early retirement of debt in fiscal 2021, lower interest income in fiscal 2021, gains recognized in fiscal 2020 of $13.0 million from the sale of golf club properties, and higher SG&A costs in fiscal 2021 primarily due to normal compensation increases and an increase in insurance costs due to higher revenues.