Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations relates to the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes to those financial statements that are included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
TOMI Environmental Solutions, Inc. (“TOMI”, “we” and “our”) is a global bacteria decontamination and infectious disease control company, providing environmental solutions for indoor surface decontamination through the manufacturing, sales, service and licensing of our SteraMist® brand of products, including SteraMist® BIT™, a low percentage (7.8%) hydrogen peroxide-based fog or mist that uses Binary Ionization Technology (BIT™).
Our SteraMist® is a patented technology that produces ionized Hydrogen Peroxide (iHP™) using cold plasma science created under a grant by the United States Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). Our EPA registered BIT™ Solution is composed of a low concentration of hydrogen peroxide converted to iHP™ after passing the trade secret blended solution including its sole active ingredient of 7.8% hydrogen peroxide through an atmospheric cold plasma arc. The newly formed iHP™ fog and mist consists of submicron’s to 3-micron radical particles that are carried throughout the treatment area in a fog or mist moving with the same velocity and characteristics of a gas. This allows the ionized hydrogen peroxide fog or mist to affect all surfaces and air space throughout the targeted treatment area, over, above and beyond the ability of a manual cleaning processes. iHP™ damages pathogenic organisms through the oxidation of proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids. SteraMist® no-touch disinfection and or decontamination treat areas mechanically, causing cellular disruptions and/or dysfunctions resulting in a 6-log (99.9999%) and greater kill or inactivation of all pathogens in the treatment area.
Under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (“FIFRA”), we are required to register with the EPA and certain state regulatory authorities as a seller of disinfectants. In June 2015, SteraMist® BIT™ was registered with the EPA as a hospital-healthcare disinfectant and general broad-spectrum surface disinfectant for use as a misting/fogging agent. SteraMist® BIT™ now holds EPA registrations (# 90150-2) for mold control, and air and surface remediation (# 90150-1). In February 2016, we expanded our label with the EPA to include Clostridium difficile Spores and MRSA, as well as the influenza (Avian) virus h1n1, which we believe has better positioned us to penetrate all industries including the biodefense and healthcare industry. In August 2017, our EPA label was further expanded to include efficacy against Salmonella and Norovirus. As of January 27, 2017, our technology is one of 53 of the EPA’s “Registered Antimicrobial Products Effective against Clostridium difficile Spores”, as published on the EPA’s K List. Further, in December 2017, SteraMist® was included in the EPA’s list G (Norovirus), L (Ebola) and M (Avian Flu). In March 2020, our EPA label was further amended to include Emerging Viral Pathogens claims, thus meeting the criteria against Enveloped viruses and Large Non-enveloped viruses and included on List N (Emerging Viral Pathogens including SARS-CoV-2).
SteraMist® BIT™ allows a facility to have a mechanical method of cleaning using a Hospital-HealthCare disinfectant which is an EPA registered tool and solution to replace flawed manual cleaning technology, upgrade existing protocols, and limit liability in a facility when it comes to resistant infectious pathogens. SteraMist® BIT™ is the first EPA registered solution and system combination on the market. We maintain this registration in 50 states, Canada, and approximately thirty-five (35) other countries.
Markets
Our SteraMist® products are designed to address a wide spectrum of industries using iHP™. Our operations consist of five main divisions based on our current target industries: Hospital-Healthcare, Life Sciences, TOMI Service Network, Food Safety and Commercial.
We continue to offer our customers a wide range of innovative mobile products designed to be easily incorporated into their existing disinfection and decontamination procedures and protocols. Additionally, we offer integrated facility equipment installations known as Custom Engineered Systems, routine & emergency iHP™ Corporate Service, essential training packages, validations and qualifications, and onsite performance maintenance requests.
Each of these are structured to address the unique disinfection and decontamination needs of our customers worldwide regardless of the type of facility requiring or requesting SteraMist® disinfection decontamination.
Divisions
Hospital-Healthcare
Our Hospital-HealthCare customer list continues to grow with the closing of every quarter. Our SteraMist® Total Disinfection Cart, an all-in-one cart that houses our handheld point-and-spray SteraMist® Surface Unit and accompanying supplies, continues to assist medical staff with emergency response and turnaround for new and established protocols. The SteraMist® Total Disinfection Cart, recently modified for further ease and mobility, allows customers within the hospital-healthcare industry to address concerns of the cross-contamination of dangerous bacteria and viral pathogens in which some can lead to HAIs stemming from existing and emerging pathogens, as well as multiple drug resistant organisms (MDRO’s). SteraMist® technology allows a manual cleaning protocol lasting 90 minutes to be reduced to 55 minutes, including the changing of bed linens, as confirmed by the Shield Study at UCLA. This mobile consolidation solution has resulted in remarkable results for facilities utilizing our technology.
As our Training and Implementation department expands TOMI expects continued expansion in its Hospital-HealthCare division. The protocol development and onboarding for implementation in this division is critical. We have experienced in 2020, the expansion of SteraMist® use in such campuses by employing comprehensive training for their day and night shift maintenance and housekeeping departments. By late 2021, TOMI anticipates yearly comparison case studies from many of these facilities who were onboarded in 2020, which should show lower transference infection rates in COVID, Clostridium difficile Spores and overall, HAI cases.
We have recently hired a Vice President of Sales for this division who brings over 25 years of experience in the HealthCare space including working for Quest Diagnostics, Abbott, Siemens Bayer and ThermoFisher Scientific.
Life Sciences
Our SteraMist® Environment System, Custom Engineered Systems, the SteraMist® Select Surface Unit, custom iHP™ implementation to decontamination chambers and cage washers, and our iHP™ Corporate Service Division, are designed to be tailored to provide a complete room solution to address the regulatory inspections of disinfecting/decontaminating and Installation Qualification (IQ)-Operational Qualification (OQ)-Performance Qualification (PQ) validation processes within the life sciences industry.
In addition, we have worked alongside many research universities and government agencies in the effort to test SteraMist® efficacy on the disinfection and reprocessing of N95 masks and other equivalent PPE, with results that indicate that the use of SteraMist® iHP™ will not reduce mask efficacy, including on those containing 10% or less of cellulose while assuring a sterile reprocessed mask 100% of the time.
TOMI Service Network
The TOMI Service Network, or TSN, is an expansive network consisting of third-party professionals specializing in a wide array of disciplines who are exclusively licensed and trained to use the SteraMist® products. We sell, train, and service a wide array of professional remediation companies in the use of SteraMist® through the TSN division. This allows for increased accessibility and brand awareness of iHP® services to facilities in need of local routine and emergency disinfection and decontamination.
Many of these companies specialize in mold remediation, treatment of water-damaged areas (including damage from grey and black water loss (CAT 1-3 water loss), fire damage, as well as professional specialists that are certified and practice in the area of forensic restoration. Currently, the TSN features a number of professionals throughout both the United States and Canada, with some utilizing SteraMist® as a standalone service and others incorporating SteraMist® into their existing business models and methods.
Sales of BIT™ Solution increases yearly as our network members utilize the technology more and more each year. BIT™ Solution sales attributable to the TSN for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were approximately $2,059,000 and $268,000, respectively, representing an increase of 668%.
Many of our TSN members were and are at the forefront on the fight against the Coronavirus pandemic.
Food Safety
Food Safety presents significant potential as an opportunity for substantial growth with continued product research and compliance testing. With the food safety industry in North America coming under closer scrutiny with the implementation and enforcement of new and established guidelines, our consultants have submitted a request to expand our current labels to include a 1% acceptable concentration of hydrogen peroxide. This concentration has previously been approved by the USDA and FDA for direct food and crop application and will allow SteraMist® to expand use sites beyond food processing machinery, restaurants, and food contact areas to assist in compliance with the newly established Food Safety Modernization Act guidelines set in place by the FDA, as well as the Safe Food for Canadians Act and Safe Food for Canadians Regulations in Canada.
Although COVID-19 has delayed a significant increase in our Food Safety division, the SteraMist® Select Surface Unit has been proven effective for the industry. In the second quarter of 2020, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) and Office of Public Health and Safety (OPHS) purchased three of these units. FSIS, a public health regulatory agency of the USDA, protects consumers by ensuring that meat, poultry, and egg products are safe, wholesome, and accurately labeled. FSIS has three laboratories located in Athens, GA, St. Louis, MO, and Albany, CA. These regulatory labs analyze meat, poultry and egg products, to ensure that they are free of adulteration. The labs are part of the critical infrastructure of the country and continue to operate during the coronavirus pandemic to provide a safe supply of food products. As the Select Surface unit is portable and flexible, the disinfection unit can be used in multiple areas and on different types of surfaces, which is ideal for these labs. The units were purchased initially to provide lab workers a safe environment to work in, however, since SteraMist® technology inactivates viruses and kills bacteria. The units will also be useful after the threat of the current pandemic ends as the Microbiology labs at all three (3) sites handle a variety of pathogenic bacteria routinely.
Recently, the USDA Research, Education, and Economics Mission area in the Northeast Area purchased a SteraMist® Select Surface unit. Additionally, we are seeing an increase in the interest of Universities assembling funding to purchase SteraMist® disinfection for their dining halls in order to bring students back to school and open their dining halls and cafes.
TOMI continues to work with premium companies in testing and validating SteraMist® technology in the Food Safety and seed industries.
In February 2021, we hired a Vice President of Sales for this division who brings years of experience with leading TIC (Testing, Inspection & Certification) companies and experience with food safety diagnostic companies including 3M, NSF International and Intertek.
Commercial
Due to a large interest and added customers in a variety of other use sites, we launched a Commercial division. These customers include but are not limited to use sites such as aircraft, airports, police and fire, manufacturing companies, automobile, military, cruise ships, shipping ports, preschool education, primary and secondary schools, colleges including dormitories, all modes of public and private transportation, regulatory consulting agencies, retail, housing and recreation, and of course emergency preparedness for counties and cities to use SteraMist® throughout their community.
We are actively pursuing federal grant monies and emergency preparedness monies in many of these verticals.
In October 2020, we hired a Vice President of Sales for this division who brings 35 years of global executive leadership experience in sales, marketing, strategy, business development, government affairs and technology development in the aerospace, defense, energy, and high-tech industries with companies such as GE, Honeywell, Textron, and Airbus.
Business Highlights and Recent Events
Reverse Stock Split and Nasdaq:
On September 10, 2020, we effected a 1-for-8 reverse stock split of the outstanding shares of our common stock and preferred A stock. On September 30, 2020, we announced our common stock was approved for listing on the Nasdaq and our shares commenced trading on the Nasdaq on October 1, 2020.
SARS CoV-2 coronavirus:
On March 11, 2020 the World Health Organization declared the SARS CoV-2 coronavirus a global pandemic, or the COVID-19 Pandemic, and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. We have been identified as a disinfectant and decontamination vendor by various agencies and countries. We have been working with organizations to address the concerns and provide solutions for disinfecting and decontamination of the SARS CoV-2 coronavirus. The outbreak initially increased the demand for our products and services. We believe that the COVID-19 Pandemic has permanently created a public interest in disinfection. People all over the world are seeing germs differently since this pandemic started, mechanical disinfection is the wave of the future for this pandemic and for the ones ahead of us. There is a permanent shift as to the virus and in relationship to infectious control protocols which have been changed forever.
We anticipate that the outbreak will change requirements and protocols for disinfecting and decontamination worldwide, of which SteraMist® should be a solution. We are working with our existing and new customers to develop and/or upgrade their existing processes and requirements for disinfecting and decontamination.
We have been addressing the increased demand for our products as follows: (i) cooperation of our supply chain to expedite product, (ii) increase our staff to be able to receive and ship orders to meet customer timelines (iii) increase our customer service support to answer questions and solve issues and (iv) working with our TOMI service network to ensure that resources are deployed in a timely manner. In addition, we increased our production capacity as we entered into an agreement with a second vendor to build our SteraMist® products.
Customers:
Globally, we have added approximately two-hundred and fifty (250) new customers across our five (5) divisions for the year ended December 31, 2020. This represents a three-hundred and sixty-three (363%) percent increase over the calendar year 2019. Post COVID-19 outlook we will continue to see demand for the SteraMist® products and services. While the initial outbreak saw a surge in demand for the SteraMist®, we expect that the demand for our products and services will continue and we are building a team to address the post COVID-19 pandemic market opportunities. We are starting to see many of our life science and biosafety customers come back to their workplace.
Revenues:
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, was $25,028,000 and $6,347,000, respectively, representing an increase of $18,681,000, or 294% compared to the same prior year period.
The increase in revenue was attributable to increased global demand for disinfection and infectious disease control products in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Although we saw a significant demand for our product within our Hospital-Healthcare, TSN, and Commercial divisions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic during the first half of 2020, we expect revenue to reflect steady growth as our customers update their operation requirements to include disinfecting and decontamination services into their regular routines for all potential pathogens and across all our divisions.
SteraMist® product-based revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were $22,971,000 and $4,999,000, representing an increase of $17,972,000 or 360% when compared to the same prior year period. The growth is attributable to increased mobile equipment orders and solution orders from our existing and new customers. We expect solution orders to continue to grow as our customers adopt new protocols for disinfecting and decontamination services.
Our service-based revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, was $2,057,000 and $1,348,000, respectively, representing a year over year increase of 53%. The increase in our service-based revenue was attributable to higher training sales recorded in connection with onboarding new customers and increased iHPTM service jobs.
Our domestic revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, was $18,367,000 and $5,002,000, respectively, an increase of $13,365,000, or 267% when compared to the same prior year period. The increase was primarily due to the growth in our TSN network, Hospital-Healthcare and Commercial sales.
Internationally, our revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, was approximately $6,661,000 and $1,345,000, respectively, representing an increase of $5,316,000 or 395%. The increase in our international revenue was attributable to the increased use and expansion of our SteraMist® line of products in Canada, Europe, Asia and the Middle East. We expect our international revenue to continue to grow as more countries adopt our products and services as well as change their disinfecting and decontamination requirements as countries open their borders when the COVID-19 pandemic subsides.
Due to COVID-19, during most of 2020 and early 2021 many of our established vertical clients were closed or required to hunker down. The markets that were affected were our life sciences that were nonessential, University and privately owned vivarium labs, and many nonessential pharmaceutical research companies globally. The healthcare industry, which has been overwhelmed and lost most of its elective surgical and clinical revenue, had limited non-essential onsite personnel which made it virtually impossible to demo our equipment. Due to the decline in revenues, we are experiencing selective limited budgets for new technology at this time. We believe this will change mid-2021 as there will be significant federal funds available to improve the preparedness for subsequent pandemics. Our potential clients are already working on reevaluating the lack of effectiveness of historic manual cleaning process versus newer technologically driven mechanical cleaning process which includes SteraMist. The re-opening of the country and the rest of the world will allow us to meet with customers which will get our core technology back on track to becoming the leading disinfection and decontamination standard in the world.
In 2020 we budgeted revenues to be $18.0M, with actual revenues at approximately $25M, approximately 39% over budget. As we continue to evaluate the post COVID-19 landscape, we will have clearer understanding of 2021. Our goal is to meet our budgeted 2021 revenues of approximately $40 million. The goals will be driven by the anticipated return to work of our clients and potential clients within each of our verticals. As our customers return to work, they will need our technology and our solution to continue their everyday functions.
As many industrial companies are pulling back on R&D and capital expenditures spending due to the economic shock from the pandemic, we are moving ahead with many new products in development. Going forward we will spend more on capital expenditures (CapEx) and operating expenditures (OpEx) including development of new products, services and process technologies to sharpen our competitive advantage. In addition, we will expand our commercial service location to meet the expanding needs of our customers.
We believe that we possess one of the best technologies in the world in the decontamination space. This pandemic has given us the confidence to develop a clear strategy to manufacture what may be our best product portfolio to date. In addition, we continue to move our BIT technology closer to becoming the standard in disinfection and decontamination globally. This should lead to a greater market share, increased profitability and capability strength.
The second half of 2020 showed us that our customers wanted a lower cost disinfection device, even if it gave the end-user less efficacy and the potential of damage to its personal property and delicate equipment. Early in 2021, approximately 500,000 of the lower cost competitors electrostatic devices were recalled by Consumer Product Safety Commission. In addition to safety issues, they were damaging the materials that they were being used on but were also dangerous and causing explosions with many resulting in fires.
In order to respond to our customer demands of a lower cost and more versatile product, we developed a Backpack unit that will possess our award winning 6-log and above kill technology and speed without the damage to space and materials. We expect our backpack to be competitively priced and open SteraMist to the largest cleaning market in the world-members of ISSA (International Sanitary Supply Association) and its divisions IEHA (Integrated Environment and Health Assessment) and EMEA (Europe, Middle East & Africa). These organizations have historically been price conscious and were resistant early on to our SteraMist pricing of our professional decontamination equipment (SteraMist Surface and Environment Unit). We plan on introducing our new innovative backpack globally in early second quarter of 2021 with pre-orders being accepted on or about April 1. We have budgeted to sell two thousand units in 2021.
As of January 2021, the ELC (Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity) Cooperative Agreement has awarded $30 billion for all 50 states and U.S. territories. The focus of the 2019-2024 ELC Cooperative Agreement (CoAg) is to strengthen core public health program growth while providing crucial flexibility needed to address emerging infectious disease issues. These awards are for the detection, response to, control and prevention of infectious disease. The ELC runs to 2024 and additional awards are expected to be distributed for 2021 - 2024.
Since 1995, the ELC program has been critical to U.S. health departments’ ability to combat infectious diseases.
Through ELC’s CoAg, all 50 states, several large metro areas, and U.S. territories and affiliates receive direct financial support to detect, respond to, control, and prevent infectious diseases.
We believe that disinfection will and should be a line item on all budgets going forward in both the public and private sectors and that SteraMist provides the best disinfection solution. Dangerous pathogens will still present themselves long after we recover from this pandemic. While the United States and other parts of the world are presently moving beyond this pandemic, there are many pathogens, some of which are respiratory in nature, that represent a looming threat. Preparedness is the most important measure to mitigate their effect. We learned this first with Ebola and again with SARS CoV-2. SteraMist can and will reduce the impact of the next pandemic.
During the pandemic, we have utilized our time to expand our salesforce in all verticals to develop relationships in the life science and healthcare industry. We believe Infectious Disease protocols have changed forever due to this pandemic and the need for a speedy comprehensive mechanical disinfectant/decontaminant will be included in the new norm of cleaning.
Due to the pandemic, there have been significant delays in our U.S. regulatory agencies in approving our new 1% label for food safety and for the FDA approving our product for reprocessing of personal protective gear. The delays are primarily due to the regulatory agencies not being able to have face-to-face committee meetings with our consultants and our staff.
We believe that disinfection will be a line item on all companies’ budgets going forward whether private, public or government. Dangerous pathogens still exist “Disease X” and will exist long after we recover from this pandemic. While the United States and most of the world is currently recovering from the SARS CoV-2 coronavirus outbreak there are many pathogens still a looming threat, with cases occurring globally to this day. There are 1.67 million unknown viruses in the world. Preparedness is the most important measure to ensure your family and business survives. We learned this with Ebola and recently with SARS CoV-2. SteraMist can reduce the impact of the next pandemic as it has already proven.
2020 Events:
In November 2020 we announced the retention of IMS Investor Relations to develop and execute a comprehensive investor relations and financial communications program.
As previously released, SteraMist iHP technology was deployed in the fight against EBOLA in West Africa, MERS in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and South Korea, and in 2020 was ready to be easily deployed throughout the world to aid in the fight against Coronavirus, an enveloped virus. TOMI’s Binary Ionization Technology (BIT) Solution, used exclusively in tandem with SteraMist equipment including the Surface Unit and Environment System, is listed on List G for Norovirus, List H for MRSA, List K for Clostridium difficile spores, List L for Ebola, List M for H1N1, and as of early 2020 List N: Disinfectants for Use Against SARS-CoV-2 with labeled efficacy for large and small enveloped viruses in addition to other pathogens.
After a three (3) year-long submission process, TOMI received two (2) separate registrations (SteraMist equipment and BIT solution) officially approved and registered with the China CDC. TOMI signed on a new distribution partner in Thailand, an exclusive partnership with Clean Environmental Solutions along with receiving a registration in the country. We shipped a number of units to Hong Kong to assist with new innovative ways of helping Hong Kong with their ongoing battle of controlling COVID-19. Routinely used to disinfect high traffic areas, SteraMist iHP technology treated public transportation, ambulances, hotel rooms, offices, and universities to stop the spread of this virus with more than 50 international customers and partners ranging from countries in Asia, Europe, and the Mideast using hundreds of SteraMist units, many of which were deployed to stop the spread of COVID-19 in 2020.
●
A hotel in York became the first in the United Kingdom to test positive for COVID-19, and after receiving approval from the Public Health of England, SteraMist was used to treat the hotel room. The treatment was a resounding success: the room was disinfected with a 9-log inactivation, exceeding the 6-log inactivation required.
●
ITH Pharma relocated their eight (8) Environment Systems to an area specifically designated for the manufacturing of COVID-19 testing supplies under the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) procedures in the United Kingdom.
●
Similarly, SteraMist in Singapore, was used in the disinfection of the National University of Singapore (NUS) upon realizing a professor contracted the contagious virus. The Ministry of Health proceeded to take action to stop the spread of the virus on campus, with the university president calling on SteraMist to thoroughly disinfect the facility - SteraMist was used in high traffic areas, such as hand railings, lifts, and lift lobbies, and routine facility cleaning was increased from two times a day to four times a day. In 2020, Singapore closed mosques to help stem the spread of SARS CoV-2 coronavirus after 82 citizens returned from a religious gathering in Malaysia with those thought to be confirmed with the virus. Professional cleaning services worked on the premises utilizing SteraMist disinfection, where all surfaces and high-contact areas within facilities, such as Masjid Angullia - one of Singapore’s oldest mosques, grateful for our superior material computability. And, early in 2021 our partner L3M has just sterilized a mosque in Malaysia.
●
South Korea’s national total of COVID-19 cases grew to over 4,000 according to the South Korean Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (KCDC). An established five-year TOMI authorized distributor in South Korea, GD Sciences, addressed this problem by utilizing SteraMist technology in transit systems, focusing primarily on the metropolitan transit system of South Korea’s capital city, Seoul which holds an annual ridership of over 1.2 billion. This same partner of TOMI’s also supplied SteraMist decontamination to the Korea Armed Force CBR Defense Command, a specialized team for the protection of life and death. It was used in special areas such as hospital negative pressure isolation rooms, operating rooms, and pharmaceutical sterile rooms.
●
TOMI 's exclusive partner in Israel, Clean-BIT purchased over $2.4 million in 2020 of TOMI technology and Solution and secured government contracts - including the Ministry of Defense - and private contracts for SteraMist disinfection to be used in hospitals, restaurants, grocery stores, food stores, ambulances and other transportation, including aircraft. They remain on alert to assist in an emergency situation by using SteraMist proprietary protocols and the cutting edge SteraMist technology to address all biological threats.
Along with being on the forefront of fighting the 2020 pandemic internationally, TOMI increased its TOMI Service Network provider memberships and BIT solution sales dramatically increased due to the amount of service jobs that our TSN providers conducted including the treatment of schools, residential and commercial buildings, rapid transit, airplanes and other transportation methods along with many other areas. Many businesses and facilities have taken proactive measures to help prevent the possibility of cross-contamination, including military and multiple healthcare facilities. Some businesses have also scheduled SteraMist service in direct response to confirmed cases, such as fast-food franchises. Certain members have begun to assist first responders, supermarket chains and aerospace defense companies and government facilities throughout the United States. TSN members throughout the U.S. and Canada serve as a critical wide spectrum of specializations within a variety of communities, and as a result of this operational diversity, many businesses experience periods of substantial growth over others depending on local conditions.
One such member, Enviro-Mist, not only utilized SteraMist during the PGA tour, but utilizes SteraMist technology to treat 234,582 square feet across five Merakey Behavioral Health campuses in Southeastern Pennsylvania on a quarterly basis. Additionally, Merakey operations personnel treat their own facilities using five (5) TOMI SteraMist Surface Unit disinfection devices, one for each facility. Coronavirus has elevated disinfection protocols adopted by the medical community and will continue to evolve well beyond the pandemic, with further scrutiny placed on other harmful pathogens prevalent in medical environments such as MRSA, Clostridium difficile Spore and Candida auris.
Late in 2020, TOMI launched its Commercial division, and has since experienced growth in this sector that includes, but is not limited to, aviation, police, fire and rescue departments, and emergency community/city preparedness. Since its launch TOMI accrued a new customer base within the Commercial division, with interest rapidly growing and providing great feedback. Two such customers that have integrated SteraMist into their disinfection/safety protocols are the fire and rescue operations of Chester Fire Bureau in Chester, PA and the fire rescue and police stations located on the airport grounds at Cincinnati-Northern Kentucky International Airport (CVG). Both of these enterprises share some commonality in their requirements for disinfection and SteraMist has been proven to perfectly fit their first responder needs. As Commissioner Rigby of the Chester Fire Bureau stated, “The most important consideration we have is the safety of our citizens and employees, especially our police officers and firefighters who have been on the front line of this pandemic alongside the amazing paramedics and EMTs. We did not want just “good” decontamination equipment…we wanted the “best” equipment available to ensure that we are doing everything we can to keep our people as safe as possible.”
TOMI also announced that its local Operations Headquarters Frederick 911 Communications Center purchased a SteraMist Surface Unit to be used throughout its office to combat COVID-19, quickly promoting it within days through an article in The Frederick News-Post: Top-of-the-line disinfecting device delivered to county 911 call center. This initial purchase of one (1) unit has led to four (4) additional units for other Communication Centers in the area with budget approval in the future for ten (10) additional Surface Units.
On a manufacturing front, our long-term customer in the United Kingdom, ITH Pharma an industry leader in aseptic compounding services, mixing drugs into ready-to-use IV preparation that must comply with stringent decontamination levels as required by regulatory agencies such as the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), implemented an additional SteraMist eight (8) applicator CES to service their new facility, following initial success with a CES in use with their other refurbished facility. Both systems have successfully been qualified and are in use.
Mid 2020, TOMI entered into a new manufacturing agreement with Planet Innovation who offers greater production capability with a large production floor, providing the ability to house product and accommodate increased production activity. Planet Innovation specializes in healthcare technology and product commercialization, with an established portfolio spanning well over a decade. As a result of its significant growth in the first half of 2020, TOMI made strides in growing and evolving its research and quality control divisions, both of which have been involved in ongoing discussions to ensure regulatory compliance and quality consistency. The geography of this new manufacturer provides a benefit of increased product availability internationally, allowing for the significant growth of existing and future SteraMist product end users into the Asia Pacific region, EU and Africa. The contract has a three (3) year term, and the team is almost complete in the design of the SteraPack™.
Robotic applications using TOMI SteraMist iHP™ technology in healthcare and many other industries will help to vastly reduce direct human exposure to dangerous pathogens. TOMI signed agreements with several companies in the Asia and Southeast Asia region granting the right of its patented SteraMist iHP™ for use in the development of disinfection robots. Prototype disinfection robots have been developed and are undergoing early-stage trials at various locations. One of TOMI’s robotic development partners, RV Automation Technology Company Limited successfully deployed SteraBot™ in late 2020, in a pilot disinfection robot at the Lithuanian University Hospital of Health Sciences.
Finally, SteraMist technology once again successfully tested for direct produce application efficacy, with testing results published in Food Control for the third time. The United States Department of Agriculture paper “Cold plasma-activated hydrogen peroxide aerosol on populations of Salmonella Typhimurium and Listeria innocua and quality changes of apple, tomato and cantaloupe during storage - A pilot scale study” authored by Dr. Xuetong Fan. The objective of this study sought to test direct application of iHP™ directly onto the smooth surfaces of tomatoes and apples, the stem scars of tomatoes, and the rinds of cantaloupes. Resulting efficacy on the reduction of Salmonella Typhimurium and Listeria innocua bacteria as well as any changes in quality parameters for simulated storage were observed.
2021 Events to Date:
During the first quarter of 2021, we hired two Vice President of Sales, each of which, along with a Vice President of Sales, hired in the fourth quarter of 2020, attended a week-long sales seminar hosted by TOMI at the end of February 2021. The sales seminar was intended to educate each sales professional about disinfection decontamination competition in their respective divisions and the advantages of SteraMist technology and products.
On January 15, 2021, Dr. Halden Shane presented at the Needham Virtual Growth Conference while continuing to pursue and enhance SteraMist media presence across many platforms.
On January 27, 2021, we released preliminary scientific results on one of two studies conducted with the University of Virginia demonstrating kill on SARS CoV-2 Virus in 5 seconds and look forward to results on the second study achieving kill on Adenovirus, which will help our Hospital-HealthCare, TOMI Service Network, and Commercial markets.
Research Studies:
An article was published on April 30, 2020, with our long-term customer, Dana Farber in Boston on the research studies and protocol developments of the decontamination of N95 masks and face shields. This protocol is under review with the FDA and allows for the disinfection of 2,000 masks in two (2) hours. Similar protocols developed at the University of Iowa and Cedars Sinai of Los Angeles are also under review with the FDA allowing for tens of thousands of PPE reprocessing daily. We continue to wait for FDA EUA approval.
We have moved forward with testing on 1% BIT Solution in preparation of another EPA label as we passed the third milestone for EPA review on December 7, 2020 and our PRIA date has been extended until early summer.
We continue to work with our German aircraft partner and Boeing in a third-party test required for the aviation industry. We will incur no costs for this work as both testing partners are clients. We anticipate the testing will be completed in Q2-21.
We continue to work with the Virginia State University Agricultural Research Station and its partner, Arkema on a food safety pilot study based on novel, nonthermal, and environmentally friendly technology to control foodborne pathogens on industrial hemp seed and strawberry as representative model foods. The study will investigate the efficacy of aerosolized hydrogen peroxide in inactivating foodborne pathogens - determining the optimum treatment conditions on microbial and physical quality of the two model products. We anticipate the pilot to be completed Q2-21.
We are working with University of Virginia on two separate studies. First, SteraMist efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 and as reported successful results. We wait for the final published paper. The second, against Adenovirus using the handheld SteraMist Surface Unit and testing spray and contact time variables and we wait for final results. We anticipate the testing will be completed in Q3-21.
TOMI has partnered with the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry of Texas Tech University to conduct a wide range of studies on spray pattern, deposition, and hydrogen peroxide content in order to compare our 1% label to other similar products on the market.
We continue to participate in a large multi-year federal funded study, known as the “SHIELD study”, that compares hospital manual cleans to a SteraMist® mechanical clean. Preliminary results collected by the current hospitals in the study is showing a decrease in the transference of pathogens resulting in HAIs and Clostridium difficile infections in the rooms that used SteraMist® for their terminal clean, as compared to the rooms that have been manually cleaned. University of California, Los Angeles expanded involvement in the SHIELD study allowing for additional collection of data to validate the value of SteraMist® technology in hospitals, this expansion has been postponed until the threat of COVID-19 decreases and on-site EVS training can continue.
Product Development:
We have added four (4) new products to our growing line of products:
SteraBot™
SteraBot™ is an autonomous, machine-based solution that provides a more precise and efficient disinfection and decontamination, eliminating potential human error and reducing a facility’s operating expenses. It incorporates Automated Guided Vehicle (AGV) technology for intuitive maneuverability in unmapped environments, perfect for high touch surfaces maneuvering high and low, side by side, and multi-angle directions. The software allows for enhanced AI capability to optimize and execute mapping, autonomous navigation, and disinfection routines based on proprietary algorithms. The software also ensures the efficacy of SteraMist iHP™ disinfection under optimal operating parameters directed by TOMI, including the support of handheld disinfection. Currently, the SteraBot™ has been developed for testing internationally. The Picture above demonstrates the one applicator robot version, and we are currently in development of a three-applicator version. The consumer will have a choice between a one applicator or a three-applicator version depending on needs. We expect to launch the SteraBot in late Q2-2021.
SteraPack™
The soon to be launched domestically and internationally, SteraPack™ will be a portable battery supplied product producing the 5-second per square foot with no wet contact time, high efficacy iHP™ technology. The SteraPack™ is approximately 25 pounds with a run time of 45 minutes and will hold a 1.0-liter BIT™ Solution bottle. The SteraPack™ will have a 4-foot hybrid cable length, an ergonomic padded harness which provides inputs for strap length and adjustment ranges.
TOMI’s SteraMist Drive-in CES Decontamination System at Frederick
TOMI has a recently installed Customer Engineered System in its Frederick Operations Office. The system houses three (3) permanent 90-degree rotating applicators and one (1) additional applicator used for manual spraying. The full-service iHP disinfection room was launched for emergency, police, fire, medical transports, specialized transports, personal vehicles, auto dealerships for new and used cars. In addition, our decontamination room can treat personal and workplace equipment, furniture, sports equipment, contaminated shipments and a lot more.
The SteraMist® systems are versatile and easy to maintain with relatively low upkeep. In fact, preventive maintenance is not required to be performed by a service engineer and remote guidance can be provided upon request.
SteraMist® SteraBox
Late in 2020, TOMI sold its first decontamination chamber. Currently we now sell our chamber in two separate sizes and it is sold with the Select Surface Unit or the Environment System and is dependent on the customers decontamination needs. This product is remotely initiated and includes a self-contained exhaust system without fear of hydrogen peroxide exposure to the surrounding area. The customer experiences speed, efficacy, and expansive material compatibility in a controlled, customizable cabinet decontaminating all needs with ease. The Chamber is expected to launch into the market in Q2-2021
Registrations & Intellectual Property (IP):
Our portfolio includes more than twenty (20) Utility Patent applications worldwide for both method and system claims on SteraMist® BIT™, either published or undergoing prosecution. Most recently, in November 2020, we were granted utility patents in Australia and Israel for our SteraMist® BIT™ technology. In the recent past, we have obtained two related US utility patents giving us protection of our technology until the year 2038, and we are pursuing further claims to additional capabilities in on-going US and worldwide patent applications. In May 2020, we filed a PCT application for further additional applications of SteraMist® BIT™ which were determined to be novel and inventive by the international search authority.
Further in 2020, we submitted utility patents in multiple countries which are all in the national stage for review under the patent prosecution highway for claims found novel and inventive by the international search authority. Once these are received, we will hold international acceptance for the inherited patents and our newly received patents. During 2020, we were awarded a design patent on our surface-mounted applicator device in the United States, China, Japan, Taiwan, and Korea. We have filed and have been granted or have pending acceptance on thirty-two (32) separate design patents for our: Decontamination Chamber(s), Decontamination Applicator, Decontamination Cart, Applicator, and Surface Mounted Applicator 90-Degree Device. These patents are published around the world, including but not limited to United States, China, Hong Kong, Europe, United Kingdom, Singapore, Taiwan, Vietnam, Canada, South Korea, and Japan.
Our products are sold around the world under various brand names and trademarks. We consider our brand names and trademarks to be valuable in the marketing of our products. As of March 1, 2021, we held a total of one hundred seventy-eight (178) trademarks (word and logo) registered or pending across the globe. TOMI registers marks in seven (7) classes of specification of goods and services: Class 1 for Chemicals for Treating Hazardous Waste, Class 5 for Disinfectants, All-Purpose for Hard Surfaces and for Treating Mold, Class 7 for Handheld Power Operated Spraying Machines, Class 11 for Sterilizers for Medical Use and Air Purification, Class 35 for Business Consultation and Management Services, Class 37 for General Disinfecting Services, and Class 40 for Chemical Decontamination and Manufacturing Services.
Financial Operations Overview
Our financial position as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, was as follows:
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our debt and liquidity positions were affected by the following:
●
Net cash provided from operations of $4,578,000
●
Proceeds from loan payable of $411,000
●
Net cash used in investing activites of $401,000
●
Proceeds from exercise of outstanding warrants and options to purchase common stock of $214,000
●
Conversion of convertible notes payable with a principal balance of $4,500,000 into shares of common stock
●
Repayment of convertible note payable with a principal balance of $500,000
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
(1)
Includes $3,131,000 and $114,000 in non-cash equity compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2)
NM - Not Meaningful
Sales
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had net revenue of approximately $25,028,000 and $6,347,000, respectively, representing an increase in revenue of approximately $18,681,000 or 294%. The increase in revenue was attributable to increased global demand for disinfection and infectious disease control products in response to the COVID-19 Pandemic. Although we saw a significant demand for our product within our Hospital-Healthcare, TSN, and Commercial divisions as a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic during the first half of 2020, we expect revenue to reflect steady growth as our customers update their operation requirements to include disinfecting and decontamination services into their regular routines for all potential pathogens and across all our divisions.
As customers mature through the product and adoption cycle and our sales pipeline converts to revenue, we expect to have more predictable sales quarter over quarter. Further, as the COVID-19 pandemic subsides, we expect that the demand for our products and services will continue and we are building a team to address the post COVID-19 pandemic market opportunities.
Net Revenue
Product and Service Revenue
Revenue by Geographic Region
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales was $9,985,000 and $2,433,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $7,552,000, or 310%, compared to the prior year. The primary reason for the increase in cost of sales is attributable to the increase in revenue in the current year. Our gross profit as a percentage of sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 was 60.1% compared to 61.7% in the same prior period, respectively. The lower gross profit is attributable to the product mix in sales. As revenues continue to grow and we are able to negotiate more favorable pricing from our vendors, we anticipate that our cost per unit could decrease.
Professional Fees
Professional fees are comprised mainly of legal, accounting, and financial consulting fees.
Professional fees were $681,000 and $364,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of approximately $317,000, or 87%, in the current year period. The increase is attributable to additional professional fees in connection with our up list to the Nasdaq.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization were approximately $720,000 and $716,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of $4,000, or 1%.
Selling Expenses
Selling expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $1,247,000, as compared to $1,655,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a decrease of approximately $408,000 or 25%.
We continue to invest and allocate resources into our sales, marketing and advertising initiatives and have increased efforts in the current year in order to further develop our brand recognition and grow our base of customers. The decline in selling expenses is primarily due to a revision of our sales department as well as a complete reduction in tradeshow costs in the current year period as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect tradeshow expenses to continue to decline this year in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic as physical distancing continues to remain in effect. We expect to increase our external sales team strategy during 2021 along with adding internal senior sales and sector Vice Presidents to address the increase in the demand for our products and services.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $455,000, as compared to $341,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of approximately $114,000, or 33%. The increase in research and development expenses is attributable to new product development and increased testing.
Equity Compensation Expense
Equity compensation expense was $3,131,000 and $114,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of $3,017,000 or 2,646%. The increase in equity compensation expense relates to the timing of warrants issued to executives and consultants in 2020.
Consulting Fees
Consulting fees were $327,000 and $127,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of $200,000, or 157%, in the current year period. The increase is due to the timing of certain projects that occurred in the current year that did not occur in the same prior year period.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense includes salaries and payroll taxes, rent, insurance expense, utilities, office expense and product registration costs.
General and administrative expense was $3,972,000 and $2,681,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $1,291,000, or 48%, in the current year period. The increase in General and administrative expense is attributable to a higher employee headcount and higher wages as well as an increase in international product registration.
Other Income and Expense
Amortization of debt discount was $0 and $18,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Amortization of debt discount for the year ended December 31, 2019, consisted of the amortization of debt discount on the $6,000,000 principal amount of Notes issued in March and May 2017. The debt discount was amortized over the life of the Notes utilizing the effective interest method.
Interest income was $2,900 and $3,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Interest expense was $44,000 and $200,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 primarily consisted of the interest incurred on the $6,000,000 principal amount of Notes issued in March and May 2017 of which $4,500,000 was converted to common stock in March, 2020 and the remaining $500,000 was paid in cash in March 2020.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes was $77,000 and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $5,199,000 and working capital of $11,503,000. Our principal capital requirements are to fund operations, invest in research and development and capital equipment, and the continued costs of public company filing requirements. We have historically funded our operations through debt and equity financings.
In March 2020, convertible notes with a principal balance of $4,500,000 were converted into 1,041,667 shares of our common stock at a conversion price of $4.32 per share and the remaining outstanding balance of $500,000 was repaid in the form of cash.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 we generated income from operations of $4,509,000 and for the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred losses from operations of ($2,083,000). Cash provided from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $4,578,000. Cash used in operations was ($814,000) for the year ended December 31, 2019.
A breakdown of our statement of cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is provided below:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $4,578,000, compared to cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 of ($814,000). Our cash provided by operations improved in the current year period as a result of increased revenue and net income.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $401,000 and $293,000, respectively.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $124,000 and $0, respectively. The cash provided by financing activities increased in the current period due to the proceeds from the exercise of warrants and options in the amount of $214,000 and proceeds from loans payable of $411,000 offset by repayment of the principal balance of the convertible notes of $500,000.
Liquidity
Our revenues can fluctuate due to the following factors, among others:
●
ramp up and expansion of our internal sales force and manufacturers’ representatives;
●
length of our sales cycle;
●
global response to the outbreak of COVID-19 Pandemic;
●
expansion into new territories and markets; and
●
timing of orders from distributors.
We could incur operating losses and an increase of costs related to the continuation of product and technology development, and sales expense as we continue to grow our sales teams and geographic presence, tooling capital expenditures as we ramp up and streamline our production and administrative activities including compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 Section 404.
Management has taken and will endeavor to continue to take a number of actions in order to improve our results of operations and the related cash flows generated from operations in order to strengthen our financial position, including the following items:
●
expanding our label with the EPA to further our product registration internationally;
●
continued expansion of our internal sales force and manufacturer representatives in an effort to drive global revenue in all verticals;
●
Continue research and development and add new products to our “Stera” product line
●
source alternative lower-cost suppliers;
●
expansion of international distributors; and
●
continued growth in all of our verticals.
We expect that the cash we generate from our core operations will generally be sufficient to cover our future capital expenditures and to pay down our near-term debt obligations, although we may choose to seek alternative financing sources.
We believe that our existing balance of cash and cash equivalents and amounts expected to be provided by operations will provide us with sufficient financial resources to meet our cash requirements for operations, working capital and capital expenditures over the next twelve months.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The estimation process requires assumptions to be made about future events and conditions, and as such, is inherently subjective and uncertain. Actual results could differ materially from our estimates.
The SEC defines critical accounting policies as those that are, in management’s view, most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and most demanding of our judgment. We consider the following policies to be critical to an understanding of our consolidated financial statements and the uncertainties associated with the complex judgments made by us that could impact our results of operations, financial position and cash flows.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). We recognize revenue when we transfer promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for contracts with customers we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligation(s) in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation(s) in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy the performance obligation(s). At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract, assess whether each promised good or service is distinct and identify those that are performance obligations.
We must use judgment to determine: a) the number of performance obligations based on the determination under step (ii) above and whether those performance obligations are distinct from other performance obligations in the contract; b) the transaction price under step (iii) above; and c) the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract for the allocation of transaction price in step (iv) above.
Title and risk of loss generally pass to our customers upon shipment. Our Customers include end users as well as dealers and distributors who market and sell our products. Our revenue is not contingent upon resale by the dealer or distributor, and we have no further obligations related to bringing about resale. Shipping and handling costs charged to customers are included in Product Revenues. The associated expenses are treated as fulfillment costs and are included in Cost of Revenues. Revenues are reported net of sales taxes collected from Customers.
Product revenue includes sales from our standard and customized equipment, solution and accessories sold with our equipment. Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products.
Service and training revenue include sales from our high-level decontamination and service engagements, validation of our equipment and technology and customer training. Service revenue is recognized as the agreed upon services are rendered to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those services.
Costs to Obtain a Contract with a Customer
We apply a practical expedient to expense costs as incurred for costs to obtain a contract with a customer when the amortization period would have been one year or less. We generally expense sales commissions when incurred because the amortization period would have been one year or less. These costs are recorded within selling expenses.
Contract Balances
As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019 we did not have any unsatisfied performance obligations for (i) contracts with an original expected length of one year or less and (ii) contracts for which we recognize revenue at the amount to which we have the right to invoice for services performed.
Arrangements with Multiple Performance Obligations
Our contracts with customers may include multiple performance obligations. We enter into contracts that can include various combinations of products and services, which are primarily distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations.
Significant Judgments
Our contracts with customers for products and services often dictate the terms and conditions of when the control of the promised products or services is transferred to the customer and the amount of consideration to be received in exchange for the products and services.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported and disclosed in the accompanying consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to accounts receivable, inventory, fair values of financial instruments, intangible assets, useful lives of intangible assets and property and equipment, fair values of stock-based awards, income taxes, and contingent liabilities, among others. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of our assets and liabilities.
Fair Value Measurements
The authoritative guidance for fair value measurements defines fair value as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or the most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. Market participants are buyers and sellers in the principal market that are (i) independent, (ii) knowledgeable, (iii) able to transact, and (iv) willing to transact. The guidance describes a fair value hierarchy based on the levels of inputs, of which the first two are considered observable and the last unobservable, that may be used to measure fair value, which are the following:
Level 1:
Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2:
Inputs other than Level 1 that are observable, either directly or indirectly, such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities; quoted prices in markets that are not active; or other inputs that are observable or corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.
Level 3:
Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to the value of the assets or liabilities.
Our financial instruments include cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued expenses. All these items were determined to be Level 1 fair value measurements.
The carrying amounts of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued expenses approximated fair value because of the short maturity of these instruments.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
For purposes of the statement of cash flows, cash and cash equivalents includes cash on hand, held at financial institutions and other liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less. At times, these deposits may be in excess of insured limits.
Accounts Receivable
Our accounts receivable are typically from credit worthy customers or, for certain international customers, are supported by pre-payments. For those customers to whom we extend credit, we perform periodic evaluations of them and maintain allowances for potential credit losses as deemed necessary. We have a policy of reserving for doubtful accounts based on our best estimate of the amount of potential credit losses in existing accounts receivable. We periodically review our accounts receivable to determine whether an allowance is necessary based on an analysis of past due accounts and other factors that may indicate that the realization of an account may be in doubt. Account balances deemed to be uncollectible are charged to the allowance after all means of collection have been exhausted and the potential for recovery is considered remote.
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method. Inventories consist primarily of finished goods.
We expense costs to maintain certification to cost of goods sold as incurred.
We review inventory on an ongoing basis, considering factors such as deterioration and obsolescence. We record an allowance for estimated losses when the facts and circumstances indicate that particular inventories may not be usable.
Property and Equipment
We account for property and equipment at cost less accumulated depreciation. We compute depreciation using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, generally three to five years. Depreciation for equipment, furniture and fixtures and vehicles commences once placed in service for its intended use. Leasehold improvements are amortized using the straight-line method over the lives of the respective leases or service lives of the improvements, whichever is shorter.
Leases
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02 (ASC 842), Leases, to require lessees to recognize all leases, with certain exceptions, on the balance sheet, while recognition on the statement of operations will remain similar to current lease accounting. Subsequently, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-10, Codification Improvements to Topic 842, Leases, ASU No. 2018-11, Targeted Improvements, ASU No. 2018-20, Narrow-Scope Improvements for Lessors, and ASU 2019-01, Codification Improvements, to clarify and amend the guidance in ASU No. 2016-02. ASC 842 eliminates real estate-specific provisions and modifies certain aspects of lessor accounting. This standard is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2018, with early adoption permitted. We adopted ASC 842 as of January 1, 2019 using the modified retrospective basis with a cumulative effect adjustment as of that date. In addition, we elected the package of practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance within the new standard, which allowed us to carry forward the historical determination of contracts as leases, lease classification and not reassess initial direct costs for historical lease arrangements. Accordingly, previously reported financial statements, including footnote disclosures, have not been recast to reflect the application of the new standard to all comparative periods presented.
Operating lease assets are included within operating lease right-of-use assets, and the corresponding operating lease liabilities are recorded as current portion of long-term operating lease, and within long-term liabilities as long-term operating lease, net of current portion on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
We have elected not to present short-term leases on the consolidated balance sheet as these leases have a lease term of 12 months or less at lease inception and do not contain purchase options or renewal terms that we are reasonably certain to exercise. All other lease assets and lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term at commencement date. Because most of our leases do not provide an implicit rate of return, we used our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at adoption date in determining the present value of lease payments.
Capitalized Software Development Costs
In accordance with ASC 985-20 regarding the development of software to be sold, leased, or marketed we expense such costs as they are incurred until technological feasibility has been established, at and after which time those costs are capitalized until the product is available for general release to customers. The periodic expense for the amortization of capitalized software development costs will be included in cost of sales.
Accrued Warranties
Accrued warranties represent the estimated costs, if any, that will be incurred during the warranty period of our products. We estimate the expected costs to be incurred during the warranty period and record the expense to the consolidated statement of operations at the date of sale. Our manufacturers assume the warranty against product defects which we extend to our customers upon sale of the product. We assume responsibility for product reliability and results.
Income Taxes
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the financial statement reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. The measurement of deferred income tax assets is reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance for any tax benefits that are, on a more likely than not basis, not expected to be realized in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) guidance for income taxes.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share
Basic net income or (loss) per share is computed by dividing our net income or (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period presented. Diluted income or (loss) per share is based on the treasury stock method and includes the effect from potential issuance of shares of common stock, such as shares issuable pursuant to the exercise of options and warrants and conversions of preferred stock or debentures.
Equity Compensation Expense
We account for equity compensation expense in accordance with FASB ASC 718, “Compensation-Stock Compensation.” Under the provisions of FASB ASC 718, equity compensation expense is estimated at the grant date based on the award’s fair value and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period.
On July 7, 2017, our shareholders approved the 2016 Equity Incentive Plan, or the 2016 Plan. The 2016 Plan authorizes the grant of stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, restricted stock units and performance units/shares. Up to 625,000 shares of common stock are authorized for issuance under the 2016 Plan. Shares issued under the 2016 Plan may be either authorized but unissued shares, treasury shares, or any combination thereof. Provisions in the 2016 Plan permit the reuse or reissuance by the 2016 Plan of shares of common stock for numerous reasons, including, but not limited to, shares of common stock underlying canceled, expired, or forfeited awards of stock-based compensation and stock appreciation rights paid out in the form of cash. Equity compensation expense will typically be awarded in consideration for the future performance of services to us. All recipients of awards under the 2016 Plan are required to enter into award agreements with us at the time of the award; awards under the 2016 Plan are expressly conditioned upon such agreements.
On December 30, 2020, we received shareholder approval to restate and amend the 2016 Equity Incentive Plan to increase the maximum number of shares of common stock authorized from issuance by 1,375,000, from 625,000 shares to 2,000,000.
Concentrations of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject us to significant concentrations of credit risk consist principally of cash and cash equivalents. We maintain cash balances at financial institutions which exceed the current Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation limit of $250,000 at times during the year.
Long-Lived Assets Including Acquired Intangible Assets
We assess long-lived assets for potential impairments at the end of each year, or during the year if an event or other circumstance indicates that we may not be able to recover the carrying amount of the asset. In evaluating long-lived assets for impairment, we measure recoverability of these assets by comparing the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate. If our long-lived assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized equals the amount by which the carrying value of the asset exceeds its fair market value. We base the calculations of the estimated fair value of our long-lived assets on the income approach. For the income approach, we use an internally developed discounted cash flow model that includes, among others, the following assumptions: projections of revenues and expenses and related cash flows based on assumed long-term growth rates and demand trends; expected future investments to grow new units; and estimated discount rates. We base these assumptions on our historical data and experience, industry projections, micro and macro general economic condition projections, and our expectations. We had no long-lived asset impairment charges for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-15, “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other-Internal-Use Software (Topic 350): Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That is a Service Contract.” This new guidance aligns the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred in a hosting arrangement that is a service contract with the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred to develop or obtain internal-use software. This new guidance is effective on a prospective or retrospective basis beginning on January 1, 2020, with early adoption permitted. We elected to adopt this guidance early, in 2020 on a prospective basis. The new guidance did not have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.