ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, which involve risks and uncertainties. For cautions about relying on such forward-looking statements, please refer to the section entitled Forward-Looking Statements at the beginning of this Annual Report immediately prior to Item 1. Our actual results
could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited to, those discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Comparison of 2019 and 2018 Results
For a discussion comparing our 2019 results to our 2018 results, refer to Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 26, 2020.
Executive Overview
COVID-19 Update
In the first quarter of 2020, the outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, was declared a pandemic. Efforts in the United States to prevent the spread of COVID-19 and mitigate its impacts intensified in March 2020. All 50 states in the United States declared states of emergency, and various countries around the world, including the United States, took steps to restrict travel. Many states and cities within the United States also enacted temporary closures of businesses, issued stay-at-home orders and implemented other restrictive measures in response to the pandemic. The pace of easing and the continued level of restrictions have varied across regions based on the rates of new COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations, and this variability is expected to continue until infection rates decrease to levels that are more acceptable to public health officials. Several vaccines have been developed and approved, or are in the process of being approved, and large-scale immunization programs have commenced worldwide, with recipients being offered the vaccine based upon government-approved priority classifications and schedules. These vaccines are highly effective against the original COVID-19 virus strain, but may not be as effective against certain new variants that have recently been discovered nor against other future variants.
In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic caused a lack of available manpower, a reduction in field labor productivity, other inefficiencies, delays to project schedules, deferral of project execution and, consequently, incremental costs estimated to be in excess of $50 million, much of which we are seeking to recover from our customers as allowed by contractual terms. The relief sought from customers, some of which has already been received, helped reduce the pandemic's negative impact on our revenue for the year to an estimated $290 million and income from construction operations to an estimated $21 million (with much of the revenue and income from construction operations associated with these impacts expected to be recognized in future periods). In addition, the pandemic caused the cancellation of a transaction to sell an office building that would have resulted in other income of approximately $8 million. Altogether, we estimate that the pandemic negatively impacted EPS by $0.41 in 2020, partially offsetting the results for the year.
The vast majority of our projects, especially in the Civil segment, have been and continue to be considered essential business activities, which has allowed projects to continue while implementing new health and safety requirements. However, the COVID-19 pandemic had an adverse effect on the volume of our new awards and, correspondingly, backlog in 2020. Many of our state and local government customers’ revenue sources have been negatively impacted by the pandemic due to severely curtailed ridership on mass-transit systems (buses, subways, trains, etc.), travel on commercial airlines, and driving by the general public, which resulted in reduced fare and toll collections, lower fuel tax receipts and reduced airport and other facility usage fees. Sales and other tax revenues have also been negatively affected by reduced spending, as the retail, travel, hospitality and entertainment industries, among others, have suffered through periodic government-imposed shut-downs or occupancy restrictions. These tax revenue shortfalls led to, and could continue to result in, funding uncertainties that have caused customers to delay bid solicitations and contract awards for many of their planned infrastructure projects. Our reduced backlog combined with the possibility of continued pandemic-related delays in project bids and awards could result in lower-than-expected revenue and earnings until such time as the federal government provides supplemental funding support (should that occur) to our customers or when customers’ funding uncertainties are otherwise resolved.
While the recently commenced COVID-19 vaccination programs offer hope that society and business environments may return to a greater sense of normalcy in the second half of 2021, the timing and pace of such a return to normalcy are difficult to predict. As such, due to the fluidity of the COVID-19 pandemic, uncertainties as to its scope and duration, and ongoing changes in the way that governments, businesses and individuals react and respond to the pandemic, the Company is unable at this time to accurately predict the pandemic’s future impact on the Company’s business, results of operations, financial condition or liquidity. Among other things, governments could prohibit the continuation of certain projects that to date have been designated as “essential” or could impose health, safety and other operational requirements on such projects that could result in delays to or suspensions of such projects. In addition, employees and contractors working on such projects could be unable or unwilling to continue working on them, perhaps for extended periods, because they may be unable or unwilling to be immunized against COVID-19, or for other reasons. The COVID-19 pandemic also could negatively affect the ability of counterparties to make required payments on a timely basis or at all.
Operating Results
Consolidated revenue for 2020 was $5.3 billion, an increase of 20% compared to $4.5 billion in 2019. The growth was primarily attributable to increased activities on several infrastructure projects in California and the Northeast, and various building projects in California. The revenue growth in 2020 was reduced by the COVID-19 impact mentioned above. Revenue in 2019 was negatively impacted by a $123.9 million reduction associated with the SR 99 charge discussed in the following paragraph.
Income from construction operations in 2020 was $262.3 million compared to a loss from construction operations of $365.0 million in 2019. Adjusted income from construction operations for 2019, which is a non-GAAP financial measure and excludes the $379.9 million non-cash goodwill impairment charge incurred in that year, was $14.9 million. (For a discussion of non-GAAP financial measures, including a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to the most nearly comparable GAAP financial measures, see the section below titled Non-GAAP Financial Measures.) The increase in 2020 was driven by contributions from the above-mentioned infrastructure projects, as well as the absence of a prior-year $166.8 million pre-tax charge related to the adverse SR 99 jury verdict. (The SR 99-related charge in 2019 principally impacted the Civil segment. For additional information, refer to the Alaskan Way Viaduct (SR 99) Matter discussion in Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.) The increase was partially offset by the COVID-19 impact mentioned above.
The provision for income taxes was $21.9 million for 2020 compared to an income tax benefit of $65.6 million for 2019. The effective tax rate for 2020 was 12.6% compared to 15.4% for 2019. The effective tax rate in 2020 primarily reflects tax benefits related to provisions of the CARES Act. The income tax benefit in 2019 resulted from the pre-tax loss primarily related to the goodwill impairment and SR 99 charges mentioned above. See Corporate, Tax and Other Matters below for a discussion of the changes in the effective tax rate.
Diluted earnings per share for 2020 was $2.12 compared to diluted loss per share of $7.72 for 2019. The COVID-19 pandemic had an estimated negative impact on diluted earnings per share of $0.41 for 2020. For 2019, adjusted diluted loss per share, which is a non-GAAP financial measure and excludes the goodwill impairment charge (and the associated tax benefit) incurred in that year, was $1.14. The increase in 2020 was principally due to the factors discussed above that drove the increase in income from construction operations, as well as the impact of the favorable income tax rate in 2020.
Consolidated new awards in 2020 were $2.4 billion compared to $6.4 billion in 2019. The lower volume of new awards in 2020 was primarily due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, which delayed certain customers from moving forward with planned project bid solicitations and contract awards due to budgetary impacts, funding uncertainties and customer staffing challenges. In addition, new awards in 2020 were negatively impacted by the timing of bids and awards for certain large prospective project opportunities, which the Company expects will occur in 2021 and 2022. The Civil and Building segments were the primary contributors to the new award activity in 2020. Significant new awards included approximately $732 million for various mass-transit projects; approximately $615 million for various building projects in California; $286 million for various electrical projects in Texas, California and Florida; $271 million for several government facilities projects nationwide; and $158 million for various electrical projects in New York.
Consolidated backlog as of December 31, 2020 was $8.3 billion compared to $11.2 billion as of December 31, 2019. Backlog declined as a result of the higher current year revenue generated from near-record backlog at the end of 2019 outpacing current year new awards, which were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 31, 2020, the mix of backlog by segment was 57% for Civil, 20% for Building and 23% for Specialty Contractors.
Most projects in the Civil segment’s backlog typically convert to revenue over a period of three to five years and in the Building and Specialty Contractors segments over a period of one to three years. We estimate that approximately $4 billion, or 47%, of our backlog as of December 31, 2020 will be recognized as revenue in 2021.
The following table presents the changes in backlog in 2020:
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
(a)New awards consist of the original contract price of projects added to our backlog plus or minus subsequent changes to the estimated total contract price of existing contracts.
(b)Backlog may differ from the transaction prices allocated to the remaining performance obligations as disclosed in Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Such differences relate to the timing of executing a formal contract or receiving a notice to proceed. More specifically, backlog sometimes may include awards for which a contract has not yet been executed or a notice to proceed has not been issued, but for which there are no remaining major uncertainties that we will proceed with our work on the project (e.g., adequate funding is in place).
Because the COVID-19 pandemic remains fluid and uncertain, the Company cannot assess the degree to which it might experience future adverse impacts. The general outlook for the Company’s growth over the next several years remains favorable, particularly in the Civil and Specialty Contractors segments, but the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic could continue to adversely affect future performance and operations, and the level of new work awarded. In addition, the Company’s growth could continue to be impacted by future project delays or the timing of project commencements, ramp-up activities and completions. We anticipate that we will continue to win our share of significant new awards resulting from long-term capital spending plans by state, local and federal customers, as well as limited competition for some of the largest project opportunities. In recent elections, voters in numerous states approved dozens of long-term transportation funding measures totaling approximately $200 billion in long-term funding. The largest of these were in Los Angeles County, where Measure M, a half-cent sales tax increase, was approved and is expected to generate $120 billion of funding over 40 years, and in Seattle, Washington, where Sound Transit 3 was passed and is expected to generate $54 billion of funding over 25 years. As state and local governments continue responding to the economic burdens attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic, they may delay or cancel planned infrastructure investments due to reduced revenues from income and sales taxes, fuel taxes and tolls. The extent of such effects, their duration, and how state and local governments will respond remains uncertain, just as the scope and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic remain uncertain. However, the COVID-19 pandemic’s dramatic impact on the U.S. economy has caused interest rates to remain at historically low levels, which may be conducive to continued, and potentially increased, spending on infrastructure projects.
There has long been strong, bipartisan support for infrastructure investments in the U.S. Given the lack of substantial federal infrastructure spending over the past two decades, there now appears to be a greater likelihood for additional federal financial assistance or stimulus programs directed toward assisting state and local governments in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and/or a federal program specifically targeting significant investments in infrastructure. Such additional federal financial assistance or stimulus programs could favorably impact the Company’s current work and prospective opportunities, though the timing and magnitude of such additional federal government actions, if any, remain uncertain.
While we anticipate continued revenue growth from our existing backlog of large civil infrastructure projects on the West Coast and other projects in Guam, certain large civil projects in the Northeast are completing or will be nearing completion over the next year. The Company is pursuing several large prospective projects on the West Coast, in the Northeast and in Guam that are expected to be bid and awarded in 2021 and 2022. However, revenue could decline in 2021 because the timing and magnitude of revenue contributions from these prospective projects may not be sufficient to offset revenue reductions associated with the projects that will be completed or nearing completion in 2021. In addition, as discussed earlier, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in, and could potentially continue to result in, delays in the bidding and awarding of certain projects the Company is pursuing, which could further delay large new revenue streams.
For a more detailed discussion of operating performance of each business segment, corporate general and administrative expenses and other items, see Results of Segment Operations, Corporate, Tax and Other Matters and Liquidity and Capital Resources below.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our consolidated financial statements presented under generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”), we are presenting certain non-GAAP financial measures. We are providing these non-GAAP financial measures to disclose additional information to facilitate the comparison of past and present operations, and they are among the
indicators management uses as a basis for evaluating the Company’s financial performance as well as for forecasting future periods. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures, when considered together with our GAAP financial results, provide management and investors with an additional understanding of our business operating results, including underlying trends.
These non-GAAP financial measures, which exclude the non-cash goodwill impairment charge incurred in 2019 (as well as the tax benefit associated with this charge), include adjusted income (loss) from construction operations, adjusted net income (loss) attributable to Tutor Perini Corporation, adjusted diluted earnings (loss) per common share and adjusted effective income tax rate. We also reference adjusted operating margin for each segment, which is a non-GAAP financial measure that we define as adjusted income (loss) from construction operations as a percentage of revenue. These non-GAAP financial measures are not intended to replace the presentation of our financial results in accordance with GAAP, and they may not be comparable to other similarly titled non-GAAP financial measures presented by other companies. Reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most nearly comparable GAAP financial measures are presented below. There were no adjustments for 2020; therefore, the non-GAAP financial measures do not differ from GAAP results in that period.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Results of Segment Operations
The results of our Civil, Building and Specialty Contractors segments are discussed below:
Civil Segment
Revenue, income (loss) from construction operations and adjusted income from construction operations for the Civil segment are summarized as follows:
Revenue for 2020 increased 24% compared to 2019. The revenue growth was primarily due to overall increased project execution activities on various mass-transit projects in California and Minnesota, as well as the absence of the prior-year revenue reduction associated with the adverse SR 99 jury verdict discussed in the section entitled Executive Overview. We estimate that the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted revenue by approximately $45 million in 2020, primarily due to the factors that affected operating results mentioned above in COVID-19 Update.
Income from construction operations was $245.8 million in 2020 compared to a loss from construction operations of $150.9 million in 2019. Excluding the impact of the goodwill impairment charge in 2019, adjusted income from construction operations was $59.3 million, reflecting an increase of 314% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily driven by the volume growth mentioned above and improved performance on certain projects, as well as the absence of the prior-year SR 99-related charge ($155.8 million of the $166.8 million charge impacted the Civil segment in 2019). The increase was partially offset by the absence of a prior-year $37.8 million reduction in the segment's general and administrative expenses associated with the remeasurement gain that resulted from the Company increasing its ownership interest in a joint venture in 2019, as well as by an increase in non-cash amortization expense of $25.9 million in 2020, also related to that increased ownership interest. We estimate that the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a negative impact of approximately $6 million on income from construction operations in 2020.
Operating margin was 11.2% for 2020 compared to operating margin of (8.5)% and adjusted operating margin of 3.3% in 2019. Adjusted operating margin excludes the impact of the 2019 goodwill impairment charge. The increase in adjusted operating margin for 2020 was primarily due to the factors discussed above that drove the increases in revenue and income from construction operations.
New awards in the Civil segment totaled $946 million in 2020 compared to $2.7 billion in 2019. The lower volume of new awards in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in delays in customers issuing bid solicitations and contract awards for certain planned projects. In addition, new awards in 2020 were negatively impacted by the timing of bids and awards for certain large prospective project opportunities, which the Company expects will occur in 2021 and 2022. New awards in 2020 included more than $732 million of additional funding for various mass-transit projects, the Company’s $121 million share of a joint-venture mass-transit project in Massachusetts, and a $64 million mining project in Alabama. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in significant revenue shortfalls for many state and local government agencies in 2020, and may continue to cause the deferrals or cancellations of certain new projects, depending on the allocation and prioritization of state and local funding, as well as the availability, timing and magnitude of anticipated supplemental funding from the federal government.
New awards in 2019 included the $1.4 billion Purple Line Section 3 Stations project and the $432 million Division 20 Portal Widening and Turnback Facility project, both in California; the $253 million Culver Line Communications-Based Train Control project in New York; and a $178 million military facilities project and a $122 million wastewater treatment project, both in Guam.
Backlog for the Civil segment was $4.8 billion as of December 31, 2020, a decrease of 21% compared to $6.0 billion as of December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to strong revenue growth for the segment that exceeded the volume of new awards in 2020. The segment continues to experience strong demand reflected in a large, multi-year pipeline of prospective projects, substantial anticipated funding from various voter-approved transportation measures and public agencies’ long-term spending plans. The Civil segment is well-positioned to continue capturing its share of these prospective projects.
Building Segment
Revenue, income from construction operations and adjusted income from construction operations for the Building segment are summarized as follows:
Revenue for 2020 increased 14% compared to 2019, primarily due to increased project execution activities on various projects in California and Oklahoma. The increase was partially offset by reduced activity on certain projects in California that are completed or nearing completion. Revenue grew in 2020 despite the estimated negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic of approximately $190 million, primarily due to the factors that affected operating results mentioned above in COVID-19 Update.
Income from construction operation in 2020 was $53.2 million compared to $23.7 million in 2019. Excluding the impact of the goodwill impairment charge in 2019, adjusted income from construction operations was $37.2 million, reflecting an increase of 43% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was principally driven by the factors mentioned above that drove the increases in revenue, as well as increased contributions from certain higher-margin projects in 2020. We estimate that the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a negative impact of approximately $6 million in income from construction operations during 2020.
Operating margin was 2.7% in 2020 compared to operating margin of 1.4% and adjusted operating margin of 2.1% in 2019. Adjusted operating margin excludes the impact of the 2019 goodwill impairment charge. The increase in adjusted operating margin was driven by the factors mentioned above that drove the increases in revenue and income from construction operations.
New awards in the Building segment totaled $897 million in 2020 compared to $2.2 billion in 2019, as the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted demand in certain end markets and, correspondingly, the timing of bids and contract awards for certain planned projects. New awards in 2020 included approximately $615 million for various building projects in California and $271 million for several government facilities projects nationwide. The COVID-19 pandemic could continue to result in delayed project opportunities.
New awards in 2019 included the Choctaw Casino and Resort project in Oklahoma; a large hospitality and gaming project in California; a $263 million courthouse project in Florida; a technology campus tenant improvement project in California valued at more than $200 million; and the $200 million Southland Gaming Casino and Hotel project in Arkansas.
Backlog for the Building segment was $1.7 billion as of December 31, 2020, a decrease of 39% compared to $2.8 billion as of December 31, 2019. The decrease was driven by revenue growth for the segment that exceeded the volume of new awards in 2020. The Building segment continues to have a large volume of prospective projects across various end markets and geographic locations. Barring any further adverse impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, demand for our building construction services is expected to continue due to ongoing customer spending supported by a historically low interest rate environment.
Specialty Contractors Segment
Revenue, income (loss) from construction operations and adjusted income (loss) from construction operations for the Specialty Contractors segment are summarized as follows:
Revenue for 2020 increased 22% compared to 2019. The growth was principally due to increased project execution activities on certain mechanical and electrical projects in the Northeast and California. We estimate that the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted revenue in 2020 by approximately $55 million, primarily due to the factors that affected operating results mentioned above in COVID-19 Update.
Income from construction operations in 2020 was $17.2 million compared to a loss from construction operations of $172.6 million in 2019. Excluding the impact of the goodwill impairment charge in 2019, adjusted loss from construction operations was $16.4 million. Income from construction operations increased substantially in 2020 compared to the adjusted loss from construction operations in 2019, primarily due to the increased volume mentioned above and a gain of $25.7 million as a result of a favorable arbitration decision and subsequent settlement of the related employment dispute. The increase was also due to the absence of prior-year net unfavorable adjustments on certain electrical and mechanical projects in New York that totaled $41.5 million, none of which were individually material, and the absence of the prior-year SR 99-related charge ($11.0 million of which impacted the Specialty Contractors segment). The increase in 2020 was partially offset by various net unfavorable adjustments to project forecasts that totaled $29.8 million, none of which were individually material; a charge of $15.2 million due to an unfavorable legal ruling pertaining to a mechanical project in California; a charge of $13.2 million due to an adverse arbitration ruling on an electrical project in New York; and the estimated negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic of approximately $9 million.
Operating margin was 1.5% in 2020 compared to operating margin of (18.6)% and adjusted operating margin of (1.8)% in 2019. Adjusted operating margin excludes the impact of the 2019 goodwill impairment charge. The changes in adjusted operating margin for both periods were mainly attributable to the aforementioned factors that drove the changes in revenue and adjusted income (loss) from construction operations.
New awards in the Specialty Contractors segment totaled $600 million in 2020 compared to $1.5 billion in 2019, as the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in, and could continue to result in, reduced demand from certain commercial and government customers that have experienced funding constraints. New awards in 2020 included $286 million for various electrical projects in Texas, California and Florida, and $158 million for various electrical projects in New York.
New awards in 2019 included, among others, electrical and mechanical subcontracts valued at $216 million for the Purple Line Section 3 Stations project and an electrical subcontract valued at $140 million for the Division 20 Portal Widening and Turnback Facility project, both in California; and three mechanical projects collectively valued at $192 million and an electrical subcontract valued at $140 million for a mass-transit project, all in New York.
Backlog for the Specialty Contractors segment was $1.9 billion as of December 31, 2020, a decrease of 22% compared to $2.4 billion as of December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to strong revenue growth for the segment that exceeded the volume of new awards in 2020. The Specialty Contractors segment continues to be increasingly focused on servicing the Company’s backlog of large Civil and Building segment projects, but also remains well-positioned to capture its share of new projects for external customers, leveraging the size and scale of our business units that operate in New York, Texas, Florida and California and the strong reputation held by these business units for high-quality work on large, complex projects.
Corporate, Tax and Other Matters
Corporate General and Administrative Expenses
Corporate general and administrative expenses were $53.9 million in 2020 compared to $65.5 million in 2019. The decrease in corporate general and administrative expenses in 2020 was predominantly due to lower share-based compensation expense, lower outside professional fees, and reduced travel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other Income (Expense), Interest Expense and Income Tax (Expense) Benefit
Other income (expense) for 2020 was a net expense of $11.9 million compared to net other income of $6.7 million for 2019. The net expense in 2020 was primarily due to charges related to the unfavorable resolutions of certain disputes pertaining to past business acquisitions, which were not material individually or in the aggregate, while the net other income in 2019 was primarily related to a net gain on the sale of property and equipment. The COVID-19 pandemic caused the cancellation of a transaction to sell an office building that would have resulted in other income of approximately $8 million in 2020.
Interest expense increased $8.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019, almost entirely due to non-cash extinguishment costs that resulted from our debt restructuring transactions in August 2020.
The provision for income taxes was $21.9 million for 2020 compared to an income tax benefit of $65.6 million for 2019. The effective income tax rate was 12.6% for 2020 compared to 15.4% for 2019. The effective income tax rate for 2020 primarily reflects the favorable tax rate differential realized on the 2019 net operating loss (“NOL”) carryback and earnings attributable to noncontrolling interests for which income taxes are not the responsibility of the Company. Under the CARES Act, enacted on March 27, 2020, the NOL generated in 2019 may be carried back up to five years, whereas under previous rules NOLs were only allowed to be carried forward. This allowed the Company to realize the benefit of the tax rate differential by carrying back the NOL to tax years when the federal statutory tax rate was 35% rather than the current rate of 21%. These benefits to the effective tax rate were partially offset by state income taxes.
During 2019, the Company recognized a tax benefit of $65.6 million on a loss before income taxes of $425.8 million. As a result of the $379.9 million goodwill impairment charge discussed above, the Company recognized a tax benefit totaling $49.4 million. Approximately $209.5 million of the charge was not deductible for income tax purposes, which significantly reduced the tax benefit and effective income tax rate for 2019. As discussed above, the effective income tax rate for 2019 was 15.4%. The adjusted effective income tax rate for 2019, which excludes the tax benefit from the goodwill impairment charge and which is a non-GAAP financial measure, was 35.3%. The adjusted effective income tax rate for 2019 was higher than the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily due to earnings attributable to noncontrolling interests for which income taxes are not the responsibility
of the Company, which increased the effective rate due to the pre-tax loss for the period, U.S. federal research and development tax credits, and state income taxes, partially offset by foreign tax impacts.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is provided by available cash and cash equivalents, cash generated from operations, credit facilities and access to capital markets. On August 18, 2020, the Company entered into a new credit agreement that provides for a term loan B facility and a revolving credit facility. We used the net proceeds to repay all borrowings under our 2017 Credit Facility and repurchase a majority of our Convertible Notes, with the remaining notes outstanding to be repaid from cash restricted for such purpose. Under the new credit agreement, we have a committed line of credit totaling $175 million, with sublimits for the issuance of letters of credit and swing line loans up to the aggregate amounts of $75.0 million and $10.0 million, respectively, which may be used for revolving loans, letters of credit and/or general purposes. We believe that cash generated from operations, along with our unused credit capacity of $175 million and available cash balances as of December 31, 2020, will be sufficient to fund any working capital needs and debt maturities for the next 12 months, provided that we are not adversely impacted by unanticipated future events, including a material increase in the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as discussed above in COVID-19 Update. For a discussion of our new credit agreement and other debt transactions, see the section entitled Debt below.
Cash and Working Capital
Cash and cash equivalents were $374.3 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $193.7 million as of December 31, 2019. Cash immediately available for general corporate purposes was $210.8 million and $43.8 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, with the remainder being amounts held by our consolidated joint ventures and also our proportionate share of cash held by our unconsolidated joint ventures. Cash held by our joint ventures was available only for joint venture-related uses, including distributions to joint venture partners. In addition, our restricted cash and restricted investments totaled $156.5 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $79.4 million as of December 31, 2019. Restricted cash and restricted investments are primarily held to secure insurance-related contingent obligations. Our restricted cash as of December 31, 2020 also included $69.9 million of cash held to repay the outstanding principal balance of the Convertible Notes.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $172.8 million (which is a new record high for any year since the 2008 merger of Tutor-Saliba and Perini), due primarily to cash generated from earnings sources, partially offset by investment in working capital. The increase in working capital for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflects an increase in costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings and an increase in accounts receivable due to timing of collections, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable due to timing of payments to suppliers and subcontractors. The increase in costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings was driven in part by impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, which caused delays in the negotiation and resolution of certain claims and unapproved change orders (due to the postponement of certain legal and arbitration proceedings, as well as deferments of certain settlement discussions) and constrained customers’ revenue and funding sources, thereby limiting their budgetary discretion to pay the Company for changes approved in scope but for which pricing is pending. During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $136.5 million, due primarily to changes in net investment in working capital and cash generated from income sources. Those changes in working capital primarily reflected an increase in billings in excess of costs and estimated earnings (“BIE”), partially offset by increases in accounts receivable and retainage receivable.
The $36.2 million increase in cash provided by operating activities when comparing 2020 with 2019 primarily reflects the significant increase in cash from earnings sources, partially offset by an increase in investment in working capital principally due to a smaller increase in BIE.
During 2020 and 2019, we used $46.4 million and $76.1 million of cash from investing activities, respectively. The net cash used in investing activities for 2020 and 2019 was primarily due to the acquisition of property and equipment for projects, which totaled $54.8 million and $84.2 million, respectively. The majority of our capital expenditures for both years was for project-specific equipment purchased by our joint ventures and funded directly by our customers.
During 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $123.3 million, which was primarily driven by increased net borrowings of $181.4 million, partially offset by $48.5 million of cash distributions to noncontrolling interests and debt issuance costs of $11.2 million. During 2019, we generated $21.8 million of cash from financing activities principally due to increased net borrowings of $61.3 million and contributions from noncontrolling interests of $9.8 million, partially offset by distributions to noncontrolling interests of $46.5 million.
As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital of $1.8 billion, a ratio of current assets to current liabilities of 1.80 and a ratio of debt to equity of 0.66 compared to working capital of $1.4 billion, a ratio of current assets to current liabilities of 1.66 and a ratio of debt to equity of 0.58 at December 31, 2019.
Debt
Summarized below are the key terms of our debt as of December 31, 2020. For additional information, refer to Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, as applicable.
2020 Credit Agreement
On August 18, 2020, the Company entered into a new credit agreement (the “2020 Credit Agreement”) with BMO Harris Bank N.A., as Administrative Agent, Swing Line Lender and L/C Issuer and other lenders. The 2020 Credit Agreement provides for a $425.0 million term loan B facility (the “Term Loan B”) and a $175.0 million revolving credit facility (the “2020 Revolver”), with sublimits for the issuance of letters of credit and swing line loans up to the aggregate amounts of $75.0 million and $10.0 million, respectively. The Term Loan B will mature on August 18, 2027 and the 2020 Revolver will mature on August 18, 2025, in each case, unless any of the 2017 Senior Notes are outstanding on January 30, 2025 (which is 91 days prior to the maturity of the 2017 Senior Notes), in which case, both the Term Loan B and the 2020 Revolver will mature on January 30, 2025 (subject to certain further exceptions). For more information regarding the terms of our 2020 Credit Agreement, refer to Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The table below presents our actual and required first lien net leverage ratio under the 2020 Credit Agreement for the period, which is calculated on a rolling four-quarter basis:
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance and expect to continue to be in compliance with the covenants under the 2020 Credit Agreement.
Termination of 2017 Credit Facility and Repurchase of Convertible Notes
On April 20, 2017, the Company entered into a credit agreement (the “2017 Credit Facility”) with SunTrust Bank, now known as Truist Bank, as Administrative Agent, Swing Line Lender and L/C Issuer and a syndicate of other lenders. The 2017 Credit Facility provided for a $350 million revolving credit facility and a sublimit for the issuance of letters of credit and swing line loans up to the aggregate amount of $150 million and $10 million, respectively, both maturing on April 20, 2022 unless any of the Convertible Notes, as defined below, were outstanding on December 17, 2020, in which case all such borrowings would have matured on December 17, 2020 (the “spring-forward provision”).
On August 18, 2020, the Company used proceeds from the Term Loan B to repay outstanding amounts under its 2017 Credit Facility. As a result of repaying the outstanding amounts under the 2017 Credit Facility and entering into the 2020 Credit Agreement, the Company terminated the 2017 Credit Facility, including its spring-forward provision that would have accelerated the maturity of the facility to December 17, 2020.
On June 15, 2016, the Company issued $200 million of 2.875% Convertible Senior Notes due June 15, 2021 (the “Convertible Notes”) in a private placement offering. On August 19, 2020, the Company used proceeds from the Term Loan B to repurchase $130.1 million aggregate principal amount of its Convertible Notes for an aggregate purchase price of $132.4 million (including accrued and unpaid interest to the repurchase date). At December 31, 2020, $69.9 million ($67.9 million net of unamortized discount and debt issuance costs) remain outstanding and are included in “Current maturities of long-term debt” on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The Company will repurchase or retire at or before maturity the remaining Convertible Notes and repay the principal balance using available proceeds from the Term Loan B, which are currently held in a restricted cash account for such purpose.
The Convertible Notes are unsecured obligations of the Company and do not contain any financial covenants or restrictions on the payments of dividends, the incurrence of indebtedness or the issuance or repurchase of securities by the Company. The Convertible Notes bear interest at a rate of 2.875% per year, payable in cash semi-annually in June and December. Upon conversion, and at the Company’s election, the Company may satisfy its conversion obligation with cash, shares of its common stock or a combination thereof. As of December 31, 2020, the conversion provisions of the Convertible Notes have not been triggered.
2017 Senior Notes
On April 20, 2017, the Company issued $500 million in aggregate principal amount of 6.875% Senior Notes due May 1, 2025 (the “2017 Senior Notes”) in a private placement offering. Interest on the 2017 Senior Notes is payable in arrears semi-annually in May and November of each year, beginning in November 2017.
Equipment Financing and Mortgages
The Company has certain loans entered into for the purchase of specific property, plant and equipment and secured by the assets purchased. The aggregate balance of equipment financing loans was approximately $36.9 million and $27.7 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, with interest rates ranging from 2.74% to 3.89% with equal monthly installment payments over periods up to seven years with balloon payments of $12.4 million in 2021 and $6.3 million in 2022. The aggregate balance of mortgage loans was approximately $10.7 million and $11.5 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, with interest rates ranging from LIBOR plus 3% to a fixed 3.50% and equal monthly installment payments over periods up to 10 years with balloon payments of $2.9 million in 2021 and $6.8 million in 2023.
Contractual Obligations
Our outstanding contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 are summarized in the following table:
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
(a)Debt and interest on debt exclude unamortized debt discounts and deferred debt issuance costs. Amounts for interest on debt are based on interest rates in effect as of December 31, 2020.
(b)The Company utilizes current actuarial assumptions in determining the expected minimum contributions to fund our defined benefit pension and other post-retirement plans. Estimated contributions for periods beyond the scope of the actuarial assumptions have not been included because, in management’s judgment, such estimates may not be reliable.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Estimates are based on information available through the date of the issuance of the financial statements; accordingly, actual results in future periods could differ from these estimates. Effective January 1, 2018, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). See Note 1(d), Note 3 and Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information. Significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements apply to the following critical accounting policies:
Method of Accounting for Contracts - Contract revenue is recognized over time using the cost-to-cost method which measures progress towards completion based on the ratio of contract costs incurred to date compared to total estimated costs for each performance obligation. The estimates used in accounting for contracts with customers require judgment and assumptions regarding both future events and the evaluation of contingencies such as the impact of change orders, liability claims, other contract disputes, the achievement of contractual performance standards and potential variances in project schedule and costs. Changes to the total estimated contract cost, either due to unexpected events or revisions to management’s initial estimates, for a given project are recognized in the period in which they are determined.
In certain instances, we provide guaranteed completion dates and/or achievement of other performance criteria. Failure to meet schedule or performance guarantees could result in unrealized incentive fees and/or liquidated damages. In addition, depending on the type of contract, unexpected increases in contract cost may be unrecoverable, resulting in total cost exceeding revenue realized from the projects. The Company generally provides limited warranties for work performed, with warranty periods typically extending for a limited duration following substantial completion of the Company’s work on a project. Historically, warranty claims have not resulted in material costs incurred.
Claims arising from construction contracts have been made against the Company by customers, and the Company has made claims against customers for costs incurred in excess of current contract provisions. The Company recognizes revenue for claims as variable consideration in accordance with ASC 606. Assumptions as to the occurrence of future events and the likelihood and amount of variable consideration are made during the contract performance period. Estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on an assessment of anticipated performance and all information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available to management. Estimated amounts are only included in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. Back charges to suppliers or subcontractors are recognized as a reduction of cost when it is determined that recovery of such cost is probable and the amounts can be reliably estimated. Disputed back charges are recognized when the same requirements described above for variable consideration have been satisfied.
Construction Joint Ventures - Certain contracts are executed through joint ventures. The arrangements are often formed for the execution of single contracts or projects and allow the Company to share risks and secure specialty skills required for project execution.
In accordance with ASC 810, Consolidation (“ASC 810”) the Company assesses its joint ventures at inception to determine if any meet the qualifications of a variable interest entity (“VIE”). The Company considers a joint venture a VIE if either (a) the total equity investment is not sufficient to permit the entity to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support, (b) characteristics of a controlling financial interest are missing (either the ability to make decisions through voting or other rights, the obligation to absorb the expected losses of the entity or the right to receive the expected residual returns of the entity), or (c) the voting rights of the equity holders are not proportional to their obligations to absorb the expected losses of the entity and/or their rights to receive the expected residual returns of the entity and substantially all of the entity’s activities either involve or are conducted on behalf of an investor that has disproportionately few voting rights. Upon the occurrence of certain events outlined in ASC 810, the Company reassesses its initial determination of whether the joint venture is a VIE.
The Company also evaluates whether it is the primary beneficiary of each VIE and consolidates the VIE if the Company has both (a) the power to direct the economically significant activities of the entity and (b) the obligation to absorb losses of, or the right to receive benefits from, the entity that could potentially be significant to the VIE. The Company considers the contractual agreements that define the ownership structure, distribution of profits and losses, risks, responsibilities, indebtedness, voting rights and board representation of the respective parties in determining whether it qualifies as the primary beneficiary. The Company also considers all parties that have direct or implicit variable interests when determining whether it is the primary beneficiary. When the Company is determined to be the primary beneficiary, the VIE is consolidated. In accordance with ASC 810, management’s assessment of whether the Company is the primary beneficiary of a VIE is performed continuously.
For construction joint ventures that do not need to be fully consolidated, the Company accounts for its interest in the joint ventures using the proportionate consolidation method, whereby the Company’s proportionate share of the joint ventures’ assets, liabilities, revenue and cost of operations are included in the appropriate classifications in the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Intercompany balances and transactions are eliminated. See Note 1(b) and Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion regarding VIEs.
Recoverability of Goodwill - Goodwill represents the excess of amounts paid over the fair value of net assets acquired from an acquisition. In order to determine the amount of goodwill resulting from an acquisition, we perform an assessment to determine the value of the acquired company's tangible and identifiable intangible assets and liabilities. In our assessment, we determine whether identifiable intangible assets exist, which typically include backlog, customer relationships and trade names.
We test goodwill for impairment annually as of October 1 of each year. This test requires us to estimate the fair value of each reporting unit carrying goodwill using income and market approaches, and to compare the calculated fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value, which is equal to the reporting unit’s net assets. If the calculated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we recognize an impairment charge equal to the difference.
The impairment evaluation process requires assumptions that are subject to a high degree of judgment such as revenue growth rates, profitability levels, discount rates, industry market multiples and weighted-average cost of capital. Changes in these assumptions would impact the results of our impairment tests.
During interim periods, including those subsequent to the Company’s October 1 annual test date, we evaluate events and circumstances, including, but not limited to, an examination of macroeconomic conditions, cost factors, overall financial performance by each reporting unit, other relevant entity-specific events, and trends in the stock prices of our Company and peers to determine if such factors indicate that it is likely that the goodwill for one or more of our reporting units is impaired, thus warranting the performance of a quantitative impairment test sooner than the fourth quarter of the year. The Company performed an interim impairment test as of June 1, 2019 and recognized a non-cash impairment loss totaling $379.9 million, which eliminated the carrying value of goodwill for the Building and Specialty Contractors reporting units. See Note 1(g) and Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we conducted our annual goodwill impairment test and determined that goodwill was not impaired since the estimated fair value of the Civil reporting unit exceeded its net book value by a significant amount. As such, there is a risk of goodwill impairment if future events are less favorable than what we assumed or estimated in our impairment analysis.
The Company has considered relevant events and circumstances since the annual goodwill impairment test, including, but not limited to, an examination of macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, cost factors, overall financial performance by each reporting unit, other relevant entity-specific events, and trends in the stock prices of the Company and its peers. In considering the totality of qualitative factors known as of the reporting date, we determined that no triggering events occurred or circumstances changed since our October 1, 2020 annual test that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the Civil reporting unit below its carrying amount. We will continue to monitor events occurring or circumstances changing which may suggest that goodwill should be reevaluated. These events and circumstances include, but are not limited to, changes in the overall financial performance of the Civil reporting unit, impacts to our business as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as other quantitative and qualitative factors specific to the Civil reporting unit which indicate potential triggering events that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the Civil reporting unit below its carrying amount.
New Accounting Pronouncements - For discussion of recently adopted accounting standards and updates, see Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.