Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Statement Regarding Forward Looking Disclosure
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes, which appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including this section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” may contain predictive or “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All statements other than statements of current or historical fact contained in this annual report, including statements that express our intentions, plans, objectives, beliefs, expectations, strategies, predictions or any other statements relating to our future activities or other future events or conditions are forward-looking statements. The words “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “predict,” “project,” “will,” “should,” “would” and similar expressions, as they relate to us, are intended to identify forward-looking statements.
These forward-looking statements are based on current expectations, estimates and projections made by management about our business, our industry and other conditions affecting our financial condition, results of operations or business prospects. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict. Therefore, actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what is expressed or forecasted in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements due to numerous risks and uncertainties. Factors that could cause such outcomes and results to differ include, but are not limited to, risks and uncertainties arising from:
● our reliance on individual purchase orders, rather than long-term contracts, to generate revenue;
● our ability to change the composition of our revenues and effectively control operating expenses;
● external factors, including the COVID-19 pandemic, that may be outside of our control;
● the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and government-imposed lockdowns in response thereto;
● the availability of appropriate financing facilities impacting our operations, financial condition and/or liquidity;
● our ability to receive contract awards through competitive bidding processes;
● our ability to maintain standards to enable us to manufacture products to exacting specifications;
● our ability to enter new markets for our services;
● our reliance on a small number of customers for a significant percentage of our business;
● competitive pressures in the markets we serve;
● changes in the availability or cost of raw materials and energy for our production facilities;
● operating in a single geographic location;
● restrictions in our ability to operate our business due to our outstanding indebtedness;
● government regulations and requirements;
● pricing and business development difficulties;
● changes in government spending on national defense;
● our ability to make acquisitions and successfully integrate those acquisitions with our business;
● general industry and market conditions and growth rates;
● the risk that the proposed acquisition of Stadco may not be completed in a timely manner or at all, which may adversely affect the Company’s business and the price of Company’s common stock;
● the failure of either party to satisfy any of the conditions to the consummation of the proposed acquisition of Stadco and uncertainties as to the timing of the consummation of the proposed acquisition;
● the occurrence of any event, change or other circumstance that could give rise to the termination of the securities purchase agreement governing the proposed acquisition of Stadco;
● the effect of the announcement or pendency of the proposed acquisition of Stadco on the Company’s business relationships, operating results and business generally;
● risks related to diverting management’s attention from the Company’s ongoing business operations;
● unexpected costs, charges or expenses resulting from the proposed acquisition of Stadco; and
● those risks discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as those described in any other filings which we make with the SEC.
Any forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made, and we undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances that may arise after the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, except as required by applicable law. Investors should evaluate any statements made by us in light of these important factors.
Overview
We offer a full range of services required to transform raw materials into precision finished products. Our manufacturing capabilities include: fabrication operations (cutting, press and roll forming, assembly, welding, heat treating, blasting and painting) and machining operations including CNC (computer numerical controlled) horizontal and vertical milling centers. We also provide support services to our manufacturing capabilities: manufacturing engineering (planning, fixture and tooling development, manufacturing), quality control (inspection and testing), materials procurement, production control (scheduling, project management and expediting) and final assembly.
All manufacturing is done in accordance with our written quality assurance program, which meets specific national and international codes, standards, and specifications. Ranor holds a certificate of authorization issued by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and the National Board of Boiler and Pressure Vessel Inspectors. The standards used are specific to the customers’ needs, and our manufacturing operations are conducted in accordance with these standards.
Because our revenues are derived from the sale of goods manufactured pursuant to a contract, and we do not sell from inventory, it is necessary for us to constantly seek new contracts. There may be a time lag between our completion of one contract and commencement of work on another contract. During such periods, we may continue to incur overhead expense but with lower revenue resulting in lower operating margins. Furthermore, changes in either the scope of an existing contract or related delivery schedules may impact the revenue we receive under the contract and the allocation of manpower. Although we provide manufacturing services for large governmental programs, we usually do not work directly for the government or its agencies. Rather, we perform our services for large governmental contractors. Our business is dependent in part on the continuation of governmental programs that require our services and products.
Our contracts are generated both through negotiation with the customer and from bids made pursuant to a request for proposal. Our ability to receive contract awards is dependent upon the contracting party’s perception of such factors as our ability to perform on time, our history of performance, including quality, our financial condition and our ability to price our services competitively. Although some of our contracts contemplate the manufacture of one or a limited number of units, we continue to seek more long-term projects with predictable cost structures.
All of our sales were generated in the U.S. and we continue to experience customer concentration. For fiscal 2021, we had seven customers, who each generated in excess of $1.0 million in revenue for the Company, which accounted for approximately 89% of our revenue, in the aggregate. Our sales order backlog at March 31, 2021 was approximately $18.6 million compared with a backlog of $16.8 million at March 31, 2020.
For fiscal 2021, we recorded net sales and net income of $15.6 million and $0.3 million, respectively, compared with net sales of $16.0 million and net loss of $0.3 million, for fiscal 2020. Our gross margin for fiscal 2021 was 22.2% compared with gross margin of 19.6% in fiscal 2020. We generated $0.6 million of cash from operating activities in fiscal 2021 and had a cash balance of $2.1 million at March 31, 2021.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
As discussed above (see “Business - COVID-19 Pandemic Update”), the COVID-19 pandemic and the government-imposed lockdowns have affected our business. On March 31, 2020, the Governor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, in which jurisdiction the Company’s manufacturing and executive offices are located, issued an emergency order generally shutting down the economy. However, the Company had been designated as a provider of a “COVID-19 Essential Service” and, accordingly, has continued it operations during the pendency of the order, which was rescinded on May 18, 2020.
Over the course of fiscal year 2021 and up to the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected the Company’s customers, suppliers and labor force. With respect to customers, management has observed impacts from certain of its customers halting operations entirely for a period of time, shifting to remote work, and suspending on-site inspections - which delays customer acceptance of completed work, the making of milestone payments to us, and delivery of finished goods. The Company believes that the potential exists for other customer shutdowns or slowdowns to occur in the future. Management expects that the impact of the foregoing may negatively affect the Company’s cash flows. With respect to suppliers, the Company has seen lead-times for delivery of certain critical supplies extended. Labor impacts have included a few issues related to employee attendance such as voluntary avoidance of work out of fear of contracting the coronavirus, certain employees becoming ill, and others self-quarantining as a result of potential exposure to other individuals with symptoms of COVID-19. Notwithstanding all of the above, this set of circumstances has had a minor impact on the Company’s production levels, however if more employees were to become ill in the future, the Company could experience a more significant disruption.
Nevertheless, our production facilities continued to operate much as they had prior to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, other than the implementation of enhanced safety measures intended to prevent the spread of the virus. The remote working arrangements and travel restrictions imposed by applicable governmental authorities have not materially impaired our ability to maintain operations. Accordingly, our results of operations and cash flows during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 were not materially affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
However, given the speed and frequency of continuously evolving developments with respect to this pandemic, the extent to which COVID-19 may adversely impact our business depends on future developments, which are highly uncertain and unpredictable, including new information concerning the severity of the outbreak and the effectiveness of actions globally to contain or mitigate its effects, we cannot reasonably estimate the magnitude of future impact on our financial condition and results of operations.
Proposed Acquisition of Stadco
In October 2020, we announced an agreement to purchase Stadco, a company that manufactures precision parts for the defense and aerospace industries. Incremental costs incurred for due diligence as a result of this agreement could impact earnings in future quarterly periods. Because of the size of this acquisition target relative to our business, following closing, we expect to report that our results of operations, cash flows and financial condition will differ materially from those reported to date. The acquisition agreement is subject to certain conditions, and may or may not be completed unless all of the conditions set forth in the agreement are completed. Failure to successfully integrate and realize the expected benefits of such acquisitions or to implement our acquisition strategy, including successfully integrating acquired businesses, could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Strategy
We aim to establish our expertise in program and project management and develop and expand a repeatable customer business model in all of our markets. We concentrate our sales and marketing activities on customers under two main industry groups: defense and precision industrial. Our strategy is to leverage our core competence as a manufacturer of high-precision, large-scale metal fabrications and machined components to optimize profitability of our current business and expand with key customers in markets that have shown increasing demand.
Defense
Our Ranor subsidiary performs precision fabrication and machining for the defense and aerospace industries, delivering defense components meeting our customers’ stringent design specifications, as well as quality and safety manufacturing standards specifically for defense component fabrication and machining. Ranor has in recent years delivered critical components in support of, among other projects, the U.S. Navy’s Virginia-class fast attack submarine program and Columbia-class ballistic missile submarine program. In addition, the team at Ranor has successfully developed new, effective approaches to fabrication that continue to be utilized at our facility and at our customer’s own defense component manufacturing facilities. We have endeavored to increase our business development efforts with large prime defense contractors. Based upon these efforts, we believe there are opportunities to secure additional business with existing and new defense contractors who are actively looking to increase outsourced content on certain defense programs over the next several years, especially in connection with the submarine programs. We believe that the military quality certifications Ranor maintains and its ability to offer fabrication and manufacturing services at a single facility position it as an attractive outsourcing partner for prime contractors looking to increase outsourced production. Sales to defense market customers have generated the largest proportion of our revenues for the last two fiscal years, and we expect sales to defense customers to be our strongest market during fiscal 2022 as well.
Precision Industrial
The customers within this market are impacted primarily by general economic conditions which may include changes in consumer consumption or demand for commercial construction for infrastructure. We serve a number of different customers in our precision industrial group.
For example, we manufacture large-scale medical device components for a customer in this group who installs their proprietary systems at certain medical institutions. In addition, we build components for customers in the power generation markets.
The power generation businesses among our energy market customers are impacted by pricing and demand for various forms of energy (e.g. coal, natural gas, oil, and nuclear). Our nuclear customers are typically dependent upon the need for new construction, maintenance, and overhaul and repair by nuclear energy providers. Also, changes in regulation may impact demand and supply. As such, we cannot assure that we will be able to develop any significant business from the nuclear industry. However, because of our manufacturing capabilities required to produce components for new nuclear power plants and our historic relationships with suppliers in the nuclear power industry, we believe that we are positioned to benefit from any increased demand in the nuclear sector.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are set forth in detail in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”. We consider the policies relating to revenue recognition to be a critical accounting policy. There have been no significant changes to our critical accounting policies during the year ended March 31, 2021.
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires that we make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We continually evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, inventories, recovery of long-lived assets, income taxes and the valuation of equity transactions. These estimates and assumptions require management's most difficult, subjective or complex judgments. Actual results may differ under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue and Related Cost Recognition
Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, or ASC 606, sets forth five steps for revenue recognition: identification of the contract, identification of any separate performance obligations in the contracts, determination of the transaction price, allocation of the transaction price to separate performance obligations, and revenue recognition when performance obligations are satisfied.
We recognize revenue over time based on the transfer of control of the promised goods or services to the customer, or at a point in time. This transfer will occur over time when the Company’s performance does not create an asset that has an alternative use to the Company and we have an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. Otherwise, control to the promised goods or services transfers to customers at a point in time.
The majority of the Company’s contracts have a single performance obligation and provide title to, or grant a security interest in, work-in-process to the customer. In addition, these contracts contain enforceable rights to payment, allowing the Company to recover both its cost and a reasonable margin on performance completed to date. The combination of these factors indicates that the customer controls the asset (and revenue is recognized) as the asset is created or enhanced. The Company measures progress for performance obligations satisfied over time using input methods (e.g., costs incurred, resources consumed, labor hours expended, time elapsed).
Under arrangements where the customer does not have title to, or a security interest in, the work-in-process, our evaluation of whether revenue should be recognized over time requires significant judgment about whether the asset has an alternative use and whether the entity has an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. When one or both of these factors is not present, the Company will recognize revenue at the point in time where control over the promised good or service transfers to the customer, i.e. when the customer has taken physical possession of the product the Company built for the customer.
When estimating contract costs, the Company takes into consideration a number of assumptions and estimates regarding risks related to technical requirements and scheduling. Management performs periodic reviews of the contracts to evaluate the underlying risks. Profit margin on any given project could increase if the Company is able to mitigate and retire such risks. Conversely, if the Company is not able to properly manage these risks, cost estimates may increase, resulting in a lower profit margin, or potentially, contract losses.
The cost estimation process requires significant judgment and is based upon the professional knowledge and experience of the Company’s engineers, program managers, and financial professionals. Factors considered in estimating the work to be completed and ultimate contract recovery include the availability, productivity, and cost of labor, the nature and complexity of the work to be performed, the effect of change orders, the availability of materials, the effect of any delays in performance, the availability and timing of funding from the customer, and the recoverability of any claims included in the estimates to complete. Costs allocable to undelivered units are reported as work in process, a component of inventory, in the consolidated balance sheet. Pre-contract fulfillment costs requiring capitalization are not material.
Changes in job performance, job conditions, and estimated profitability are recognized in the period in which the revisions are determined. Costs incurred on uncompleted contracts consist of labor, overhead, and materials. Provisions for estimated losses on uncompleted contracts are made in the period in which such losses are determined.
Income Taxes
We provide for federal and state income taxes currently payable, as well as those deferred because of temporary differences between reporting income and expenses for financial statement purposes versus tax purposes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between carrying amount of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recoverable. The effect of the change in the tax rates is recognized as income or expense in the period of the change. A valuation allowance is established, when necessary, to reduce deferred income taxes to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
In assessing the recoverability of deferred tax assets, we consider whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. If we determine that it is more likely than not that certain future tax benefits may not be realized, a valuation allowance will be recorded against deferred tax assets that are unlikely to be realized. Realization of the remaining deferred tax assets will depend on the generation of sufficient taxable income in the appropriate jurisdiction, the reversal of deferred tax liabilities, tax planning strategies and other factors prior to the expiration date of the carryforwards. A change in the estimates used to make this determination could require a reduction in the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets if they become realizable.
As of March 31, 2021, our federal net operating loss carryforward was approximately $7.3 million. U.S. tax laws limit the time during which these carryforwards may be applied against future taxes.
The Company has recorded a net deferred tax asset of $1.9 million, which includes the benefit of $2.2 million in loss carryforwards. Realization is dependent on generating sufficient taxable income prior to the expiration of the loss carryforwards. Although the realization is not assured, management believes it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. The amount of the deferred tax asset considered realizable, however, could be reduced in the near term if estimates of future taxable income during the carryforward period are reduced.
Accounting Pronouncements
New Accounting Standards
See Note 3, Accounting Standards Update, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”, for a discussion of recently adopted new accounting guidance and new accounting guidance not yet adopted.
Results of Operations
Our results of operations are affected by a number of external factors including the availability of raw materials, commodity prices (particularly steel), macroeconomic factors, including the availability of capital that may be needed by our customers, and political, regulatory and legal conditions in the United States and in foreign markets. Generally, our product mix is made up of short-term contracts with a production timeline of twelve months, more or less. However, contracts for larger complex components can take up to thirty-six months to complete. Units manufactured under the majority of our customer contracts have historically been delivered on time and with a positive gross margin, with some exceptions. Our results of operations are also affected by our success in booking new contracts, the timing of revenue recognition, delays in customer acceptances of our products, delays in deliveries of ordered products and our rate of progress fulfilling obligations under our contracts. A delay in deliveries or cancellations of orders could have an unfavorable impact on liquidity, cause us to have inventories in excess of our short-term needs, and delay our ability to recognize, or prevent us from recognizing, revenue on contracts in our order backlog.
Key Performance Indicators
While we prepare our financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP, we also utilize and present certain financial measures that are not based on or included in U.S. GAAP. We refer to these as Non-GAAP financial measures. Please see the section titled “EBITDA Non-GAAP financial measure” below for further discussion of these financial measures, including the reasons why we use such financial measures and reconciliations of such financial measures to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures.
Fiscal Years Ended March 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth information from our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss), in dollars and as a percentage of revenue:
Net Sales
Net sales were $15.6 million for fiscal 2021, or 3% lower when compared to net sales for fiscal 2020 of $16.0 million. Net sales in defense markets decreased by $0.7 million when compared to fiscal 2020, however, our defense backlog remains strong as new orders for components continue to flow down from our existing customer base of prime defense contractors. Net sales to industrial markets increased by $0.3 million when compared with fiscal 2020 as a sales increase to nuclear energy customers more than offset a decrease in sales to medical markets. We have experienced repeat business in the industrial markets, but the order flow can be uneven and difficult to forecast.
The Company records most of its revenue over time as it completes performance obligations. We measure progress for performance obligations satisfied over time using input methods (e.g., labor hours expended and time elapsed). Fiscal 2021 revenue recognized over time was $12.9 million, an increase of 2% when compared to fiscal 2020. Fiscal 2021 revenue recognized over time was generated by a favorable product mix that included more customer projects with profitable gross margins, consuming actual labor hours that were in-line with estimates to complete.
Remaining performance obligations reflect future revenue that will be recorded in subsequent periods as projects in progress are completed. At March 31, 2021, the Company had a backlog of $18.6 million, an increase of $1.8 million when compared with March 31, 2020.
Cost of Sales and Gross Margin
Gross profit was $3.5 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, or 10% higher when compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020. Gross margin was 22.1% for the period ended March 31, 2021 and 19.6% for the period ended March 31, 2020.
Cost of sales consists primarily of raw materials, parts, labor, overhead and subcontracting costs. Our cost of sales for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 were $0.7 million lower when compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease in cost of sales was the result of lower contract losses and lower material costs offset in part by an increase in under-applied overhead.
In fiscal 2020, our cost of sales included an increase in expense of $1.0 million for losses on certain customer projects, which dampened gross profit and gross margin for the prior year period. The fiscal 2020 period was also marked by a higher number of new project startup activities, and more labor hours allocated to less profitable projects.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Total selling, general and administrative expenses for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 increased by $55,549 as increases in expenses for share-based compensation, employee benefits, and office costs more than offset a decrease in professional fees and travel expenses due to the COVID-19 travel restrictions.
Provision for Claims Settlement
In fiscal 2020, we agreed to settle all outstanding claims for $495,000 under a civil class action brought by former employees against the Company for past wages claimed under a paid time-off program. The settlement was paid out in the first quarter of fiscal 2022. The Company was released from all claims raised in this litigation under the Massachusetts Wage Act.
Other Expense, net
Interest expense was lower for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 when compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, and should continue to remain at current levels, barring any additional borrowings for working capital purposes under our revolving credit facility, or any new credit facility to meet our changing capital resource needs. Debt issue costs decreased as certain costs were retired in connection with amendments to the existing Berkshire loan agreement. Fiscal 2020 included a gain from the sale of retired machinery for $16,000. The following table presents costs for the fiscal years ended March 31:
Provision for Income Taxes
For fiscal year 2021 the Company recorded tax expense of $104,880. In fiscal 2020, the Company recorded a tax benefit of $73,041. The fiscal 2021 tax expense was driven by certain reversing temporary differences, which reduced the amount of deferred tax assets.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences and carryforwards are expected to be recovered or settled. The valuation allowance on deferred tax assets at March 31, 2021 was approximately $1.7 million. We believe that it is more likely than not that the benefit from certain state and foreign NOL carryforwards and other deferred tax assets will not be realized. In recognition of this risk, we continue to provide a valuation allowance on these items. In the event future taxable income is below management’s estimates or is generated in tax jurisdictions different than projected, the Company could be required to increase the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets. This would result in an increase in the Company’s effective tax rate.
Net Income (Loss)
As a result of the foregoing, for fiscal 2021, we recorded net income of $0.3 million, or $0.01 per share basic and fully diluted, compared with net loss of $0.3 million, or $0.01 per share basic and fully diluted in fiscal 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At March 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $2.1 million and working capital of $5.2 million. We believe our available cash plus cash expected to be provided by operations during fiscal 2022, and borrowing capacity available under the Revolver Loan will be sufficient to fund our operations, capital expenditures and principal and interest payments under our debt obligations through the 12 months from the issuance date of our financial statements. However, following the closing of the potential acquisition of Stadco, or in connection therewith, we may need to reevaluate our financing needs in light of the significant changes we expect to the combined Company’s capital resource needs. As a result, we may decide to seek new debt and/or equity financing.
The table below presents selected liquidity and capital measures at the fiscal years ended:
The next table summarizes changes in cash by primary component in the cash flows statements for the fiscal years ended:
Operating activities
Our primary sources of cash are from accounts receivable collections, customer advance payments and project progress payments. Our customers make advance payments and progress payments under the terms of each manufacturing contract. Our cash flows can fluctuate significantly from period to period as the composition of our receivables collections mix changes between advance payments and customer payments made after shipment of finished goods.
Cash provided by operations for fiscal 2021 was $0.6 million. Favorable timing with customer advance payments and progress payments resulted in higher amounts of cash generated in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. Fiscal 2020 was marked by an increase in customer project activity which resulted in $0.7 million of cash provided by operations.
Investing activities
We invested approximately $0.6 million in new factory machinery and equipment in fiscal 2021, and we estimate that we will spend approximately $1.1 million for new machinery and equipment in fiscal 2022. In fiscal 2020, we expended approximately $40,000 for new factory machinery and equipment.
Financing activities
On May 8, 2020 we borrowed $1.3 million under the CARES Act payroll protection program. On April 3, 2020 we borrowed $1.0 million under our Revolver loan, then paid down $1.0 million in principal on June 30, 2020.
For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 we made principal payments of $0.1 million in connection with our term debt and finance lease obligations.
In fiscal 2020, we used $1.6 million to repay in full Ranor’s indebtedness under a capital equipment loan with People’s Capital and Leasing Corp. In addition, we used $0.1 million for monthly principal payments in connection with our other debt obligations.
All of the above activity resulted in a net increase in cash of $1.2 million in fiscal 2021 compared with a decrease in cash of $1.1 million in fiscal 2020.
Small Business Administration Loan
On May 8, 2020, the Company, through Ranor, issued a promissory note, or the Note, evidencing an unsecured loan in the amount of $1,317,100 made to Ranor under the Paycheck Protection Program, or the PPP. The PPP was established under the CARES Act, and is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration, or the SBA. The loan to Ranor was made through Berkshire Bank.
The Note provides for an interest rate of 1.00% per year and matures two years after the issuance date. Principal and accrued interest are payable monthly in equal installments commencing on the date that is approximately six months after the date funds are first disbursed on the loan and continuing through the maturity date, unless the Note is forgiven as described below. To be available for loan forgiveness, the Note may only be used for payroll costs, costs related to certain group health care benefits and insurance premiums, rent payments, utility payments, mortgage interest payments and interest payments on any other debt obligation that existed before February 15, 2020. The Note may be prepaid at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties and contains events of default and other conditions customary for a Note of this type.
Under the terms of the CARES Act, PPP loan recipients can apply for and be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of loan granted under the PPP, with such forgiveness to be determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of the loan proceeds for payment of payroll costs, certain group health care benefits and insurance premiums, and any payments of mortgage interest, rent, and utilities. The terms of any forgiveness may also be subject to further requirements in any regulations and guidelines the SBA may adopt. While the Company currently believes that its use of the Note proceeds will meet the conditions for forgiveness under the PPP, no assurance is provided that the Company will obtain forgiveness of the Note in whole or in part.
On June 5, 2020, the PPP was amended to give borrowers more time to spend loan proceeds and still obtain loan forgiveness. The amendments extended the length of the covered period as defined in the CARES Act from eight to twenty-four weeks, while allowing borrowers that received PPP loans before June 5, 2020 to elect to use the original eight-week covered period. In addition, the amendments provide that if the borrower does not apply for forgiveness of a loan within ten months after the last day of the covered period, the PPP loan is no longer deferred and the borrower must begin paying principal and interest. The Company applied for loan forgiveness within the ten month period on March 26, 2021.
On May 12, 2021, the SBA remitted to Berkshire Bank, the lender of record of the PPP loan, a payment of principal and interest in the amounts of $1,317,000 and $13,207, respectively, for forgiveness of the Company’s PPP loan. The funds credited to the PPP loan pay this loan off in full.
Berkshire Bank Loan Facility
On December 21, 2016, TechPrecision, through Ranor, closed on a Loan Agreement with Berkshire Bank. Pursuant to the Berkshire Loan Agreement, Berkshire Bank made a term loan to Ranor in the amount of $2,850,000, or the Term Loan, and made available to Ranor a revolving line of credit of $1,000,000, or the Revolver Loan. As amended, the Term Loan matures on December 20, 2021, with a balloon payment of approximately $2.4 million due under the terms of the Term Loan with Berkshire Bank. We anticipate that we will be able to refinance that debt with Berkshire Bank.
On December 23, 2019, TechPrecision, through Ranor, entered into a Third Modification to Loan Agreement, and an Amended and Restated Promissory Note with Berkshire Bank. Under the Third Modification, Ranor and Berkshire agreed to increase the maximum principal amount available under the Revolver Loan from $1,000,000 to $3,000,000.
The Company borrowed $1.0 million under the Revolver Loan on April 3, 2020 and repaid that principal on June 30, 2020. There were no borrowed amounts outstanding under the Revolver Loan at March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020. Interest-only payments on advances made under the Revolver Loan during the twelve months ended March 31, 2021 totaled $6,664 at a weighted average interest rate of 2.67%.
On December 18, 2020, under the Fourth Modification, Ranor and Berkshire Bank agreed to revise the minimum interest rate payable on the Revolver Loan. Under the Line of Credit Note, the Company can elect to pay interest at an adjusted LIBOR-based rate or an Adjusted Prime Rate. Under the Fourth Modification, the minimum adjusted LIBOR-based rate is 2.75% and the Adjusted Prime Rate is the greater of (i) the Prime Rate minus 70 basis points or (ii) 2.75%. Interest-only payments on advances made under the Revolver Loan will continue to be payable monthly in arrears. The maturity date of the Revolver Loan was also extended to December 20, 2022. All other material terms of the Loan Agreement and Line of Credit Note were unchanged. Unused borrowing capacity at March 31, 2021 was $2.7 million.
The following table sets forth information as of March 31, 2021 as to our contractual obligations:
(1) Includes the finance lease and the PPP loan for $1,317 which was forgiven by the SBA in May 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not currently have, and have not had during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, any off-balance sheet assets, liabilities or arrangements.
EBITDA Non-GAAP Financial Measure
To complement our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income and consolidated statements of cash flows, we use EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure. Net income is the financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP that is most directly comparable to EBITDA. We believe EBITDA provides our board of directors, management and investors with a helpful measure for comparing our operating performance with the performance of other companies that have different financing and capital structures or tax rates. We also believe that EBITDA is a measure frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in the evaluation of companies in our industry, and is a measure contained in our debt covenants. However, while we consider EBITDA to be an important measure of operating performance, EBITDA and other non-GAAP financial measures have limitations, and investors should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP.
We define EBITDA as net income plus interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization. Net income was $0.3 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to net loss of $0.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, was $1.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to $0.6 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. The following table provides a reconciliation of EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable GAAP measure reported in our consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended:
(1) Includes amortization of debt issue costs.