Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following should be read in conjunction with the sections of this annual report on Form 10-K entitled “Risk Factors,” “Cautionary Note Concerning Forward-Looking Statements,” “Selected Financial Data,” “Business” and our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Legal Proceedings” elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Effective January 15, 2021, we consolidated our six regional homebuilding brands into one unified name-Tri Pointe Homes. For purposes of this annual report on Form 10-K, however, the results of our homebuilding operations will be organized into the six reportable segments of which such operations consisted during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
Notwithstanding a relatively modest window of depressed demand beginning in mid-March through early May 2020, we experienced a robust demand environment with sustained levels above average for most of the year ended December 31, 2020. The slowdown in demand resulted directly from the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related shelter-in-place and other public health orders, an exogenous event that continues to impact our operations as of the date of this report. However, we believe the combination of historically low mortgage interest rates, an abundance of fiscal and monetary support from the U.S. government and Federal Reserve, and a further contraction of new home supply has helped drive the remarkable recovery from the early months of COVID-19. Despite these strong indicators, several countervailing considerations ariose during 2020, including a decrease in gross domestic product, a substantial increase in the U.S. unemployment rate and the introduction of a considerable degree of broad economic uncertainty due to the pandemic. While we remain cautiously optimistic regarding the factors that are contributing to the current demand environment, potential friction exists between the extremely strong market conditions we are experiencing and the less robust economic indicators noted above, which may be the result, at least in part, of the effect of current U.S. monetary policy and the injection of high levels of stimulus in support of the economy. We continue to closely monitor this dynamic and remain focused on identifying means to mitigate these potential risks, particularly through our capital management initiatives.
Highlights of the year include an increase in homebuilding gross margin percentage to 22.0% and a reduction in selling, general and administrative expense as a percentage of home sales revenue to 10.8%. Our monthly absorption rate for the year was 4.0, a record high for any year since our inception. These factors, along with a slight increase in average sales price of homes delivered to $631,000, allowed us achieve net income of $282.2 million. While housing demand remains strong and our homebuilding gross margin percentage increased in the third quarter compared to the prior-year period, rising material costs, particularly with respect to lumber, could negatively impact our future homebuilding gross margins going forward. As of December 31, 2020, our backlog units and dollar value of backlog were both up 69% compared to the prior year, to 2,964 units and $1.9 billion, respectively. In addition, we ended 2020 with total liquidity of $1.2 billion, including cash and cash equivalents of $621.3 million and $535.9 million of availability under our Credit Facility.
Our results for the year ended December 31, 2020 may not be indicative of trends that will persist, as uncertainty caused by COVID-19 and government responses to the pandemic have impacted, and will continue to impact, our business and operations.
Impact of COVID-19 and Business Outlook
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a global pandemic, and on March 13, 2020, the United States issued a proclamation declaring a national emergency concerning COVID-19. As a result of the pandemic, a number of states and local governments issued shelter-in-place orders or guidance for individuals not engaged in essential activities to remain at home other than for essential needs. While our Bay Area and Washington divisions were prohibited from engaging in residential construction activities in the Bay Area in California and Seattle, Washington, respectively, for several weeks beginning in late March 2020, residential homebuilding operations are currently designated as an essential business activity and remain exempt from the application of “stay-at-home” orders in all of our markets. However, there can be no assurance that our homebuilding operations will continue to remain exempt in all of our markets.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and measures taken by applicable governmental authorities, in mid-March 2020, we implemented new operating measures relating to our sales, construction and other operations, including protocols relating to social distancing, enhanced sanitation, monitoring of symptoms related to COVID-19 and other processes. Under
- 50 -
these measures, we encouraged employees at our corporate and division offices whose duties could be performed from home to work remotely; our new home galleries and design studios transitioned to virtual appointments or appointment-only with pre-screened individuals, as permitted by law; we instituted social distancing, hygiene and sanitation guidelines in accordance with recommended protocols throughout the organization (including in our new home sales galleries and design studios, and with respect to trade partners and their employees on our jobsites); and we postponed non-essential customer care service and warranty requests. As of the date of this report, as permitted by applicable government orders or guidelines, we have transitioned most of our employees back to our corporate and division offices (in many cases, using staggered or flexible schedules), have resumed non-essential customer care service and warranty requests in substantially all of our markets, and are no longer appointment-only in certain of our new home galleries. Our field-based team members continue to report to their assigned communities in all jurisdictions where homebuilding has been deemed an essential activity or is otherwise permitted by applicable government authorities. We have also encouraged our employees to use our virtual working and communication platforms in lieu of holding in-person meetings whenever possible.
The COVID-19 outbreak and the measures taken by governmental authorities to delay and contain its spread have resulted in substantial adverse effects on the United States economy. While demand for new homes has rebounded substantially since May 2020, given the dynamic nature of the situation and the uncertainty surrounding the containment of the virus, as well as the availability and acceptance of effective vaccines, the emergence and spread of new strains or variants of COVID-19, adequate testing and treatments and the prevalence of widespread immunity to COVID-19, we cannot estimate whether the current demand environment will persist. Similarly, the extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our liquidity and operational and financial performance will depend on, among other things, existing and future federal, state and local restrictions regarding virus containment, as we believe these factors are highly correlated with consumer strength as it relates to employment and economic well-being.
As of the date of this report, we continue to build and sell homes in all of our markets, and net new orders and traffic in our sales offices have increased significantly as compared to the beginning of the second quarter of 2020. Notwithstanding, the new protocols we implemented in response to the COVID-19 outbreak and the measures taken by governmental authorities to contain its spread continue to affect our business and operations as of the date of this report, in many regards, including by requiring a meaningful investment of time and resources by our management and organization and causing other material disruptions to our normal operations.
While the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on the United States economy and our business and operations is unknown, we believe that the fundamental backdrop of housing remains favorable and are optimistic about the long term outlook for our industry and our company. We believe we are well positioned to capitalize on the strength in housing, due in large part to our emphasis on core locations in proximity to employment centers, quality schools and vibrant neighborhoods, as well as our premium brand positioning, which allows us to differentiate our homes from our competitors through thoughtful design, innovation and customer experience.
- 51 -
Consolidated Financial Data (in thousands, except share and per share amounts):
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net New Home Orders, Average Selling Communities and Monthly Absorption Rates by Segment
- 52 -
Net new home orders for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 19% to 6,335, compared to 5,338 for the prior year. The increase in net new home orders was due to a 29% increase in monthly absorption rate offset by a 9% decrease in average selling communities. Overall, the markets in which we operate demonstrated very strong demand throughout most of 2020, aided primarily by historically low mortgage interest rates, in addition to a high level of government stimulus and an evolving home buyer sentiment, both resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. The combination of these three catalysts helped sustain very strong demand for the majority of 2020, with the exception of a period of depressed demand beginning in mid-March through early May, a period of time during which uncertainty around the pandemic was peaking.
Maracay reported a 15% increase in net new home orders driven by a 22% increase in average selling communities offset by a 7% decrease in monthly absorption rate. Its 4.0 monthly absorption rate was driven by strong demand for Maracay’s new community openings during the current-year period, as well as continued strong market fundamentals in Arizona. Pardee Homes reported a 15% increase in net new home orders due to a 24% increase monthly absorption rates offset by an 8% decrease in average selling communities. The increase in monthly absorption rate was driven by increased home buying activity in the Los Angeles, Inland Empire and San Diego markets. Net new home orders increased by 12% at Quadrant Homes due to a 10% increase in average selling communities. Net new home orders increased by 16% at Trendmaker Homes due to a 48% increase in monthly absorption rate, offset by a 22% decrease in average selling communities. The more favorable regulatory environment, along with better affordability, has helped attract many companies and individuals to Texas from higher tax and regulatory states, such as California, which we believe has driven the increase in monthly absorption rate. Tri Pointe Homes’ net new home orders increased by 30% on a year over year basis due to a 36% increase in monthly absorption rate offset by a 6% decrease in average selling communities. Tri Pointe Homes experienced an increase in monthly absorption rate in all markets, including Southern California, the Bay Area, Sacramento and Colorado. In addition, Tri Pointe Homes commenced operations in the Carolinas during 2020 and ended the year with 27 orders with a 4.2 monthly absorption rate. Winchester Homes experienced a 20% increase in net new home orders during the current-year period as a result of a 52% increase in monthly absorption rate offset by a 20% decrease in average selling communities. Strong demand at Winchester Homes was aided by historically low new home and resale inventory levels.
Backlog Units, Backlog Dollar Value and Average Sales Price by Segment (dollars in thousands)
Backlog units reflect the number of homes, net of actual cancellations experienced during the period, for which we have entered into a sales contract with a homebuyer but for which we have not yet delivered the home. Homes in backlog are generally delivered within three to nine months from the time the sales contract is entered into, although we may experience cancellations of sales contracts prior to delivery. Our cancellation rate of homebuyers who contracted to buy a home but did not close escrow (as a percentage of overall orders) was 13% and 15% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The dollar value of backlog was approximately $1.9 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $780.5 million, or 69%, compared to $1.1 billion as of December 31, 2019. This increase was due to an increase in backlog units of 1,212, or 69%, to 2,964 as of December 31, 2020, compared to 1,752 as of December 31, 2019, with flat average sales price in backlog to $647,000 as of December 31, 2020, compared to $648,000 as of December 31, 2019. Across most of our markets we experienced much stronger order demand in the second half of 2020, compared to the prior year, during which seasonality had a greater impact.
Maracay’s backlog dollar value increased 79% compared to the prior year as a result of a 45% increase in backlog units and a 24% increase in average sales price. The increase in backlog units was primarily related to strong demand for Maracay’s new community openings during the current-year period as well as continued strong market fundamentals in Arizona. Maracay opened eight total communities in 2020, which helped support the increase in backlog. Pardee Homes’ backlog dollar value
- 53 -
increased by 71% due to an 81% increase in backlog units offset by a 6% decrease in average sales price. The increase in backlog units was due to the substantially stronger order activity we experienced in the second half of 2020 compared to the prior-year period. Quadrant Homes’ backlog dollar value increased 75% as a result of a 56% increase in backlog units in addition to a 12% increase in average sales price. The increase in backlog units is the result of increased order activity and overall market demand in the current year, as well as construction and permitting delays related to COVID-19 that impacted delivery times. Trendmaker Homes’ backlog dollar value increased 37% due to a 44% increase in backlog units, offset by a 5% decrease in average sales price. The increase in backlog units is due to higher demand in 2020 compared to the prior year, as evidenced by Trendmaker Homes’ 48% increase in monthly absorption rate in 2020. Tri Pointe Homes’ backlog dollar value increased 94% due to at 114% increase in backlog units, offset by a 9% decrease in average sales price. This change was driven by higher order activity in each market served by Tri Pointe Homes. In addition our current year expansion into the Carolinas contributed 15 units, along with further traction into Sacramento which was a new market in 2019 with only 29 units in backlog as of December 31, 2019 compared to 93 as of December 31, 2020. Winchester Homes’ backlog dollar value increased 43% due to a 57% increase in backlog units, offset by a 9% decrease in average sales price. The increase in backlog units was due to stronger market conditions in 2020 compared to 2019.
New Homes Delivered, Homes Sales Revenue and Average Sales Price by Segment (dollars in thousands)
Home sales revenue increased $163.5 million, or 5%, to $3.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was comprised of: (i) $126.0 million related to a 4% increase in homes delivered to 5,123 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 4,921 in the prior year, and (ii) $37.5 million due to a 1% increase in the average sales price of homes delivered to $631,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $624,000 in the prior year. While deliveries were impacted by COVID-19-related restrictions and delays, our overall deliveries increased in 2020 due in large part to the 31% higher backlog leading into 2020 compared to 2019, with each segment entering the current year with higher unit backlog.
Maracay reported a 35% increase in home sales revenue due to a 25% increase in new homes delivered and a 7% increase in average sales price. The increase in new homes delivered was primarily the result of a 119% increase in backlog dollar value leading into 2020 compared to 2019. Home sales revenue at Pardee Homes decreased by 3% due to a 4% decrease in new homes delivered, offset by a 1% increase in average sales price. The decrease in new homes delivered was due in part to construction delays stemming from COVID-19 restrictions. Quadrant Homes reported an 11% increase in home sales revenue due to an 11% increase in new homes delivered. The increase in new homes delivered was largely due to the higher backlog leading into 2020 compared to 2019. Home sales revenue increased 3% at Trendmaker Homes due to a 3% increase in new homes delivered. Tri Pointe Homes reported a 2% increase in home sales revenue as a result of a 3% increase in average sales price offset by a 1% decrease in new homes delivered. Home sales revenue increased at Winchester Homes by 21% largely due to a 20% increase in new homes delivered as a result of higher backlog units to start the year compared to the prior year.
- 54 -
Homebuilding Gross Margins (dollars in thousands)
______________________________________
(1)Non-GAAP financial measure (as discussed below).
Our homebuilding gross margin percentage increased to 22.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 19.8% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in gross margin percentage was due to the combination of an increase in pricing power, which allowed us to decrease incentives in the current year, along with strong operational improvements helping to drive higher gross margins at each of our reporting segments on a year-over-year basis. Excluding interest and impairments and lot option abandonments in cost of home sales, adjusted homebuilding gross margin percentage was 25.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 23.2% for the prior-year period.
Adjusted homebuilding gross margin is a non-GAAP financial measure. We believe this information is meaningful as it isolates the impact that leverage and non-cash charges have on homebuilding gross margin and permits investors to make better comparisons with our competitors, who adjust gross margins in a similar fashion. See the table above reconciling this non-GAAP financial measure to homebuilding gross margin, the nearest GAAP equivalent.
Land and Lot Gross Margins (dollars in thousands)
Land and lot sales gross margin percentage can vary significantly due to the type of land and its related cost basis. Additionally, we expect land and lot sales revenue to vary significantly between reporting periods based on our business decisions to maintain or decrease our land ownership in various markets. Our land and lot sale decisions will be based on a variety of factors, including, without limitation, prevailing market conditions. Our land and lot gross margin percentage for the year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by a Pardee Homes sale located in San Diego, California. This land, which was entitled for the construction of a self-storage facility, was sold for approximately $11.0 million in land and lot sales revenue and $10.1 million of land and lot gross margin.
Sales and Marketing, General and Administrative Expense (dollars in thousands)
- 55 -
Sales and marketing expense as a percentage of home sales revenue decreased to 5.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 6.4% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to a reduction in advertising costs due primarily to the evolved sales environment created by the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in a shift to a more focused strategy targeted toward prospects deemed to have a higher level of direct interest in our new home offerings. In addition, the 5% increase in home sales revenue resulted in better utilization of leverage on the fixed components of our sales and marketing costs. Sales and marketing expense decreased to $183.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $195.1 million in the prior-year period.
General and administrative expense as a percentage of home sales revenue was flat at 5.1% for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. General and administrative expense increased by $9.1 million to $166.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $157.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in general and administrative expenses is primarily related to higher incentive compensation in the current year.
Total sales and marketing and G&A (“SG&A”) expense decreased $2.9 million, or 1%, to $349.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $352.3 million in the prior-year period. SG&A decreased to 10.8% of home sales revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 11.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Restructuring Charges
In May 2020, due to the existing and anticipated future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, we implemented a workforce reduction plan. As a result of the workforce reduction plan, we incurred $5.7 million of pre-tax restructuring charges consisting of severance and related costs for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest
Interest, which was incurred principally to finance land acquisitions, land development and home construction, totaled $83.1 million and $89.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. All interest incurred in both periods was capitalized.
Other (Loss) Income, Net
Other (loss) income, net for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was a loss of $9.0 million and income of $6.9 million, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a $10.2 million charge related to the early extinguishment of a portion of our 4.875% Senior Notes due 2021 (the “2021 Notes”). During the year ended December 31, 2019, we amended our existing tax sharing agreement with Weyerhaeuser Company (“Weyerhaeuser”), pursuant to which the parties agreed, among other things, that we had no further obligation to remit payment to Weyerhaeuser in connection with any potential utilization of certain deductions or losses associated with certain Weyerhaeuser entities with respect to federal and state taxes. As a result of the amendment, during the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded other income of $6.0 million related to the reduction of our income tax liability to Weyerhaeuser.
Income Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we have recorded a tax provision of $91.2 million based on an effective tax rate of 24.4%. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a tax provision of $63.9 million based on an effective tax rate of 23.6%.
Financial Services Segment
Income from our financial services operations increased to $15.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to income of $10.4 million in the prior year. The increase in financial services income for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year relates to the growth of both our mortgage financing and our title and escrow services operations. Our mortgage financing operations continues to experience an increasing capture rate, while our expansion into new markets has further contributed to the increased income from our title and insurance services.
- 56 -
Lots Owned or Controlled by Segment
Lots owned or controlled include our share of lots controlled from our unconsolidated land development joint ventures. Investments in joint ventures are described in Note 6, Investments in Unconsolidated Entities, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. The table below summarizes our lots owned or controlled by segment as of the dates presented:
______________________________________________
(1)As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, lots controlled included lots that were under land option contracts or purchase contracts. As of December 31, 2020 lots controlled for Trendmaker Homes and Winchester Homes include 2,083 lots and 179 lots, respectively, which represent our expected share of lots owned by our investments in unconsolidated land development joint ventures.
Total lots owned or controlled as of December 31, 2020 increased 19% from the prior year, driven primarily by the 81% increase in lots controlled, as we continue to execute on a strategy of structuring a higher portion of land deals through a variety of land and lot option arrangements, including land bank and joint venture arrangements.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Discussion and analysis of our 2018 fiscal year and the year-over-year comparison of our 2019 financial performance to our 2018 financial performance may be found in Part II, Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 19, 2020, which is available in the “investors” portion of our internet website at www.tripointehomes.com and the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. The information contained in, or that can be accessed through, our website is not incorporated by reference and is not a part of this annual report on Form 10-K.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our principal uses of capital for the year ended December 31, 2020 were operating expenses, share repurchases, debt repayments, land purchases, land development and home construction. We used funds generated by our operations to meet our short-term working capital requirements. We remain focused on generating positive margins in our homebuilding operations and acquiring desirable land positions in order to maintain a strong balance sheet and keep us poised for growth. As of
- 57 -
December 31, 2020, we had $621.3 million of cash and cash equivalents. We believe that we have sufficient cash and sources of financing for at least the next twelve months.
Our board of directors will consider a number of factors when evaluating our level of indebtedness and when making decisions regarding the incurrence of new indebtedness, including the purchase price of assets to be acquired with debt financing, the estimated market value of our assets and the ability of particular assets, and our company as a whole, to generate cash flow to cover the expected debt service.
Senior Notes
In June 2020, Tri Pointe issued $350.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.700% Senior Notes due 2028 (the “2028 Notes”) at 100.00% of their aggregate principal amount. Net proceeds of this issuance were $345.2 million, after debt issuance costs and discounts. The 2028 Notes mature on June 15, 2028 and interest is paid semiannually in arrears on June 15 and December 15 of each year until maturity.
In June 2017, Tri Pointe issued $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.250% Senior Notes due 2027 (the “2027 Notes”) at 100.00% of their aggregate principal amount. Net proceeds of this issuance were $296.3 million, after debt issuance costs and discounts. The 2027 Notes mature on June 1, 2027 and interest is paid semiannually in arrears on June 1 and December 1 of each year until maturity.
In May 2016, Tri Pointe issued $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2021 Notes at 99.44% of their aggregate principal amount. Net proceeds of this issuance were $293.9 million, after debt issuance costs and discounts. The 2021 Notes were scheduled to mature on July 1, 2021 and interest was paid semiannually in arrears on January 1 and July 1. On June 3, 2020, the Company commenced a cash tender offer for any and all of the outstanding 2021 Notes at a price of $1,025 per $1,000 principal amount of 2021 Notes tendered before the expiration of the tender offer. The principal amount of 2021 Notes tendered was $216.3 million, or 72% of the outstanding principal amount, after which $83.7 million principal amount of 2021 Notes remained outstanding and was subsequently fully paid in July 2020 in connection with the redemption of the remaining 2021 Notes.
Tri Pointe and its 100% owned subsidiary Tri Pointe Homes Holdings, Inc. (“Tri Pointe Homes Holdings”) are co-issuers of the 5.875% Senior Notes due 2024 (the “2024 Notes”). The 2024 Notes were issued at 98.15% of their aggregate principal amount. The net proceeds from the offering of the 2024 Notes was $429.0 million, after debt issuance costs and discounts. The 2024 Notes mature on June 15, 2024, with interest payable semiannually in arrears on June 15 and December 15.
Our outstanding senior notes (the “Senior Notes”) contain covenants that restrict our ability to, among other things, create liens or other encumbrances, enter into sale and leaseback transactions, or merge or sell all or substantially all of our assets. These limitations are subject to a number of qualifications and exceptions. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants required by our Senior Notes.
Loans Payable
On March 29, 2019, we entered into a Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (as amended, the “Credit Agreement”), which amended and restated our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of July 7, 2015. The Credit Facility (as defined below), which matures on March 29, 2023, consists of a $600 million revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Facility”) and a $250 million term loan facility (the “Term Facility” and together with the Revolving Facility, the “Credit Facility”). The Term Facility includes a 90-day delayed draw provision, which allowed us to draw the full $250 million from the Term Facility in June 2019 in connection with the maturity of the 2019 Notes. We may increase the Credit Facility to not more than $1 billion in the aggregate, at our request, upon satisfaction of specified conditions. The Revolving Facility contains a sublimit of $100 million for letters of credit. We may borrow under the Revolving Facility in the ordinary course of business to repay senior notes and fund our operations, including our land acquisition, land development and homebuilding activities. Borrowings under the Revolving Facility will be governed by, among other things, a borrowing base. Interest rates on borrowings under the Revolving Facility will be based on either a daily Eurocurrency base rate or a Eurocurrency rate, in either case, plus a spread ranging from 1.25% to 2.00%, depending on our leverage ratio. Interest rates on borrowings under the Term Facility will be based on either a daily Eurocurrency base rate or a Eurocurrency rate, in either case, plus a spread ranging from 1.10% to 1.85%, depending on the Company’s leverage ratio.
We had no outstanding debt under the Revolving Facility as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had $250 million outstanding debt under the Term Facility with an interest rate of 1.25%. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there was $3.1 million and $4.3 million, of capitalized debt financing costs. These costs related to the Credit Facility will amortize over the remaining term of the Credit Facility and are included in other assets on our consolidated balance
- 58 -
sheets. Accrued interest, including loan commitment fees, related to the Credit Facility was $617,000 and $1,220,000 as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had outstanding letters of credit of $64.1 million and $32.6 million, respectively. These letters of credit were issued to secure various financial obligations. We believe it is not probable that any outstanding letters of credit will be drawn upon.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $9.0 million outstanding related to two seller financed loans to acquire lots for the construction of homes. Principal on these loans are scheduled to mature in 2021. The seller financed loans accrue interest at a weighted average rate of 0.89% per annum.
Covenant Compliance
Under the Credit Facility, we are required to comply with certain financial covenants, including, but not limited to, those set forth in the table below (dollars in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all of the above financial covenants.
Leverage Ratios
We believe that our leverage ratios provide useful information to the users of our financial statements regarding our financial position and cash and debt management. The ratio of debt-to-capital and the ratio of net debt-to-net capital are calculated as follows (dollars in thousands):
______________________________________________
- 59 -
(1)The ratio of debt-to-capital is computed as the quotient obtained by dividing total debt by the sum of total debt plus stockholders’ equity.
(2)The ratio of net debt-to-net capital is a non-GAAP financial measure and is computed as the quotient obtained by dividing net debt (which is debt less cash and cash equivalents) by the sum of net debt plus stockholders’ equity. The most directly comparable GAAP financial measure is the ratio of debt-to-capital. We believe the ratio of net debt-to-net capital is a relevant financial measure for investors to understand the leverage employed in our operations and as an indicator of our ability to obtain financing. See the table above reconciling this non-GAAP financial measure to the ratio of debt-to-capital.
Cash Flows-Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The comparison of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
•Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $272.0 million to $588.0 million in 2020 from cash provided of $316.0 million in 2019. The change was primarily composed of (i) a decrease in cash outflow related to real estate inventories of $36.8 million in 2020 as we decreased our land acquisition and development spending, (ii) an increase in net income to $282.2 million in 2020 compared to $207.2 million in 2019, and (iii) other offsetting activity including changes in accounts receivable, other assets, accrued expenses and other liabilities and deferred income taxes.
•Net cash used in investing activities was $88.0 million in 2020 compared to $37.3 million in 2019. The higher cash used in 2020 was due primarily to our investments in unconsolidated entities. During 2020, our Winchester Homes division invested in one joint venture and our Trendmaker Homes division invested in three joint ventures.
•Net cash used in financing activities decreased to $207.7 million in 2020 from $227.4 million in 2019. The change was primarily a result of an increase in share repurchases of $161.5 million to $250.7 million in 2020 compared to $89.2 million in 2019, offset by a net debt borrowing of $50.2 million in 2020 compared to a repayment of $131.9 million in 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents balance was $621.3 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into land option contracts in order to procure lots for the construction of our homes. We are subject to customary obligations associated with entering into contracts for the purchase of land and improved lots. These purchase contracts typically require a cash deposit and the purchase of properties under these contracts is generally contingent upon satisfaction of certain requirements by the sellers, including obtaining applicable property and development entitlements. We also utilize option contracts with land sellers and land banking arrangements as a method of acquiring land in staged takedowns, to help us manage the financial and market risk associated with land holdings, and to reduce the use of funds from our corporate financing sources. These option contracts and land banking arrangements generally require a non-refundable deposit for the right to acquire lots over a specified period of time at pre-determined prices. We generally have the right at our discretion to terminate our obligations under both purchase contracts and option contracts by forfeiting our cash deposit with no further financial responsibility to the land seller. When market conditions are such that land values are not appreciating, existing option agreements may become less desirable, at which time we may elect to forfeit deposits and pre-acquisition costs and terminate the agreements. In some cases, however, we may be contractually obligated to complete development work even if we terminate the option to procure land or lots. As of December 31, 2020, we had $120.4 million of non-refundable cash deposits pertaining to land option contracts and purchase contracts with an aggregate remaining purchase price of approximately $935.4 million (net of deposits).
Our utilization of land option contracts and land banking arrangements is dependent on, among other things, the availability of land sellers or land banking firms willing to enter into option takedown arrangements, the availability of capital to finance the development of optioned lots, general housing market conditions, and local market dynamics. Options may be more difficult to procure from land sellers in strong housing markets and are more prevalent in certain geographic regions.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $535.9 million of availability under the Credit Facility after considering the borrowing base provisions and outstanding letters of credit.
- 60 -
Contractual Obligations Table
The following table summarizes our future estimated cash payments under existing contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020, including estimated cash payments due by period. Our purchase obligations represent commitments for land purchases under land purchase and land option contracts with non-refundable deposits.
__________________________________________
(1)For a more detailed description of our long-term debt, please see Note 11, Senior Notes and Loans Payable, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
(2)Includes fixed interest payments on our senior notes and estimated interest payments on our variable rate term loan.
(3)Includes leases relating to office space, buildings and equipment. For a more detailed description of our operating leases, see Note 13, Commitments and Contingencies, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
(4)Ground lease obligations have been fully subleased through 2041. Our lease commitment net of sublease income was $31.8 million as of December 31, 2020. For a more detailed description of our ground leases, see Note 13, Commitments and Contingencies, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
(5)Includes $935.4 million (net of deposits) of the remaining purchase price for all land options contracts and purchase contracts as of December 31, 2020. For a more detailed description of our land purchase and option contracts, please see the discussion set forth above in the section entitled “Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements.”
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information
2027 Notes and 2028 Notes
On June 5, 2017, Tri Pointe issued the 2027 Notes and on June 10, 2020, Tri Pointe issued the 2028 Notes. All of Tri Pointe’s 100% owned subsidiaries that are guarantors (each a “Guarantor” and, collectively, the “Guarantors”) of the Credit Facility, including Tri Pointe Homes Holdings, are party to supplemental indentures pursuant to which they jointly and severally guarantee Tri Pointe’s obligations with respect to these Notes. Each Guarantor of the 2027 Notes and the 2028 Notes is 100% owned by Tri Pointe, and all guarantees are full and unconditional, subject to customary exceptions pursuant to the indentures governing the 2027 Notes and the 2028 Notes, as described in the following paragraph. All of our non-Guarantor subsidiaries have nominal assets and operations and are considered minor, as defined in Rule 3-10(h) of Regulation S-X. In addition, Tri Pointe has no independent assets or operations, as defined in Rule 3-10(h) of Regulation S-X. There are no significant restrictions upon the ability of Tri Pointe or any Guarantor to obtain funds from any of their respective wholly owned subsidiaries by dividend or loan. None of the assets of our subsidiaries represent restricted net assets pursuant to Rule 4-08(e)(3) of Regulation S-X.
A Guarantor of the 2027 Notes and the 2028 Notes shall be released from all of its obligations under its guarantee if (i) all of the assets of the Guarantor have been sold; (ii) all of the equity interests of the Guarantor held by Tri Pointe or a subsidiary thereof have been sold; (iii) the Guarantor merges with and into Tri Pointe or another Guarantor, with Tri Pointe or such other Guarantor surviving the merger; (iv) the Guarantor is designated “unrestricted” for covenant purposes; (v) the Guarantor ceases to guarantee any indebtedness of Tri Pointe or any other Guarantor which gave rise to such Guarantor guaranteeing the the 2027 Notes or the 2028 Notes; (vi) Tri Pointe exercises its legal defeasance or covenant defeasance options; or (vii) all obligations under the applicable supplemental indenture are discharged.
- 61 -
2024 Notes
Tri Pointe and Tri Pointe Homes Holdings are co-issuers of the 2024 Notes. All of the Guarantors (other than Tri Pointe Homes Holdings) have entered into supplemental indentures pursuant to which they jointly and severally guarantee the obligations of Tri Pointe and Tri Pointe Homes Holdings with respect to the 2024 Notes. Each Guarantor of the 2024 Notes is 100% owned by Tri Pointe and Tri Pointe Homes Holdings, and all guarantees are full and unconditional, subject to customary exceptions pursuant to the indentures governing the 2024 Notes, as described below.
A Guarantor of the 2024 Notes shall be released from all of its obligations under its guarantee if (i) all of the assets of the Guarantor have been sold; (ii) all of the equity interests of the Guarantor held by Tri Pointe or a subsidiary thereof have been sold; (iii) the Guarantor merges with and into Tri Pointe or another Guarantor, with Tri Pointe or such other Guarantor surviving the merger; (iv) the Guarantor is designated “unrestricted” for covenant purposes; (v) the Guarantor ceases to guarantee any indebtedness of Tri Pointe or any other Guarantor which gave rise to such Guarantor guaranteeing the 2024 Notes; (vi) Tri Pointe exercises its legal defeasance or covenant defeasance options; or (vii) all obligations under the applicable indenture are discharged.
Tri Pointe’s non-Guarantor subsidiaries are considered minor, as defined in Rule 3-10(h) of Regulation S-X, therefore the consolidated financial statements represent the full issuer and guarantor subsidiary results.
Inflation
Our homebuilding operations can be adversely impacted by inflation, primarily from higher land, financing, labor, material and construction costs. In addition, inflation can lead to higher mortgage rates, which can significantly affect the affordability of mortgage financing to homebuyers. While we attempt to pass on cost increases to homebuyers through increased prices, when weak housing market conditions exist, we are often unable to offset cost increases with higher selling prices.
Seasonality
Historically, the homebuilding industry experiences seasonal fluctuations in quarterly operating results and capital requirements. We typically experience the highest new home order activity during the first and second quarters of our fiscal year, although this activity is also highly dependent on the number of active selling communities, timing of new community openings and other market factors. Since it typically takes four to six months to construct a new home, the number of homes delivered and associated home sales revenue typically increases in the third and fourth quarters of our fiscal year as new home orders sold earlier in the year convert to home deliveries. Due to this seasonality, home starts, construction costs and related cash outflows have historically been highest in the second and third quarters of our fiscal year, and the majority of cash receipts from home deliveries occur during the second half of the year. We expect this seasonal pattern to continue over the long-term, although it may be affected by volatility in the homebuilding industry.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires our management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of costs and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, our management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those which impact our most critical accounting policies. Our management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from our estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Our management believes that the following accounting policies are among the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require among the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments:
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Topic 606 (“ASC 606”), Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Under ASC 606, we apply the following steps to determine the timing and amount of revenue to recognize: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
- 62 -
Following the adoption of ASC 606 on January 1, 2018, the timing of revenue recognition for all of our contracts remained materially consistent with our historical revenue recognition policy due to the nature of our revenue generating activities, with the most common difference under ASC 606 relating to the deferral of revenue due to these uncompleted performance obligations at the time we deliver new homes to our homebuyers.
Home sales revenue
We generate the majority of our total revenues from home sales, which consists of our core business operation of building and delivering completed homes to homebuyers. Home sales revenue and related profit is generally recognized when title to and possession of the home is transferred to the homebuyer at the home closing date. Our performance obligation to deliver the agreed-upon home is generally satisfied in less than one year from the original contract date. Included in home sales revenue are forfeited deposits, which occur when homebuyers cancel home purchase contracts that include a nonrefundable deposit. Both revenue from forfeited deposits and deferred revenue resulting from uncompleted performance obligations existing at the time we deliver new homes to our homebuyers are immaterial.
Land and lot sales revenue
Historically, we have generated land and lot sales revenue from a small number of transactions, although in some years we have realized a significant amount of revenue and gross margin. We do not expect our future land and lot sales revenue to be material, but we still consider these sales to be an ordinary part of our business, thus meeting the definition of contracts with customers. Similar to our home sales, revenue from land and lot sales is typically fully recognized when the land and lot sales transactions are consummated, at which time no further performance obligations are left to be satisfied. Some of our historical land and lot sales have included future profit participation rights. We will recognize future land and lot sales revenue in the periods in which all closing conditions are met, subject to the constraint on variable consideration related to profit participation rights, if such rights exist in the sales contract.
Other operations revenue
The majority of our homebuilding other operations revenue relates to a ground lease at our Quadrant Homes reporting segment. We are responsible for making lease payments to the land owner, and we collect sublease payments from the buyers of the buildings. This ground lease is accounted for in accordance with ASC Topic 842, Leases. We do not recognize a material profit on this ground lease.
Financial services revenues
Tri Pointe Solutions is a reportable segment and is comprised of our Tri Pointe Connect mortgage financing operations, Tri Pointe Assurance title and escrow services operations, and Tri Pointe Advantage property and casualty insurance agency operations.
Mortgage financing operations
Tri Pointe Connect was formed as a joint venture with an established mortgage lender and is accounted for under the equity method of accounting. We record a percentage of income earned by Tri Pointe Connect based on our ownership percentage in this joint venture. Tri Pointe Connect activity appears as equity in income of unconsolidated entities under the Financial Services section of our consolidated statements of operations.
Title and escrow services operations
Tri Pointe Assurance provides title examinations for our homebuyers in the Carolinas and Colorado and both title examinations and escrow services for our homebuyers in Arizona, Austin, Dallas-Fort Worth, Houston, Maryland, Nevada and Virginia. Tri Pointe Assurance is a wholly owned subsidiary of Tri Pointe and acts as a title agency for First American Title Insurance Company. Revenue from our title and escrow services operations is fully recognized at the time of the consummation of the home sales transaction, at which time no further performance obligations are left to be satisfied. Tri Pointe Assurance revenue is included in the Financial Services section of our consolidated statements of operations.
Property and casualty insurance agency operations
Tri Pointe Advantage is a wholly owned subsidiary of Tri Pointe and provides property and casualty insurance agency services that help facilitate the closing process in all of the markets in which we operate. The total consideration for these services, including renewal options, is estimated upon the issuance of the initial insurance policy, subject to constraint. Tri Pointe Advantage revenue is included in the Financial Services section of our consolidated statements of operations.
Real Estate Inventories and Cost of Sales
Real estate inventories consist of land, land under development, homes under construction, completed homes and model homes and are stated at cost, net of impairment losses. We capitalize direct carrying costs, including interest, property taxes and
- 63 -
related development costs to inventories. Field construction supervision and related direct overhead are also included in the capitalized cost of inventories. Direct construction costs are specifically identified and allocated to homes while other common costs, such as land, land improvements and carrying costs, are allocated to homes within a community based upon their anticipated relative sales or fair value. In accordance with ASC Topic 835, Interest (“ASC 835”), homebuilding interest capitalized as a cost of inventories owned is included in costs of sales as related units or lots are sold. To the extent our debt exceeds our qualified assets as defined in ASC 835, we expense a portion of the interest incurred by us. Qualified assets represent projects that are actively under development. Homebuilding cost of sales is recognized at the same time revenue is recognized and is recorded based upon total estimated costs to be allocated to each home within a community. Any changes to the estimated costs are allocated to the remaining undelivered lots and homes within their respective community. The estimation and allocation of these costs require a substantial degree of judgment by management.
The estimation process involved in determining relative sales or fair values is inherently uncertain because it involves estimating future sales values of homes before delivery. Additionally, in determining the allocation of costs to a particular land parcel or individual home, we rely on project budgets that are based on a variety of assumptions, including assumptions about construction schedules and future costs to be incurred. It is common that actual results differ from budgeted amounts for various reasons, including construction delays, increases in costs that have not been committed or unforeseen issues encountered during construction that fall outside the scope of existing contracts, or costs that come in less than originally anticipated. While the actual results for a particular construction project are accurately reported over time, a variance between the budget and actual costs could result in the understatement or overstatement of costs and have a related impact on gross margins between reporting periods. To reduce the potential for such variances, we have procedures that have been applied on a consistent basis, including assessing and revising project budgets on a periodic basis, obtaining commitments from subcontractors and vendors for future costs to be incurred and utilizing the most recent information available to estimate costs.
If there are indications of impairment, we perform a detailed budget and cash flow review of our real estate assets to determine whether the estimated remaining undiscounted future cash flows of the community are more or less than the asset’s carrying value. If the undiscounted cash flows are more than the asset’s carrying value, no impairment adjustment is required. However, if the undiscounted cash flows are less than the asset’s carrying value, the asset is deemed impaired and is written down to fair value. These impairment evaluations require us to make estimates and assumptions regarding future conditions, including timing and amounts of development costs and sales prices of real estate assets, to determine if expected future undiscounted cash flows will be sufficient to recover the asset’s carrying value.
When estimating undiscounted cash flows of a community, we make various assumptions, including: (i) expected sales prices and sales incentives to be offered, including the number of homes available, pricing and incentives being offered by us or other builders in other communities, and future sales price adjustments based on market and economic trends; (ii) expected sales pace and cancellation rates based on local housing market conditions, competition and historical trends; (iii) costs expended to date and expected to be incurred including, but not limited to, land and land development costs, home construction costs, interest costs, indirect construction and overhead costs, and selling costs; (iv) alternative product offerings that may be offered that could have an impact on sales pace, sales price and/or building costs; and (v) alternative uses for the property.
Many assumptions are interdependent and a change in one may require a corresponding change to other assumptions. For example, increasing or decreasing monthly sales absorption rates has a direct impact on the estimated per unit sales price of a home and the level of time sensitive costs (such as indirect construction, overhead and carrying costs). Depending on the underlying objective of the community, assumptions could have a significant impact on the projected cash flow analysis. For example, if our objective is to preserve operating margins, our cash flow analysis will be different than if the objective is to increase sales. These objectives may vary significantly from community to community and over time.
We perform a quarterly review for indicators of impairment. If assets are considered impaired, impairment is determined by the amount the asset’s carrying value exceeds its fair value. Fair value is determined based on estimated future cash flows discounted for inherent risks associated with real estate assets. These discounted cash flows are impacted by expected risk based on estimated land development, construction and delivery timelines; market risk of price erosion; uncertainty of development or construction cost increases; and other risks specific to the asset or market conditions where the asset is located when assessment is made. These factors are specific to each community and may vary among communities. It is reasonably possible that changes in market conditions could change management’s estimates of future cash inflows and outflows, leading to future impairment charges. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we recorded real estate inventory impairment charges of $1.5 million, $10.1 million and $0, respectively.
- 64 -
Warranty Reserves
In the normal course of business, we incur warranty-related costs associated with homes that have been delivered to homebuyers. Estimated future direct warranty costs are accrued and charged to cost of sales in the period when the related home sales revenues are recognized while indirect warranty overhead salaries and related costs are charged to cost of sales in the period incurred. Factors that affect the warranty accruals include the number of homes delivered, historical and anticipated rates of warranty claims and cost per claim. Our primary assumption in estimating the amounts we accrue for warranty costs is that historical claims experience is a strong indicator of future claims experience. In addition, we maintain general liability insurance designed to protect us against a portion of our risk of loss from warranty and construction-related claims. We also generally require our subcontractors and design professionals to indemnify us for liabilities arising from their work, subject to various limitations. However, such indemnity is significantly limited with respect to certain subcontractors that are added to our general liability insurance policy.
Our warranty reserve is based on actuarial analysis that uses our historical claim and expense data, as well as industry data to estimate these overall costs. Key assumptions used in developing these estimates include claim frequencies, severities and resolution patterns, which can occur over an extended period of time. Our warranty reserve may also include an estimate of future fit and finish warranty claims to the extent not contemplated in the actuarial analysis. These estimates are subject to variability due to the length of time between the delivery of a home to a homebuyer and when a warranty or construction defect claim is made, and the ultimate resolution of such claim; uncertainties regarding such claims relative to our markets and the types of product we build; and legal or regulatory actions and/or interpretations, among other factors. Due to the degree of judgment involved and the potential for variability in these underlying assumptions, our actual future costs could differ from those estimated. There can be no assurance that the terms and limitations of the limited warranty will be effective against claims made by homebuyers, that we will be able to renew our insurance coverage or renew it at reasonable rates, that we will not be liable for damages, cost of repairs, and/or the expense of litigation surrounding possible construction defects, soil subsidence or building related claims or that claims will not arise out of uninsurable events or circumstances not covered by insurance and not subject to effective indemnification agreements with certain subcontractors.
We also record expected recoveries from insurance carriers based on actual insurance claims made and actuarially determined amounts that depend on various factors, including, the above-described reserve estimates, our insurance policy coverage limits for the applicable policy years and historical recovery rates. Because of the inherent uncertainty and variability in these assumptions, our actual insurance recoveries could differ significantly from amounts currently estimated.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded based on future tax consequences of both temporary differences between the amounts reported for financial reporting purposes and the amounts deductible for income tax purposes, and are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply in the years in which the temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in earnings in the period when the changes are enacted.
Each quarter we assess our deferred tax assets to determine whether all or any portion of the assets is more likely than not unrealizable under ASC 740. We are required to establish a valuation allowance for any portion of the asset we conclude is more likely than not to be unrealizable. Our assessment considers, among other things, the nature, frequency and severity of our current and cumulative losses, forecasts of our future taxable income, the duration of statutory carryforward periods and tax planning alternatives. Due to uncertainties inherent in the estimation process, it is possible that actual results may vary from estimates.
The enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in December 2017, among other things, reduced the federal corporate tax rate to 21% from 35%, effective January 1, 2018. This resulted in a $22.0 million reduction in our deferred tax asset for the year ended December 31, 2017. For further details, see Note 15, Income Taxes, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
We classify any interest and penalties related to income taxes as part of income tax expense.
- 65 -
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
In accordance with ASC Topic 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”), we evaluate goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment on an annual basis, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances between annual tests indicate that it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired. We have identified one reporting unit within our homebuilding operations with goodwill, Tri Pointe Homes, and performed our annual goodwill impairment evaluation as of October 1, 2020. For further details on goodwill, see Note 8, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
For our Tri Pointe Homes reporting unit, we performed a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that its fair value is less than its carrying amount. Upon completion of the October 2020 annual impairment assessment, we determined that no goodwill impairment was indicated. As of December 31, 2020, we are not aware of any significant indicators of impairment that exist for our goodwill that would require additional analysis.
An impairment of our indefinite-lived intangible asset is based on a comparison of its fair value to book value, without consideration of any recoverability due to the indefinite nature of the asset. As of December 31, 2020, we believe that our indefinite-lived intangible asset continues to have an indefinite life and that its fair value exceeds its carrying value. For further details on our indefinite-lived intangible asset, see Note 8, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
In accordance with ASC Topic 360, Property, Plant and Equipment (“ASC 360”), we evaluate finite-lived intangible assets for impairment on an annual basis, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances between annual tests indicate that it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired. An impairment in the carrying value of our finite-lived intangible asset is recognized whenever anticipated future undiscounted cash flows from the asset become unrecoverable and are estimated to be less than its carrying value. As of December 31, 2020, we believe that the carrying value of our finite-lived intangible asset is recoverable and that its fair value is greater than its carrying value. For further details on our finite-lived intangible asset, see Note 8, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Significant management judgment is required in the forecasts of future operating results that are used in our impairment evaluations. Our estimates are consistent with the plans and estimates that we use to manage our business. It is possible, however, that the plans may change and estimates used may prove to be inaccurate. If our actual results, or the plans and estimates used in future impairment analyses, are lower than the original estimates used to assess the recoverability of these assets, we could incur future impairment charges.
Related Party Transactions
We had no related party transactions for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 1, Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
- 66 -