ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the audited Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere in this Report. Unless otherwise noted, all of the financial information in this Report is consolidated financial information for the Company. The forward-looking statements in this discussion regarding the mattress and pillow industries, our expectations regarding our future performance, liquidity and capital resources and other non-historical statements in this discussion are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties. See "Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" and Part I, ITEM 1A of this Report. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. For results of operations comparisons relating to years ending December 31, 2019 and 2018, refer to our annual report on Form 10-K, Part II, ITEM 7: Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 21, 2020.
In this discussion and analysis, we discuss and explain the consolidated financial condition and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, including the following topics:
•an overview of our business and strategy;
•results of operations, including our net sales and costs in the periods presented as well as changes between periods;
•expected sources of liquidity for future operations; and
•our use of certain non-GAAP financial measures.
Business Overview
General
We are committed to improving the sleep of more people, every night, all around the world. As a global leader in the design, manufacture and distribution of bedding products, we know how crucial a good night of sleep is to overall health and wellness. Utilizing over a century of knowledge and industry-leading innovation, we deliver award-winning products that provide breakthrough sleep solutions to consumers in over 100 countries.
We operate in two segments: North America and International. Corporate operating expenses are not included in either of the segments and are presented separately as a reconciling item to consolidated results. These segments are strategic business units that are managed separately based on geography. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we realigned our business segment reporting to include Mexico within our North America segment, which was previously included in our International segment. The change in segment reporting aligned with changes in how our global operations are managed. Our North America segment consists of Tempur and Sealy manufacturing and distribution subsidiaries, joint ventures and licensees located in the U.S., Canada and Mexico. In 2020, we acquired an 80% ownership interest in a newly formed limited liability company containing substantially all of the assets of the Sherwood Bedding business, which is included in the North America segment. Our International segment consists of Tempur and Sealy manufacturing and distribution subsidiaries, joint ventures and licensees located in Europe, Asia-Pacific and Latin America (other than Mexico). We evaluate segment performance based on net sales, gross profit and operating income. For additional information refer to Note 14, "Business Segment Information," included in Part II, ITEM 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data", of this Report.
Our product brand portfolio includes many highly recognized and iconic brands in the industry, including Tempur-Pedic®, Sealy® featuring Posturepedic® Technology and Stearns & Foster® and our non-branded offerings include value-focused private label OEM products. Our distinct brands allow for complementary merchandising strategies.
Our distribution model operates through an omni-channel strategy. We distribute through two channels in each operating business segment: Wholesale and Direct. Our Wholesale channel consists of third-party retailers, including third-party distribution, hospitality and healthcare. Our Direct channel includes company-owned stores, online and call centers. We have a global manufacturing footprint with approximately 9,000 employees worldwide.
Full year net income for 2020 increased 84.1% and full year diluted earnings per share ("EPS") increased 90.7% to $1.64. Our growth has been driven by strong demand during the COVID-19 global pandemic as more people are investing in their homes and overall wellness. We also maintain a strong competitive position within the industry. We believe the investments that we have made over the past five years have strengthened the long-term foundation of our company and enhanced our competitive position. The combination of our product superiority, brand strength, manufacturing efficiency and quality, powerful omni-channel distribution platform and substantial cash flow and balance sheet continue to drive market share gains and solid financial performance.
General Business and Economic Conditions
We believe the bedding industry is now structured for sustained growth. The industry is no longer engaged in uneconomical retail store expansion, startups have shifted from uneconomical strategies to becoming profitable and legacy retailers and manufacturers have become skilled in producing profitable online sales.
In 2020, we began rapidly expanding organically with new distribution partners through our direct channel and the initiation of our OEM business. We experienced a reduction in total net sales at the outset of the COVID-19 global pandemic within our International business segment in the first quarter. Order trends reached their lowest point in early April when they had declined approximately 80% as compared to the prior year. North American order trends significantly improved beginning in late May, and this improvement continued throughout the remainder of the year. This improvement was primarily due to the reopening of brick-and-mortar stores on a reduced or appointment only basis as restrictions were lifted; the acceleration of e-commerce business trends; and a shift in consumer spending habits towards in-home products, including bedding products. We believe this may be a long-term shift in consumer spending habits, which could continue to favorably impact our industry.
The rapid increase in demand for bedding products has challenged the entire bedding industry and supply chain, including our business. Additionally, the U.S. government has mandated that domestic suppliers of certain materials used in the production of bedding products redirect such materials towards the production of personal protective equipment. The broad-based increase in demand coupled with supply chain constraints, primarily related to an encased innerspring component, has created operational challenges in the production of Sealy and Sherwood products in the U.S. As a result, the sales growth of Sealy and Sherwood in the second half of 2020 was unfavorably impacted by these supply chain constraints, as we could not fulfill the entire domestic demand for these products. We expect these supply chain constraints to mitigate significantly by early second quarter of 2021. The Tempur-Pedic manufacturing process has not been as impacted by supply chain constraints.
Sales trends for early 2021 indicate that growth in the U.S. and Asia-Pacific has accelerated from the fourth quarter of 2020. However, sales within certain of our European markets have decelerated from the fourth quarter of 2020 as a result of significant restrictions on retail activity due to renewed government restrictions related to the global COVID-19 pandemic.
We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers and stockholders. While we are unable to determine or predict the nature, duration or scope of the overall impact the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business, results of operations, liquidity or capital resources, we believe that it is important to share where the Company stands today, how our response to COVID-19 is progressing and how our operations and financial condition may change as the fight against COVID-19 progresses. For further information regarding the potential impacts of COVID-19 on the Company, please refer to "Risk Factors" in ITEM 1A of Part I of this Report.
Product Launches
In our North America segment in 2020, we introduced the Tempur-Ergo Smart Base Collection with Sleeptracker® technology. In 2021, we are refreshing our Sealy portfolio and launching new models in our Posturepedic Plus™, Posturepedic® and Essentials product lines. We expect to complete the launch of our Essentials and Posturepedic lines in the second quarter of 2021. Additionally, we expect to complete the launch of the higher margin Posturepedic Plus line in the second half of the year.
Our global 2021 marketing plan is to aggressively support our innovative bedding products through investing significant marketing dollars to promote our worldwide brands. We expect to spend a record amount of marketing dollars in 2021 for Tempur-Pedic, Sealy and Stearns & Foster.
Omni-Channel Distribution Expansion
We have a diversified group of strong retail partners and a rapidly growing direct business. In 2019, we announced three new or expanded third-party retail relationships in the U.S. and Europe. This resulted in the largest expansion of stores in our history. In 2020, we successfully completed the product rollout to our expanded distribution relationships, realizing robust wholesale channel growth as a result. We continue to increase our network of third-party retail partners and recently added new distribution at several established retail chains.
We have been focused on building our direct channel, both online and company-owned retail stores. The development of our online business has been particularly important as consumers have grown more comfortable shopping for bedding products online. Online purchases accelerated during the pandemic and we expect that consumers will continue to lean into this channel in the future. In 2020, we estimate that 20% of our U.S. sales occurred online, either through our own website in our direct channel or through our third-party retailer websites in our wholesale channel. The direct channel growth rate has surpassed the wholesale growth rate over the last few years, and we anticipate the direct channel to continue to grow as a percentage of net sales in future years.
Our North America distribution network expanded in 2020 as we opened 21 new Tempur-Pedic retail stores. As of December 31, 2020, we had 76 Tempur-Pedic retail stores in operation. We plan to expand our network to 125 to 150 new retail stores in the long-term. We expect these retail stores to complement our existing third-party retail partners by increasing our products' brand awareness in the local markets.
In 2020, we expanded our presence into the OEM market by offering non-branded products, including mattresses, pillows, and other bedding products and components at a wide range of price points. The addition of non-branded offerings expands our capabilities to service third-party retailers and creates opportunity to capture manufacturing profits from bedding brands outside our own. In 2020, we sold approximately $150 million of OEM bedding products. In 2021, we plan to grow our sales in the North American OEM business.
Commodities
Future changes in raw material prices could have an unfavorable impact on our gross margin. For the year ended December 31, 2020, commodity costs were flat as compared to the same period in the prior year, but were higher than expected for the second half of 2020. We currently expect commodity costs and inflation to increase into 2021. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we implemented pricing actions that fully mitigated the anticipated commodity costs increases expected for 2021. In the first quarter of 2021, commodity costs have increased greater than expected and we will consider additional pricing actions as needed.
Acquisition of Sherwood Bedding
On January 31, 2020, we acquired an 80% ownership interest in a newly formed limited liability company containing substantially all of the assets of the Sherwood Bedding business for a cash purchase price of $39.1 million. Sherwood Bedding is a major manufacturer in the U.S. private label and OEM bedding market, and this acquisition of a majority interest marks our entrance into the private label category. During the first quarter of 2020, we completed the integration of Sherwood Bedding into our portfolio of product brands. Since the acquisition, we have leveraged our overall brand portfolio to gain additional distribution for Sherwood products.
Acquisition of Innovative Mattress Solutions, LLC ("iMS")
On April 1, 2019, we acquired substantially all of the net assets of iMS in a transaction valued at approximately $24.0 million, including assumed liabilities of $11.0 million as of March 31, 2019 (referred to as the "Sleep Outfitters Acquisition"). The acquisition of this regional bedding retailer furthers our North American retail strategy, which is focused on meeting customer demand through geographic representation and sales expertise. During the second quarter of 2019, we completed the integration of Sleep Outfitters into the North America segment. Sleep Outfitters, previously a third party retailer, had historically been part of our Wholesale channel. Sleep Outfitters' sales have been reclassified into our Direct channel beginning in the second quarter of 2019.
2020 Results of Operations
A summary of our results for the year ended December 31, 2020 include:
•Total net sales increased 18.4% to $3,676.9 million as compared to $3,106.0 million in 2019.
•Gross margin was 44.6% in 2020 as compared to 43.2% in 2019. Adjusted gross margin, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, was 44.7% in 2020. There were no adjustments to gross margin in 2019.
•Operating income was $532.1 million, or 14.5% of net sales, as compared to $346.7 million, or 11.2% of net sales, in 2019. Adjusted operating income, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, was $617.7 million, or 16.8% of net sales, as compared to $392.2 million, or 12.6% of net sales, in 2019. Operating income and adjusted operating income, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, included $7.9 million of costs associated with temporarily closed company-owned retail stores and sales force retention costs as a result of the novel coronavirus ("COVID-19 charges").
•Net income was $348.8 million as compared to $189.5 million in 2019. Adjusted net income, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, was $405.7 million as compared to $221.9 million in 2019.
•EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, increased 57.5% to $737.8 million as compared to $468.4 million in 2019. Adjusted EBITDA per credit facility, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, increased 53.5% to $779.9 million as compared to $508.1 million in 2019.
•EPS increased to $1.64 as compared to $0.86 in 2019. Adjusted EPS, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, increased 91.0% to $1.91 as compared to $1.00 in 2019. Adjusted EPS, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, included $0.03 of COVID-19 charges.
For a discussion and reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures as discussed above to the corresponding GAAP financial results, refer to the non-GAAP financial information set forth below under the heading "Non-GAAP Financial Information."
We may refer to net sales or earnings or other historical financial information on a “constant currency basis,” which is a non-GAAP financial measure. These references to constant currency basis do not include operational impacts that could result from fluctuations in foreign currency rates. To provide information on a constant currency basis, the applicable financial results are adjusted based on a simple mathematical model that translates current period results in local currency using the comparable prior corresponding period’s currency conversion rate. This approach is used for countries where the functional currency is the local country currency. This information is provided so that certain financial results can be viewed without the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency rates, thereby facilitating period-to-period comparisons of business performance. Constant currency information is not recognized under GAAP, and it is not intended as an alternative to GAAP measures. Refer to Part II,