Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes included in Part IV of this Annual Report. Additional sections in this Annual Report should be helpful to the reading of our discussion and analysis, including the following: (i) a description of our business strategy found in “Item 1. Business-Overview”; (ii) a description of recent developments, found in “Item 1. Business-Recent Developments”; and (iii) a description of risk factors affecting us and our business, found in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” Also, the Partnership files a separate Annual Report on Form 10-K with the SEC. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Annual Report can be found in Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview
Targa Resources Corp. (NYSE: TRGP) is a publicly traded Delaware corporation formed in October 2005. Targa is a leading provider of midstream services and is one of the largest independent midstream infrastructure companies in North America. We own, operate, acquire and develop a diversified portfolio of complementary domestic midstream infrastructure assets.
We are engaged primarily in the business of:
•
gathering, compressing, treating, processing, transporting and purchasing and selling natural gas;
•
transporting, storing, fractionating, treating and purchasing and selling NGLs and NGL products, including services to LPG exporters; and
•
gathering, storing, terminaling and purchasing and selling crude oil.
Factors That Significantly Affect Our Results
Our results of operations are impacted by a number of factors, including the volumes that move through our gathering, processing and logistics assets, contract terms, changes in commodity prices, the impact of hedging activities and the cost to operate and support assets.
Commodity Prices
The following table presents selected average annual and quarterly industry index prices for natural gas, selected NGL products and crude oil for the periods presented:
(1)
Natural gas prices are based on average first of month prices from Henry Hub Inside FERC commercial index prices.
(2)
“Illustrative Targa NGL” pricing is weighted using average quarterly prices from Mont Belvieu Non-TET monthly commercial index and represents the following composition for the periods noted:
2020: 43% ethane, 32% propane, 12% normal butane, 4% isobutane and 9% natural gasoline
2019: 38% ethane, 34% propane, 12% normal butane, 5% isobutane and 11% natural gasoline
(3)
Crude oil prices are based on average quarterly prices of West Texas Intermediate crude oil as measured on the NYMEX.
Volumes
In our gathering and processing operations, plant inlet volumes, crude oil volumes and capacity utilization rates generally are driven by wellhead production and our competitive and contractual position on a regional basis and more broadly by the impact of prices for crude oil, natural gas and NGLs on exploration and production activity in the areas of our operations. The factors that impact the gathering and processing volumes also impact the total volumes that flow to our Downstream Business. In addition, fractionation volumes are also affected by the location of the resulting mixed NGLs, available pipeline capacity to transport NGLs to our fractionators and our competitive and contractual position relative to other fractionators.
Contract Terms, Contract Mix and the Impact of Commodity Prices
With the potential for volatility of commodity prices, the contract mix of our Gathering and Processing segment (other than fee-based contracts in certain gathering and processing business units and gathering and processing services), can have a significant impact on our profitability, especially those percent-of-proceeds contracts that create direct exposure to changes in energy prices by paying us for gathering and processing services with a portion of proceeds from the commodities handled (“equity volumes”).
Contract terms in the Gathering and Processing segment are based upon a variety of factors, including natural gas and crude quality, geographic location, competitive dynamics and the pricing environment at the time the contract is executed, and customer requirements. Our gathering and processing contract mix and, accordingly, our exposure to crude, natural gas and NGL prices may change as a result of producer preferences, competition and changes in production as wells decline at different rates or are added, our expansion into regions where different types of contracts are more common and other market factors.
The contract terms and contract mix of our Downstream Business can also have a significant impact on our results of operations. Transportation and fractionation services are supported by fee-based contracts whose rates and terms are driven by NGL supply and transportation and fractionation capacity. Export services are supported by fee-based contracts whose rates and terms are driven by global LPG supply and demand fundamentals. The Logistics and Transportation segment includes predominantly fee-based contracts.
The adoption of ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), in January of 2018 did not result in an impact to our operating or gross margin. However, the adoption did have an impact on the classification between components of operating margin and gross margin, “Fees from midstream services” and “Product purchases,” as well as the reporting of gross versus net revenues. For more details, see “Revenue Recognition” included within Note 3 - Significant Accounting Policies.
Impact of Our Commodity Price Hedging Activities
We have hedged the commodity price risk associated with a portion of our expected natural gas, NGL and condensate equity volumes, future commodity purchases and sales, and transportation basis risk by entering into financially settled derivative transactions. These transactions include swaps, futures, and purchased puts (or floors) and calls (or caps) to hedge additional expected equity commodity volumes without creating volumetric risk. We intend to continue managing our exposure to commodity prices in the future by entering into derivative transactions. We actively manage the Downstream Business product inventory and other working capital levels to reduce exposure to changing prices. For additional information regarding our hedging activities, see “