Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis provides information concerning our results of operations and financial condition. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our accompanying consolidated financial statements and the notes in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Tripadvisor is a leading online travel company and our mission is to help people around the world plan, book and experience the perfect trip. We operate a global travel guidance platform that connects the world’s largest audience of prospective travelers with travel partners through rich content, price comparison tools, and online reservation and related services for destinations, accommodations, travel activities and experiences, and restaurants.
Under our flagship brand, Tripadvisor, we launched www.Tripadvisor.com in the U.S. in 2000. Since then, we have launched localized versions of the Tripadvisor website in 48 markets and 28 languages worldwide. As of December 31, 2020, Tripadvisor featured 884 million reviews and opinions on 7.9 million hotels and other accommodations, restaurants, experiences, airlines and cruises.
In addition to the flagship Tripadvisor brand, we own and operate a portfolio of online travel brands and businesses, operating under various websites, connected by the common goal of providing consumers the most comprehensive travel-planning and trip-taking resources in the travel industry. For information on our portfolio of brands and our business model, see the discussion set forth in Part I, Item 1. “Business”, under the captions “Overview” and “Our Business Model.”
Our reporting structure includes the following reportable segments: (1) Hotels, Media & Platform; and (2) Experiences & Dining. For further information on our segments, including the principal revenue streams within these segments, refer to “Note 4: Revenue Recognition” and “Note 20: Segment and Geographic Information” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Executive Financial Summary
Tripadvisor is the world’s largest travel guidance platform, as measured by monthly unique users. As a result, Tripadvisor represents an attractive platform for travel partners - including hotel chains, independent hoteliers, OTAs, destination marketing organizations, and other travel-related and non-travel related product and service providers - who seek to market and sell their products and services to a global audience. Tripadvisor’s platform and product offerings enable consumers to discover, research and price shop a variety of travel products, including hotels, flights, cruises, cars, vacation rental properties, tours, travel activities and experiences, and restaurants; and book a number of these travel experiences either directly on our websites or mobile apps, or on our travel partners’ websites or mobile apps.
Business Trends
The online travel industry in which we operate is large and also highly dynamic and competitive. Our overall strategy is to deliver more value to consumers and travel partners in order to generate more monetization on our platform. While we operate with a long-term growth focus, our specific growth objectives and resource allocation strategies can differ in both duration and magnitude within our segments. We describe these dynamics, as well as the current trends affecting our overall business and reportable segments, key drivers of our financial results, and uncertainties that may impact our ability to execute on our objectives and strategies, below.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused a significant negative impact on the travel, hospitality, restaurant, and leisure industry and consequently adversely and materially affected our business, results of operations, liquidity and financial condition during the year ended December 31, 2020. Among other impacts, COVID-19 has negatively
impacted global consumer demand and consumers’ ability to travel, thereby resulting in many of our travel partners operating at significantly reduced service levels.
Commencing in late February 2020 and progressively worsening through March 2020, we experienced a significant decline in user demand for our products and services, concurrent with intensifying concerns about COVID-19 on a global basis, in conjunction with widespread travel restrictions imposed by governments and businesses. The adverse impact to our business from COVID-19 intensified in the second half of March, driven by the pandemic’s proliferation and increased governmental restrictions and mandates globally that additionally impacted the travel, hospitality, restaurant, and leisure industry and further dampened consumer demand for our products and services. In the second half of March and throughout April, significant year-over-year revenue declines generally stabilized across the Company’s segments and products, which generally continued throughout the second quarter of 2020, and modestly improved during the third quarter of 2020. Our consolidated revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, was approximately 40% of the prior year’s comparable period. In the second half of 2020, revenue averaged approximately 35% of the prior year’s comparable period, while revenue performance in the months of November and December was approximately 33% of the prior year’s comparable periods. This trend compares favorably to the trends observed in months of April 2020 and May 2020, where revenue for those months was approximately 10% of the prior year’s comparable periods. In addition, traffic trends on our websites have improved since the significant declines seen in the second half of March and throughout April 2020. In the second half of 2020, monthly unique users on Tripadvisor websites averaged approximately 67% of the prior year’s comparable periods, while in April and May of 2020, monthly unique users on Tripadvisor websites were approximately 33% and 45% of the prior year’s comparable periods, respectively. While our revenue and traffic trends generally improved since April and May 2020, these trends began to flatten out in September 2020. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, governments again, particularly in Europe, began to impose new restrictions to mitigate the spread of the virus, which negatively impacted these recent trends, as monthly unique users on Tripadvisor websites during the fourth quarter of 2020 declined to approximately 60% of the prior year’s comparable period, in comparison to approximately 70% of the prior year’s comparable period, during the third quarter of 2020.
We have also incurred significant and unanticipated cancellations by travelers related to future travel, accommodations and tour bookings, which had been reserved by travelers in the pre-COVID-19 timeframe and included a significant number of bookings recorded as deferred revenue on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2019. During the course of 2020, we have worked with travelers and travel partners to address cancellations, re-bookings, and in certain cases we have provided our travel partners extended payment terms, discounts and other incentives.
While we have seen varying degrees of containment of the virus in certain countries and some signs of travel recovery during points in time during 2020, the degree of containment and the recovery in travel has varied region-to-region globally, as well as state-to-state in the U.S. Most notably, a resurgence of COVID-19 has occurred again, after a period of decline, during the fourth quarter of 2020 and the beginning of the first quarter of 2021, followed by the reinstatement of government restrictions and mandates in certain geographies globally and the identification of new variants of the virus. There remains uncertainty around when remaining or reinstated restrictions will be lifted, where additional restrictions may be initiated, or where restrictions that have been previously lifted may be reinstated due to resurgence of the virus, nor is it clear when the short or long-term changes to consumer usage patterns on our platform or travel behavior patterns when travel bans and other government restrictions and mandates are fully lifted, or the timing of widespread distribution and administration of the vaccine globally. We believe the travel industry and our business will continue to be materially and adversely affected while such travel restrictions remain in place and COVID-19 continues to proliferate. Although we cannot predict with certainty the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our full year 2021 financial results, we currently expect that our first quarter 2021 fiscal year financial results will continue to be negatively impacted by the pandemic to a material degree.
In addition, the ultimate extent of the COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on travel, regional and global markets, and overall economic activity remains difficult to predict. Therefore, the ultimate extent and duration of the impact of COVID-19 on our business, results of operations, liquidity and financial condition remains largely uncertain and is dependent on future developments that cannot be accurately predicted at this time, such as the continued resurgence and severity of the virus, continued transmission rate of COVID-19, the extent and effectiveness of
containment actions taken, the timing or extent of widespread distribution and administration of the vaccine, mobility and travel restrictions, and the impact of these and other factors on consumer travel behavior.
In response to the impact of COVID-19, we have taken several steps to further strengthen our financial position and balance sheet and maintain financial liquidity and flexibility during 2020, including, but not limited to, restructuring activities, reducing our ongoing operating expenses and headcount, additional borrowings of debt, and amendments to our 2015 Credit Facility, all of which are described in more detail below.
Liquidity
During the first quarter of 2020, we borrowed $700 million under the 2015 Credit Facility as a precautionary measure to reinforce our liquidity position and preserve financial flexibility in light of uncertainty in the global markets resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. We repaid these borrowings during the three months ended September 30, 2020.
In May 2020, we amended our 2015 Credit Facility to, among other things, suspend the leverage ratio covenant on this facility beginning in the second quarter of 2020 and ending prior to September 30, 2021 or such earlier date as elected by the Company (such period, the “Leverage Covenant Holiday”), add a minimum liquidity covenant to be applicable during the Leverage Covenant Holiday, secure the obligations under the agreement, as well as downsize the capacity of the facility to $1.0 billion from $1.2 billion. In December 2020, we again amended the 2015 Credit Facility to, among other things, continue the suspension of the requirement for quarterly testing of compliance under the leverage ratio covenant until the earlier of (a) the first day after June 30, 2021 through maturity on which borrowings and other revolving credit utilizations under the revolving commitments exceed $200 million, and (b) the election of the Company (the “Covenant Changeover Date”), at which time the leverage ratio covenant will be reinstated. At this time, we also downsized the capacity to $500 million from $1.0 billion and extended the maturity date from May 12, 2022 to May 12, 2024. We believe this additional flexibility will be important given our continued limited ability to predict our future financial performance due to the uncertainty associated with COVID-19 as well as consumer behavior and restrictive measures put in place in response to COVID-19.
In addition, in July 2020, the Company completed the sale of $500 million aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes in a private offering. The Indenture pursuant to which the Senior Notes were issued provides, among other things, that interest will be payable on the Senior Notes at 7.000% per annum, on January 15 and July 15 of each year, beginning on January 15, 2021, until their maturity date of July 15, 2025. The Company used the net proceeds received of $490 million, net of debt issuances costs, to repay a portion of our 2015 Credit Facility borrowings.
Refer to “Note 10: Debt” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information about our 2015 Credit Facility and Senior Notes.
Cost Reduction Measures
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company instituted a cost reduction initiative to preserve cash flows, including targeted workforce reduction measures largely in the Experiences & Dining segment and optimizing and reducing brand advertising as the Company pivots to leverage newer mediums we believe will be more effective than our historically television-focused campaign.
During the latter part of the first quarter of 2020, and in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company instituted additional cost reduction measures, including the elimination of the majority of discretionary spending, business travel, non-critical vendor relationships, brand advertising, cessation of nearly all new hiring and contingent staff, reduction of targeted employee benefits and the furloughing of over 100 employees. On April 28, 2020, management approved and the Company announced an additional cost reduction initiative in response to the continued economic and financial impacts to the Company as a result of the COVID -19 pandemic, which included the following:
•
Enacting a workforce reduction eliminating more than 900 employees;
•
Furloughing additional employees bringing the total furloughed employees during March and April 2020 to approximately 850 employees, primarily in our European operations at The Fork; and
•
Making targeted reductions of the Company’s office lease portfolio, primarily either through subleasing or allowing property leases to expire.
By the end of the third quarter of 2020, a majority of the Company’s previously furloughed employees had returned to their jobs; however, during the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company again furloughed approximately 400 employees, primarily in our Europeans operations of The Fork. This action taken by the Company was a direct result of the reinstatement of government restrictions related to restaurants in various countries within Europe in response to the resurgence of COVID-19 in those markets.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred total pre-tax restructuring and other related reorganization costs of approximately $41 million as a result of these measures, all of which were paid by the Company as of December 31, 2020.
CARES Act and Other Governmental Relief
In March 2020, the U.S. government enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The CARES Act is an emergency economic stimulus package in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which includes numerous income tax provisions, some of which are effective retroactively. We anticipate that we will benefit from certain of these provisions, and have accordingly recorded income tax benefits of $23 million during year ended December 31, 2020.
In addition, certain other governments have passed legislation to help businesses during the COVID-19 pandemic through loans, wage subsidies, tax relief or other financial aid. Some of these governments have extended or are considering extending these programs. The Company has participated in several of these programs, including the CARES Act in the U.S., the United Kingdom's job retention scheme, as well as other certain jurisdictions' programs. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized government grants and other assistance benefits of $12 million, as a reduction of personnel and overhead costs in the consolidated statement of operations.
For further details of the income tax and other benefits recorded by the Company under the CARES Act and other governmental relief programs, refer to “Note 1: Organization and Business Description” and “Note 12: Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Hotels, Media & Platform Segment
In our Hotels, Media & Platform segment our strategic objective is to preserve profit and drive increased customer engagement and monetization on the Tripadvisor platform. We seek to achieve this by delivering consumers compelling products and holistic user experience as well as by offering travel partners a diverse set of advertising opportunities.
For consumers, we test and implement product enhancements that deliver a more engaging and comprehensive hotel shopping experience. This includes providing rich, immersive content - reviews, photos, videos and ratings, among other contributions - as well as increasing the number of travel partners and properties as well as the available hotel supply on our platform. We believe providing consumers tools to discover, research, price shop and book a comprehensive selection of accommodations helps increase brand awareness and brand loyalty and, over time, can result in deeper consumer engagement, more qualified leads delivered to travel partners and greater monetization on our platform.
We seek to monetize our influence through hotel-related product improvements, supply and marketing efforts and customer advertising opportunities. Historically, we have generated a significant amount of hotel shoppers from search engines, such as Google. A hotel shopper is a visitor to our sites that views either a listing of hotels in a city or a specific hotel page. Our key ongoing objective related to traffic acquisition is to attract or acquire hotel shoppers at or above our desired marketing return on investment targets. Over the long-term, we are focused on
driving a greater percentage of our traffic from direct traffic sources, which comes with little to no traffic acquisition costs.
Our business, including the Hotels, Media & Platform segment, has been adversely and materially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which was the primary and material driver of this segment’s unfavorable results during the year ended December 31, 2020 as noted in the “COVID-19” discussion above. During the third quarter of 2020, our Hotels, Media & Platform segment demonstrated modest month-over-month performance improvements; however, beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, governments again, particularly in Europe, began to impose restrictions to mitigate the spread of the virus, which negatively impacted this recent trend, particularly in our European business. In addition, most notably in the pre-Covid time period, the Company experienced revenue headwinds in our SEO marketing channel, which we believe has been impacted by search engines (primarily Google) increasing the prominence of their own hotel products in search results and we expect this trend may continue.
We believe deepening consumer engagement on our platform will enable us to more significantly monetize our influence and eventually grow Hotels, Media & Platform segment revenue. For example, in Tripadvisor-branded display and platform revenue, we enable travel partners to amplify their brand, generate brand impressions, and potentially drive qualified leads and bookings for their businesses. Historically, we have limited both the type and number of display-based advertising opportunities we make available to travel partners, particularly on mobile phone, which, in turn, has limited display-based advertising revenue growth. However, we continue to work on initiatives to better leverage our audience, content, data, travel influence and platform breadth to open up new media advertising opportunities through a more modern, high-powered advertising suite spanning native, video and programmatic solutions. We intend to broaden our solution to a larger set of advertising travel endemic and non-travel endemic advertising partners, including industries such as airlines and finance.
In addition, we have historically and will continue to focus on initiatives to increase our traffic quality and deepen customer engagement on our platform, including driving membership growth, increasing personalization, and innovating our mobile app experience. We believe improving the user experience on our platform will lead to higher monetization over time. Further, we believe there remains an opportunity to continue to grow our member base, as well as to deepen member engagement by making membership more valued, building communities and leveraging our content to further personalize trip-planning features. As an example, during December 2020, we introduced direct-to-consumer initiatives, which included a beta-launch of an annual subscription-based membership that offers discounts to consumers for hotels and experiences, and also a travel concierge service that connects travelers with a curated community of expert trip designers in local travel destinations.
Experiences & Dining Segment
Our Experiences & Dining offerings contribute to the comprehensive user experience we deliver, which we believe helps to increase awareness of, loyalty to, and engagement with our products, drive more bookings to Experiences & Dining partners and generate greater revenue and increased profitability on our platform. Given the significant market opportunities in these large categories, we expect to continue to invest in building these offerings to drive consumer engagement, bookings and revenue growth for the long-term.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our Experiences & Dining segment’s financial results were adversely and materially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Restaurants across European markets saw restrictions ease during the second quarter of 2020, which was met with an increase in consumer demand. As a result, in the month of September 2020, TheFork business unit, primarily based in Europe, had largely regained the revenue level of the prior year’s comparable period; however, beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, governments again, particularly in Europe, imposed new restrictions to try to mitigate the resurgence of the virus, which negatively and materially impacted this recent trend.
Throughout the pandemic, we have explored new initiatives to delight and engage consumers. For example, we began offering virtual tours to our consumers, as well as the beta-launch of an annual subscription-based membership, as discussed above, which offers consumers discounts on experience bookings. This is in addition to other recent initiatives, such as the recent rollout of a new payment option in late 2019, which enables consumers to reserve certain experience activities and defer payment until a date no later than two days before the experience date.
In December 2019, we acquired U.K.-based Bookatable, which offers an online restaurant reservation and booking platform. This further strengthened our position in certain of our existing European markets as well as expands us into new countries for our Dining offering, such as the U.K., Germany, Austria, Finland and Norway. TheFork’s online restaurant booking platform, including Bookatable, had approximately 76,000 total bookable restaurants as of December 31, 2020.
Other
Other is a combination of our Rentals, Flights & Car, and Cruise businesses and is not considered a reportable segment. Profits and revenues have declined during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic, similar to our other business units, and to a lesser extent, due to the sale of our SmarterTravel business in the second quarter of 2020. We continue to operate these businesses opportunistically as they complement our overall strategic objectives to deliver more value to consumers and travel partners.
Consolidated Results of Operations
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018 can be found in Part II, Item 7. "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 19, 2020.
Results of Operations
Selected Financial Data
(in millions, except per share amounts and percentages)
Revenue and Segment Information
n.m. = not meaningful
(1)
“Adjusted EBITDA Margin by Segment” is defined as Adjusted EBITDA by segment divided by revenue by segment.
Hotels, Media & Platform Segment
Hotels, Media & Platform segment revenue decreased by $578 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to the impacts of COVID-19 as discussed above.
Adjusted EBITDA in our Hotels, Media & Platform segment decreased $365 million, during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019. This was primarily due to a decrease in revenue, partially offset by reductions in television advertising costs, direct selling and marketing expenses related to SEM, and other online paid traffic acquisition costs in response to a decline in consumer demand related to COVID-19 and, to a lesser extent, a reduction in personnel costs as a result of workforce reductions.
The following is a detailed discussion of the revenue sources within our Hotels, Media & Platform segment:
Tripadvisor-branded Hotels Revenue
Tripadvisor-branded hotels revenue primarily includes hotel auction revenue and, to a lesser extent, hotel B2B revenue, which includes click-based revenue generated from hotel sponsored placement advertising that enable hotels to enhance their visibility on Tripadvisor hotel pages, and subscription-based advertising services that we offer to travel partners. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, 81%, 83%, and 85%, respectively, of our total Hotels, Media & Platform segment revenue was derived from Tripadvisor-branded hotels revenue. Tripadvisor-branded hotels revenue decreased $487 million or 63% during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by reduced consumer demand as a result of COVID-19, concurrent with widespread travel restrictions and service limitations on our travel partners imposed by local and federal governments at various stages during the course of the year in response to the pandemic.
Tripadvisor-branded Display and Platform Revenue
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, 19%, 17%, and 15%, respectively, of our total Hotels, Media & Platform segment revenue was derived from Tripadvisor-branded display and platform revenue, which consists of revenue from display-based advertising across all our websites. Tripadvisor-branded display and platform revenue decreased $91 million or 57% during the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily driven by a decrease in marketing spend from our advertisers due to lack of consumer demand resulting from the impact of COVID-19.
Experiences & Dining Segment
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, our Experiences & Dining segment revenue accounted for 31%, 29% and 23%, respectively, of total consolidated revenue. Experiences & Dining segment revenue decreased by $270 million or 59% during the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019. Revenue growth in this segment was negatively impacted by a significant reduction in consumer demand as a result of COVID-19, concurrent with many jurisdictions globally adopting laws, rules, regulations or decrees intended to address COVID-19, including implementing various travel restrictions, “shelter in place” or
“social distancing” mandates, or restricting access to city centers or popular tourist destinations, restaurants and limiting access to experience offerings in surrounding areas at various stages during the course of the year. Restaurants across many European markets saw restrictions ease during the second quarter of 2020, which was met with an increase in consumer demand. As a result, in the month of September 2020, TheFork business unit had largely regained its revenue level of the prior year’s comparable period; however, beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, governments again, particularly in Europe, began to impose new restrictions to try to mitigate the spread of the virus, which negatively impacted this recent trend. The negative impact of COVID-19 to this segment’s revenue, was partially offset by incremental revenue of approximately $31 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, related to our December 2019 acquisitions of Bookatable and SinglePlatform.
Experiences & Dining segment Adjusted EBITDA decreased by $84 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to the decrease in revenue noted above, partially offset by reduced selling and marketing expenses related to SEM and other online paid traffic acquisition costs in response to reduced consumer demand and lack of, or reduced, availability of dine-in restaurants, experiences and tours, at various stages during the course of the year as a result of COVID-19 and, to a lesser extent, decreased direct costs related to credit card payments and other transaction costs directly related to reduced revenue, and a reduction in personnel costs as a result of workforce reductions.
Other
Other revenue, which includes Rentals revenue, in addition to primarily click-based advertising and display-based advertising revenue from our Flights, Cars, and Cruises offerings on Tripadvisor websites, decreased by $108 million or 65% during the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to decreased consumer demand, similar to our other businesses, as a result of COVID-19, and subsequent widespread global travel restrictions and service limitations on travel partners imposed by local and federal governments at various stages during the course of the year, and reduced travel partner spend in response to COVID-19 and, to a lesser extent, the sale of our SmarterTravel business during the second quarter of 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA in Other decreased $40 million or 73% during the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to the decrease in revenue, partially offset by a reduction in selling and marketing expenses related to SEM and other online paid traffic acquisition costs in response to a decline in consumer demand related to COVID-19, a reduction in personnel costs as a result of workforce reductions and, to a lesser extent, the sale of our SmarterTravel business during the second quarter of 2020.
Consolidated Expenses
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists of expenses that are directly related or closely correlated to revenue generation, including direct costs, such as credit card and other booking transaction payment fees, data center costs, costs associated with prepaid tour tickets, ad serving fees, flight search fees, and other transaction costs. In addition, cost of revenue includes personnel and overhead expenses, including salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and bonuses for certain customer support personnel who are directly involved in revenue generation.
Cost of revenue decreased $39 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to decreased direct costs from credit card payment and other transaction costs in our Experiences & Dining segment in correlation with the reduction in revenue related to COVID-19.
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing expenses primarily consist of direct costs, including traffic generation costs from SEM and other online traffic acquisition costs, syndication costs and affiliate marketing commissions, social media costs, brand advertising (including television and other offline advertising), promotions and public relations. In addition, our sales and marketing expenses consist of indirect costs such as personnel and overhead expenses, including salaries, commissions, benefits, stock-based compensation, and bonuses for sales, sales support, customer support and marketing employees.
Direct selling and marketing costs decreased $305 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to a decrease in SEM and other online traffic acquisition costs across all our segments and businesses and, to a lesser extent, a decrease in television advertising costs in our Hotels, Media & Platform segment, driven by cost reduction measures primarily in response to the financial impact to the Company and decline in consumer demand caused by COVID-19.
Personnel and overhead costs decreased $51 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily as a result of a reduction in headcount related to our cost-reduction measures in response to COVID-19 across our business. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $6 million, as a reduction in personnel costs related to government grants and other assistance benefits received as COVID-19 relief from various governments.
Technology and Content
Technology and content expenses consist primarily of personnel and overhead expenses, including salaries and benefits, stock-based compensation expense, and bonuses for salaried employees and contractors engaged in the design, development, testing, content support, and maintenance of our websites and mobile apps. Other costs include licensing, maintenance expense, computer supplies, telecom costs, content translation and localization costs, and consulting costs.
Technology and content costs decreased $73 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to decreased personnel and overhead costs across our business as a result of a reduction in headcount driven by cost-reduction measures in response to COVID-19. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $4 million, as a reduction in personnel costs related to government grants and other assistance benefits received as COVID-19 relief from various governments.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel and related overhead costs, including personnel engaged in leadership, finance, legal, and human resources, as well as stock-based compensation expense for those same personnel. General and administrative costs also include professional service fees and other fees including audit, legal, tax and accounting, and other costs including bad debt expense, non-income taxes, such as sales, use and other non-income related taxes.
General and administrative costs decreased $14 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019. Personnel and overhead costs decreased $16 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily driven by a reduction in headcount related to our cost-reduction measures across our business in response to COVID-19. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $2 million, as a reduction in personnel costs related to government grants and other assistance benefits received as COVID-19 relief from various governments. Professional service fees and other increased $2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to an increase in bad debt expense across our business as a result of COVID-19 impact on our customers, partially offset by a decrease in consulting and legal costs.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation expense consists of depreciation on computer equipment, leasehold improvements, furniture, office equipment and other assets, and amortization of capitalized software and website development costs and right-of-use (“ROU”) assets related to our finance lease. Amortization consists of the amortization of definite-lived intangibles purchased in business acquisitions.
Depreciation and amortization decreased $1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to the completion of amortization related to certain intangible assets from business acquisitions in previous years, partially offset by increased depreciation related to capitalized software and website development costs.
Impairment of Goodwill
The Company recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $3 million related to our Tripadvisor China reporting unit in the third quarter of 2020. Refer to “Note 8: Goodwill and Intangible Assets, Net” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Restructuring and other related reorganization costs
Restructuring and other related reorganization costs consist primarily of employee severance and related benefits.
The Company incurred pre-tax restructuring and other related reorganization costs of $41 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. These costs consist of employee severance and related benefits. In response to COVID-19, and during the second quarter of 2020, the Company committed to restructuring actions intended to reinforce its financial position, reduce its cost structure, and improve operational efficiencies, resulting in headcount reductions, for which we recognized $32 million in restructuring and other related reorganization costs. In addition, we engaged in a smaller scale restructuring action in the first quarter of 2020 to reduce our cost structure and improve our operational efficiencies, which resulted in headcount reductions for which we recognized $9 million in restructuring and other related reorganization costs.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily consists of interest incurred, commitment fees, and debt issuance cost amortization related to our 2015 Credit Facility and Senior Notes, as well as interest on finance leases.
Interest expense increased $28 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to the issuance of our Senior Notes in July 2020 and higher average outstanding borrowings from our 2015 Credit Facility during 2020. Refer to “Note 10: Debt” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Interest Income
Interest income primarily consists of interest earned from bank deposits available on demand, money market funds, term deposits and marketable securities, including amortization of discounts and premiums on our marketable securities.
Interest income decreased $14 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to both a reduction in average interest rates earned on our investments and lower average invested funds by the Company during 2020.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net generally consists of net foreign exchange gains and losses, forward contract gains and losses, earnings/(losses) from equity method investments, gain/(loss) and impairments on non-marketable investments, gain/loss on sale/disposal of businesses, and other non-operating income (expenses).
Other expense, net increased $5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to a loss on sale of business of $6 million, an allowance for credit losses of $3 million on a long-term note receivable and $3 million of net losses on our equity method investment; partially offset by net foreign currency transaction gains as a result of the fluctuation of foreign exchange rates during 2020. Refer to “Note 18: Other Income (Expense), Net” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(Provision) Benefit for Income Taxes
We had an income tax benefit of $80 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in our income tax expense during the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily due to significant pretax losses incurred the year ended December 31, 2020, and an income tax benefit of $23 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the tax rate differential in tax years applicable to U.S. loss carryforwards that became eligible for carryback under the CARES Act, offset by foreign valuation allowances and an increase in the recognition of stock-based compensation shortfalls related to the decline in the Company’s common stock price during the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to “Note 12: Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Net income (loss)
Net income decreased $415 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to a decrease in revenue primarily related to the negative impact on the Company’s business related to COVID-19, as described above in “Revenue and Segment Information”, partially offset by a decrease in total costs and expenses, primarily as a result of cost reduction measures initiated by the Company in response to COVID-19, as described above in “Consolidated Expenses”.
Adjusted EBITDA
To provide investors with additional information regarding our financial results, we also disclose Adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure. A “non-GAAP financial measure” refers to a numerical measure of a company’s historical or future financial performance, financial position, or cash flows that excludes (or includes) amounts that are included in (or excluded from) the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP in such company’s financial statements.
Adjusted EBITDA is also our segment profit measure and a key measure used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate the financial performance of our business and on which internal budgets and forecasts are based and approved. In particular, the exclusion of certain expenses in calculating Adjusted EBITDA can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons and better enables management and investors to compare financial results between periods as these costs may vary independent of ongoing core business performance. Accordingly, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) plus: (1) (provision) benefit for income taxes; (2) other income (expense), net; (3) depreciation and amortization; (4) stock-based compensation and other stock-settled obligations; (5) goodwill, intangible asset, and long-lived asset impairments; (6) legal reserves and settlements; (7) restructuring and other related reorganization costs; and (8) other non-recurring expenses and income.
Our use of Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results reported in accordance with GAAP. Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including net income and our other GAAP results.
Some of these limitations are:
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense, or cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not consider the potentially dilutive impact of stock-based compensation or other stock-settled obligations;
•
Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect certain income and expenses not directly tied to the ongoing core operations of our business, such as legal reserves and settlements, restructuring and other related reorganization costs;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us; and
•
Other companies, including companies in our own industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to Net Income, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, for the periods presented:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For a discussion of our liquidity and capital resources as of and our cash flow activities for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018, see Part II, Item 7. "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 19, 2020.
Our principal source of liquidity is cash flow generated from operations and our existing cash and cash equivalents balance. Our liquidity needs can also be met through drawdowns under our 2015 Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $418 million and $319 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents, and $497 million of available borrowing capacity under our 2015 Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $91 million of our cash and cash equivalents were held by our international subsidiaries outside of the U.S., of which approximately 30% was located in the U.K. As of December 31, 2020, the significant majority of our cash was denominated in U.S. dollars. The Company had $500 million in long-term debt as of December 31, 2020, as a result of the issuance of its Senior Notes in July 2020, as discussed below.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $ 494 million of cumulative undistributed earnings in foreign subsidiaries. As a result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “2017 Tax Act”), foreign earnings may now generally be repatriated back to the U.S. without incurring U.S. federal income tax. Historically, we had asserted our intention to indefinitely reinvest the cumulative undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries. In response to increased cash requirements in the U.S. related to our declaration of a special cash dividend and other strategic initiatives during the fourth quarter of 2019, we determined that we no longer considered all of our foreign earnings to be indefinitely reinvested. As of December 31, 2020, $376 million of our cumulative undistributed foreign earnings were no longer considered to be indefinitely reinvested. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a deferred tax liability of $1 million for the U.S. state income tax and foreign withholding tax liabilities on the cumulative undistributed foreign earnings that we no longer consider indefinitely reinvested. We intend to indefinitely reinvest $118 million of these foreign earnings in our non-US subsidiaries, which determination of any related unrecognized deferred income tax liability is not practicable. Refer to “Note 12: Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
2015 Credit Facility
As of December 31, 2020, we are party to a credit agreement with a group of lenders, initially entered in June 2015 (as amended, the “Credit Agreement”), which, among other things, provides for a $500 million revolving credit facility (the “2015 Credit Facility”) with a maturity date of May 12, 2024.
The 2015 Credit Facility requires us to maintain a maximum leverage ratio and contains certain customary affirmative covenants and events of default, including a change of control. Borrowings under the 2015 Credit Facility generally bear interest, at the Company’s option, at a rate per annum equal to either (i) the Eurocurrency Borrowing rate, or the adjusted LIBO rate for the interest period in effect for such borrowing; plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.25% to 2.00% (“Eurocurrency Spread”), based on the Company’s leverage ratio; or (ii) the
Alternate Base Rate (“ABR”) Borrowing, which is the greatest of (a) the Prime Rate in effect on such day, (b) the New York Fed Bank Rate in effect on such day plus 1/2 of 1.00% per annum and (c) the Adjusted LIBO Rate (or LIBO rate multiplied by the Statutory Reserve Rate) for an interest period of one month plus 1.00%; in addition to an applicable margin ranging from 0.25% to 1.00% (“ABR Spread”), based on the Company’s leverage ratio.
However, in May 2020, we amended our 2015 Credit Facility to, among other things, suspend the leverage ratio covenant on this facility beginning in the second quarter of 2020 and ending prior to September 30, 2021 or such earlier date as elected by the Company, and add a minimum liquidity covenant to be applicable during the Leverage Covenant Holiday, secure the obligations under the agreement, as well as downsize the capacity of the facility to $1.0 billion from $1.2 billion. In December 2020, we again amended the 2015 Credit Facility to, among other things, continue the suspension of the requirement for quarterly testing of compliance with the leverage ratio covenant until the earlier of (a) the first day after June 30, 2021 through maturity on which borrowings and other revolving credit utilizations under the revolving commitments exceed $200 million, and (b) the election of the Company. The Company also downsized the facility’s borrowing capacity to $500 million from $1.0 billion and extended the maturity date of the facility from May 12, 2022 to May 12, 2024. These amendments also limit the Company from making certain payments and distributions, including share repurchases and dividends, during the Leverage Covenant Holiday. During the Leverage Covenant Holiday, any future borrowings under the 2015 Credit Facility will bear interest at LIBOR plus a 2.25% margin with a LIBOR floor of 1% per annum. We are also required to pay a quarterly commitment fee, at an applicable rate of 0.5%, on the daily unused portion of the revolving credit facility for each fiscal quarter during the Leverage Covenant Holiday.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, we were in compliance with our covenants under the 2015 Credit Facility. While there can be no assurance that we will be able to meet the leverage ratio covenant after the Leverage Covenant Holiday expires, based on our current projections, we do not believe there is a material risk we will not remain in compliance throughout the next twelve months.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company borrowed $700 million under the 2015 Credit Facility. These funds were drawn down as a precautionary measure to reinforce our liquidity position and preserve financial flexibility in light of uncertainty in the global markets resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company repaid these borrowings in full during the three months ended September 30, 2020.
Senior Notes
In July 2020, the Company completed the sale of $500 million in Senior Notes. The Senior Notes provide, among other things, that interest will be payable on the Senior Notes on January 15 and July 15 of each year, beginning on January 15, 2021, at an interest rate of 7.000% per annum, until their maturity date of July 15, 2025. In July 2020, the Company used the net proceeds from the Senior Notes, or $490 million, net of approximately $10 million in debt issuances costs, to repay a portion of our outstanding borrowings under our 2015 Credit Facility. The Senior Notes are senior unsecured obligations of the Company and are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by certain domestic subsidiaries. The Senior Notes are not a registered security and there are no plans to register our Senior Notes as a security in the future. As a result, Rule 3-10 of Regulation S-X promulgated by the SEC is not applicable and no separate financial statements are required for the guarantor subsidiaries.
For additional information on our 2015 Credit Facility and its amendments during 2020, and our Senior Notes, refer to “Note 10: Debt” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Chinese Credit Facilities
We were party to a $30 million, one-year revolving credit facility with Bank of America as of December 31, 2019. The Company terminated this credit facility in June 2020. We had no outstanding borrowings under this credit facility at the time of termination or as of December 31, 2019.
Significant uses of capital
On January 31, 2018, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $250 million of our shares of common stock under a share repurchase program authorized by our Board of Directors. This share repurchase program has no expiration date but may be suspended or terminated by the Board of Directors at any time. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we repurchased 2,582,198 shares of the Company’s outstanding common stock at an aggregate cost of $100 million under the share repurchase program.
On November 1, 2019, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of an additional $100 million in shares of our common stock under our existing share repurchase program, which increased the amount available to the Company under this share repurchase program to $250 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we repurchased 2,059,846 shares of the Company’s outstanding common stock at an aggregate cost of $60 million under the share repurchase program.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased 4,707,450 shares of our outstanding common stock at an aggregate cost of $115 million under the share repurchase program. As of December 31, 2020, we had $75 million remaining available to repurchase shares of our common stock under this share repurchase program. The terms of our Credit Agreement were amended to limit the Company from share repurchases during the Leverage Covenant Holiday and the terms of the Indenture related to the Senior Notes impose certain limitations and restrictions on share repurchases.
On November 1, 2019, our Board of Directors declared a special cash dividend of $3.50 per share, or approximately $488 million in the aggregate. The dividend was payable on December 4, 2019 to stockholders of record on November 20, 2019. We funded this special cash dividend with available cash primarily from the U.S. and to a lesser extent from a foreign subsidiary, with any related income tax impact not material. During 2019, we paid $110 million, net of cash acquired, in connection with the following Dining acquisitions: (1) SinglePlatform, a leading online content management and syndication platform company based in the U.S., (2) BookaTable, an online restaurant reservation and booking platform company based in the U.K.; and (3) Restorando, an online restaurant reservation and booking platform company based in Argentina.
Our business typically experiences seasonal fluctuations that affect the timing of our annual cash flows related to working capital. In our Experiences business and our Rentals free-to-list model, we generally receive cash from travelers at the time of booking and we record these amounts, net of commissions, on our consolidated balance sheet as deferred merchant payables. We pay the suppliers, or the property rental owners and experience providers, after the travelers’ use. Therefore, we generally receive cash from the traveler prior to paying the supplier and this operating cycle represents a source or use of cash to us. During the first half of the year Experiences and Rentals bookings typically exceed the amount of completed tour-taking and stays, resulting in higher cash flow related to working capital, while during the second half of the year, particularly in the third quarter, this pattern reverses and cash flows from these transactions are typically negative. However, this trend was impacted during the year ended December 31, 2020, as cash outflows to suppliers related to deferred merchant payables significantly exceeded cash received from travelers, primarily reflecting the decline in consumer demand for our products and increased cancellations of reservations due to COVID-19, most notably occurring during the first half of 2020 when we typically generate significant positive cash flow. The ultimate extent and longevity of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on travel, regional and global markets, and overall economic activity in currently affected countries or globally is unknown and impossible to predict with certainty, as such the impacts on our business and cash flows are uncertain at this point in time. Other factors may also impact typical seasonal fluctuations, which include further significant shifts in our business mix or adverse economic conditions unrelated to COVID-19 that could result in future seasonal patterns that are different from historical trends. In addition, new or different payment options offered to our customers could impact the timing of cash flows. For example, we introduced a new payment feature in late 2019, which allows our Experiences customers the option to reserve certain experience activities and defer payment until a date no later than two days before the experience date; as a result, this payment option may affect the timing of our future cash flows.
As discussed in “Note 12: Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we have received Notices of Proposed Adjustments issued by the IRS for tax years 2009 through 2016, as of December 31, 2020. These proposed adjustments are related to certain transfer pricing arrangements with our foreign subsidiaries, and would result in an increase to our worldwide income tax
expense in an estimated range of $95 million to $105 million, exclusive of interest expense, at the close of the audit if the IRS prevails. We have disputed these proposed adjustments and intend to continue to defend our position. Although the ultimate timing for resolution of this is uncertain, future payments may negatively impact our operating cash flows.
The CARES Act, enacted in March 2020, made tax law changes to provide financial relief to companies as a result of the business impacts of COVID-19. Key income tax provisions of the CARES Act include changes in net operating loss (“NOL”) carryback and carryforward rules, increase of the net interest expense deduction limit, and immediate write-off of qualified improvement property. The CARES Act allows us to carryback our U.S. federal NOL incurred in 2020, generating an expected tax refund of $48 million, which we have recorded in income taxes receivable on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. This tax refund is expected to be received during 2021.
We believe that our available cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our foreseeable working capital requirements, capital expenditures, existing business growth initiatives, debt obligations, lease commitments, and other financial commitments through at least the next twelve months. Our future capital requirements may also include capital needs for acquisitions and/or other expenditures in support of our business strategy, and may potentially reduce our cash balance and/or increase our borrowings under our 2015 Credit Facility or to seek other financing alternatives.
In addition, our capital requirements may increase due to the impact of COVID-19, which has already resulted in reduced revenues and operating cash flows for the Company, and the extent and duration to which it may continue to impact the Company’s business and the travel industry is unclear. Given the uncertainty in the rapidly changing market and economic conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact to our liquidity and capital requirements, and therefore our capital structure.
Our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in our consolidated statements of cash flows, are summarized in the following table:
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our primary use of cash was in operations, financing activities (including repurchases of our outstanding common stock at an aggregate cost of $115 million under our existing share repurchase program and payment of withholding taxes on net share settlements of our equity awards of $21 million), and investing activities (including capital expenditures of $55 million). This use of cash was funded primarily with cash on hand and cash equivalents, and financing activities, which includes $490 million in proceeds from the issuance of our Senior Notes, net of financing costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities increased by $618 million when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to a decrease in net income of $415 million and increase in use of working capital of $209 million, driven by working capital outflows primarily due to booking cancellations and payments to travel suppliers related to deferred merchant payables for completed experiences, tours and rentals in pre-COVID-19 time period, which significantly exceeded cash received as of December 31, 2020 from consumers for prepaid experiences, tours and rentals as a result of a decline in consumer demand due to COVID-19, as well as an income tax benefit recorded in 2020, that did not occur in 2019. This was partially offset by an increase in cash received from trade receivables, as cash collected primarily from customer invoices from services provided in the pre-COVID-19 time period, significantly exceeded uncollected invoices as of December 31, 2020 for services provided to customers as a result of a decline in consumer demand due to COVID-19 and, to a lesser extent, a decrease of income tax payments.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities decreased by $120 million when compared to the same period in 2019, due to $110 million in cash used for business acquisitions in 2019, which did not reoccur in 2020, and a decrease in capital expenditures of $28 million, partially offset by an increase in net cash generated from the purchases, sales and maturities of marketable securities of $17 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities increased by $921 million when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to proceeds from the issuance of our Senior Notes of $490 million, net of financing costs, a payment of a special cash dividend to stockholders of $488 million in 2019, which did not reoccur in 2020, and a decrease in payment of withholding taxes on net share settlements of equity awards of $8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by a net increase in share repurchases of our common stock under our share repurchase program of $55 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table summarizes our material contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Represents outstanding debt on our Senior Notes due July 2025. Refer to “Note 10: Debt” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
(2)
Expected interest payments on our Senior Notes are based on a fixed interest rate of 7.0%, as of December 31, 2020. Refer to “Note 10: Debt” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
(3)
Estimated future lease payments for our Headquarters Lease in Needham, Massachusetts. Refer to “Note 7: Leases” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
(4)
Estimated future lease payments for our operating leases, primarily for office space, with non-cancelable lease terms. These amounts exclude expected rental income under non-cancelable subleases. Refer to “Note 7: Leases” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
(5)
Expected commitment fee payments are based on the daily unused portion of the 2015 Credit Facility, issued letters of credit, and the effective commitment fee rate as of December 31, 2020; however, these variables could change significantly in the future. Refer to “Note 10: Debt” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
(6)
Estimated purchase obligations that are fixed and determinable, primarily related to telecommunication contracts, with various expiration dates through approximately June 2029. These contracts have non-cancelable terms or are cancelable only upon payment of significant penalty.
(7)
Excluded from the table was $178 million of unrecognized tax benefits, including interest, which is included in other long-term liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020, for which we cannot make a reasonably reliable estimate of the amount and period of payment. We anticipate that the liability for unrecognized tax benefits could decrease by up to $4 million within the next twelve months due to the settlement of examinations of issues with tax authorities. Refer to “Note 12: Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion.
(8)
Excluded from the table was $3 million of undrawn standby letters of credit, primarily as security deposits for certain property leases as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, other than the items discussed above, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K promulgated by the SEC, that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Office Lease Commitments
As of December 31, 2020, we leased approximately 280,000 square feet of office space for our corporate headquarters in Needham, Massachusetts. Our Headquarters Lease, has an expiration date of December 2030, with an option to extend the lease term for two consecutive terms of five years each. We account for our Headquarters Lease as a finance lease as of December 31, 2020.
In addition to our Headquarters Lease, we also have contractual obligations in the form of operating leases for our office space, in which we lease an aggregate of approximately 485,000 square feet of office space at approximately 35 other locations across North America, Europe, Asia Pacific and South America, in cities such as New York, London, Sydney, Barcelona, Buenos Aires, and Paris, primarily for our sales offices, subsidiary headquarters, and international management teams, pursuant to leases with various expiration dates, with the latest expiring in June 2027.
Contingencies
In the ordinary course of business, we are party to regulatory and legal matters, including threats thereof, arising out of or in connection with our operations. These matters may involve claims involving patent and other intellectual property rights (including alleged infringement of third-party intellectual property rights), tax matters (including value-added, excise, transient occupancy and accommodation taxes), regulatory compliance (including competition, consumer matters and data privacy), defamation and reputational claims. Periodically, we review the status of all significant outstanding matters to assess any potential financial exposure. When (i) it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred; and (ii) the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated, we record the estimated loss in our consolidated statements of operations. We provide disclosures in the notes to the consolidated financial statements for loss contingencies that do not meet both of these conditions if there is a reasonable possibility that a loss may have been incurred that would be material to the consolidated financial statements. We base accruals on the best information available at the time which can be highly subjective. Although occasional adverse decisions or settlements may occur, we do not believe that the final disposition of any of these matters will have a material adverse effect on our business. However, the final outcome of these matters could vary significantly from our estimates. Finally, there may be claims or actions pending or threatened against us of which we are currently not aware and the ultimate disposition of which could have a material adverse effect on us.
We are also under audit by the IRS and various other domestic and foreign tax authorities with regards to income tax matters. We have reserved for potential adjustments to our provision for income taxes that may result from examinations by, or any negotiated agreements with, these tax authorities. Although we believe our tax estimates are reasonable, the final determination of audits could be materially different from our historical income tax provisions and accruals. The results of an audit could have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows in the period for which that determination is made.
By virtue of consolidated income tax returns previously filed with Expedia, we are currently under an IRS audit for the 2009, 2010 and short-period 2011 tax years. We are separately under examination by the IRS for the short-period 2011, 2012 through 2016, and 2018 tax years, under an employment tax audit by the IRS for the 2015 through 2017 tax years, and have various ongoing audits for foreign and state income tax returns. These audits include questioning of the timing and the amount of income and deductions and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. These examinations may lead to proposed or ordinary course adjustments to our taxes. We are no longer subject to tax examinations by tax authorities for years prior to 2009. As of December 31, 2020, no material assessments have resulted, except as noted below regarding our 2009, 2010, and 2011 IRS audit with Expedia and our 2012 through 2016 standalone IRS audit.
In January 2017 and April 2019, as part of the IRS audit of Expedia, we received Notices of Proposed Adjustment from the IRS for the 2009, 2010, and 2011 tax years. Subsequently, in September 2019, as part of Tripadvisor’s standalone audit, we received Notices of Proposed Adjustment from the IRS for the 2012 and 2013 tax years, and in August 2020, we received Notices of Proposed Adjustments from the IRS for the 2014, 2015 and 2016 tax years. These proposed adjustments are related to certain transfer pricing arrangements with our foreign subsidiaries, and would result in an increase to our worldwide income tax expense in an estimated range of $95 million to $105 million at the close of the audit if the IRS prevails. The estimated range takes into consideration competent authority relief and transition tax regulations, and is exclusive of deferred tax consequences and interest expense, which would be significant. We disagree with the proposed adjustments and we intend to defend our position through applicable administrative and, if necessary, judicial remedies. Our policy is to review and update tax reserves as facts and circumstances change. Based on our interpretation of the regulations and available case law, we believe the position we have taken with regard to transfer pricing with our foreign subsidiaries is sustainable. In addition to the risk of additional tax for 2009 through 2016 transactions, if the IRS were to seek transfer pricing adjustments of a similar nature for transactions in subsequent years, we would be subject to significant additional tax liabilities. We have requested competent authority assistance under the Mutual Agreement Procedure (“MAP”) for tax years 2009 through 2013. We expect the competent authorities to present a resolution for the 2009 through 2011 tax years in the near future. Upon receipt, we will assess the resolution provided by the competent authorities as well as its impact on our existing income tax reserves for all subsequent years which remain open.
In January 2021, we received an issue closure notice relating to adjustments for 2012 through 2016 tax years from HM Revenue & Customs (“HMRC”). These proposed adjustments are related to certain transfer pricing arrangements with our foreign subsidiaries and would result in an increase to our worldwide income tax expense in an estimated range of $45 million to $55 million, exclusive of interest expense, at the close of the audit if HMRC prevails. We disagree with the proposed adjustments and we intend to defend our position through applicable administrative and, if necessary, judicial remedies. Our policy is to review and update tax reserves as facts and circumstances change. Based on our interpretation of the regulations and available case law, we believe the position we have taken with regard to transfer pricing with our foreign subsidiaries is sustainable.
The OECD has been working on a Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Project, and issued the Action 1 report in 2015 to address the tax challenges arising from digitalization. Since then, the OECD/G20 Inclusive Framework has issued various guidelines, policy notes, and proposals that if adopted could result in an overhaul of the international taxation system under which our current tax obligations are determined. As the OECD/G20 Inclusive Framework drives toward a consensus long-term solution, several countries have introduced unilateral digital service tax initiatives which impose new types of non-income taxes, including taxes based on a percentage of revenue. The Company is monitoring certain U.S. states and countries in which we do business, such as France, Italy, Spain, and the U.K., which have enacted or proposed similar taxes that will be applicable or are likely to be applicable going forward. During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded $2 million and $3 million, respectively, of digital service tax to general and administrative expense on our consolidated statement of operations; however, we continue to assess the financial impact of new laws relating to digital services and taxation. Further, as additional U.S. states and countries introduce unilateral measures we will continue to monitor developments and determine the financial impact of these initiatives to the Company.
As a result of the 2017 Tax Act, foreign earnings may now generally be repatriated back to the U.S. without incurring U.S. federal income tax. Historically, we have asserted our intention to indefinitely reinvest the cumulative undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries. In response to increased cash requirements in the U.S. related to our declaration of a special cash dividend and other strategic initiatives during the fourth quarter of 2019, we determined that we no longer consider all of these foreign earnings to be indefinitely reinvested. As of December 31, 2020, $376 million of our cumulative undistributed foreign earnings were no longer considered to be indefinitely reinvested. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a deferred tax liability of $1 million for the U.S. state income tax and foreign withholding tax liabilities on the cumulative undistributed foreign earnings that we no longer consider indefinitely reinvested. We intend to indefinitely reinvest $118 million of these foreign earnings in our non-US subsidiaries, which determination of any related unrecognized deferred income tax liability is not practicable. Refer to “Note 12: Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on potential tax contingencies, including current audits by the IRS and various other domestic and foreign tax authorities, and other income tax and non-income tax matters.
Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions
For information on our related party transactions, refer to “Note 19: Related Party Transactions” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes in accordance with GAAP. Preparation of the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes requires that management make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements as well as revenue and expenses during the periods reported. Management bases its estimates on historical experience, when applicable and other assumptions that it believes are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
There are certain critical policies and estimates that we believe require that management use significant judgment and estimates in applying those policies in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if:
•
It requires us to make an assumption because information was not available at the time or it included matters that were highly uncertain at the time we were making the estimate; and/or
•
Changes in the estimate or different estimates that we could have selected may have had a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Refer to “Note 2: Significant Accounting Policies” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for an overview of our significant accounting policies and new accounting pronouncements that we have adopted or that we plan to adopt that have had or may have an impact on our financial statements.
A discussion of information about the nature and rationale for our critical accounting estimates is below:
Recognition and Recoverability of Goodwill, Definite-Lived Intangibles, and Other Long-Term Assets
We account for acquired businesses using the acquisition method of accounting which requires that the tangible assets and identifiable intangible assets acquired and assumed liabilities be recorded at the date of acquisition at their respective fair values. Any excess purchase price over the estimated fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired is allocated to goodwill. When determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, management makes significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include but are not limited to future expected cash flows from customer and supplier relationships, acquired technology and trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives and discount rates. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Valuations are performed by management or third party valuation specialists under management's supervision, where appropriate.
We subsequently assess goodwill, which is not amortized, for impairment annually during the fourth quarter, or more frequently, if events and circumstances indicate impairment may have occurred. We test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level. Goodwill is assigned to reporting units that are expected to benefit from the synergies of the business combination as of the acquisition date. We evaluate our reporting units when changes in our operating structure occur, and if necessary, reassign goodwill using a relative fair value allocation approach. Once goodwill has been allocated to the reporting units, it no longer retains its identification with a particular acquisition and becomes identified with the reporting unit in its entirety. Accordingly, the fair value of the reporting unit as a whole is available to support the recoverability of its goodwill.
The Company has the option to qualitatively assess whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. In the evaluation of goodwill for impairment, we generally first perform
a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not (i.e., a likelihood of more than 50%) that the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying amount. Periodically, we may choose to forgo the initial qualitative assessment and proceed directly to a quantitative analysis to assist in our annual evaluation. When assessing goodwill for impairment, our decision to perform a qualitative impairment assessment for an individual reporting unit in a given year is influenced by a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the size of the reporting unit's goodwill, the significance of the excess of the reporting unit's estimated fair value over carrying value at the last quantitative assessment date, the amount of time in between quantitative fair value assessments from the date of acquisition to establish an updated baseline quantitative analysis, and other performance and market indicators. During a qualitative assessment, if we determine that it is not more likely than not that the implied fair value of the goodwill is less than its carrying amount, no further testing is necessary. If, however, we determine that it is more likely than not that the implied fair value of the goodwill is less than its carrying amount, we then perform a quantitative assessment and compare the estimated fair value of the reporting unit to the carrying value. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, the goodwill impairment is measured using the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the reporting unit; however, any loss recognized cannot exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
In determining the estimated fair values of reporting units in a quantitative goodwill impairment test, we generally use a blend of the following recognized valuation methods: the income approach (discounted cash flows model) and the market valuation approach, which we believe compensates for the inherent risks of using either model on a stand-alone basis. The discounted cash flows model indicates the fair value of the reporting units based on the present value of the cash flows that we expect the reporting units to generate in the future. Our significant estimates in the discounted cash flows model include: weighted average cost of capital; long-term rate of growth and profitability of the reporting unit; income tax rates and working capital effects. The market valuation approach indicates the fair value of the business based on a comparison to comparable publicly traded firms in similar lines of business and other precedent transactions. Our significant estimates in the market approach model include identifying similar companies with comparable business factors such as size, growth, profitability, risk and return on investment and assessing comparable revenue and/or income multiples in estimating the fair value of the reporting units. Valuations are performed by management or third party valuation specialists under management's supervision, where appropriate. We believe that the estimated fair values assigned to our reporting units in impairment tests are based on reasonable assumptions that marketplace participants would use. However, such assumptions are inherently uncertain and actual results could differ from those estimates. The use of different assumptions, estimates or judgments could trigger the need for an impairment charge, or materially increase or decrease the amount of any such impairment charge.
The Company reorganized its reporting units pursuant to an internal restructuring during the second quarter of 2020. Following the internal restructuring changes, our legacy Dining and Flights/Cruises/Car reporting units were reorganized into four new distinct reporting units: (1) TheFork, (2) Tripadvisor Restaurants, (3) Flights & Car, and (4) Cruises, for the purposes of goodwill impairment testing. As a result, we first performed a qualitative assessment on our historical Dining and Flights/Cruise/Car reporting units prior to implementing the revised reporting unit structure and determined that it was more likely than not that the fair value of these reporting units was greater than the carrying value, which was consistent with our conclusion in the fourth quarter of 2019. We then performed a goodwill impairment test for each of the new reporting units using a quantitative assessment. We concluded the estimated fair values were in excess of the carrying values for each of the four new reporting units. We also performed sensitivity analyses, such as calculating estimated fair values using different rates for the weighted-average cost of capital and long-term rates of growth in the income approach and different revenue/income multiples in our market approach and the estimated fair values remained in excess of the carrying values. Therefore, no indications of impairment were identified as a result of these changes to our reporting units as of June 30, 2020. In addition, as a result of internal restructuring and the sale of its SmarterTravel business during the second quarter of 2020, our SmarterTravel reporting unit no longer exists. The sale of this business was not a significant disposition. This change in reporting units had no impact on the composition of our operating segments, or the information that the chief operating decision maker, or CODM, reviews to evaluate the financial performance of the Company’s operating segments.
During the third quarter of 2020, the Company recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $3 million, which represented all of the goodwill allocated to our Tripadvisor China reporting unit. This impairment was driven by
strategic operating decisions made by the Company in the third quarter of 2020. Consequently, Tripadvisor China was no longer considered a reporting unit as of December 31, 2020.
During the Company's annual goodwill impairment test during the fourth quarter of 2020, a qualitative assessment was performed for all our reporting units. We determined that the fair value of all our remaining reporting units were in excess of their carrying values, and, accordingly, no further impairment charges were recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Although our annual impairment testing did not result in any impairment indicators, due to the COVID-19 environment and our inability to predict the expected duration and ultimate severity of the impact of COVID-19, we believe our reporting units are at an elevated risk of impairment in future periods. We will continue to monitor our financial performance, stock price and other events and circumstances that may negatively impact the estimated fair values of our reporting units to determine if future impairment assessments may be necessary. A prolonged duration, and/or decline in the outlook for future revenue and cash flows or other factors, related to COVID-19 or other events, could result in a determination that a non-cash impairment adjustment is required, which could be material.
We periodically review the carrying amount of our definite-lived intangible assets and other long-term assets, including property and equipment and website and internal use software, to determine whether current events or circumstances indicate that such carrying amounts may not be recoverable. Factors that would necessitate an impairment assessment include a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used, a significant adverse change in legal factors or the business climate that could affect the value of the asset, or a significant decline in the observable market value of an asset, among others. If such facts indicate a potential impairment, we assess the recoverability of the asset group by determining if the carrying value of the asset group exceeds the sum of the projected undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the assets over the remaining economic life of the primary asset of the group. If the recoverability test indicates that the carrying value of the asset group is not recoverable, we will estimate the fair value of the asset group using appropriate valuation methodologies which would typically include an estimate of discounted cash flows, using an appropriate discount rate. Any impairment would be measured by the amount that the carrying values, of such asset groups, exceed their fair value and would be included in operating income on the consolidated statement of operations. Considerable management judgment is necessary to estimate the fair value of asset groups. Accordingly, actual results could vary significantly from such estimates. We have not identified any circumstances that would warrant an impairment charge for any recorded definite-lived intangibles or other long term assets on our consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
In addition, we hold investments in non-marketable equity investments of privately-held companies, which do not have a readily determinable fair value. Our policy is to measure these investments at cost less impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment of the same issuer such observable price changes may include instances where the investee issues equity securities to new investors, thus creating a new indicator of fair value, as an example. On a quarterly basis, we perform a qualitative assessment considering impairment indicators to evaluate whether these investments are impaired and also monitor for any observable price changes. When indicators of impairment exist, we prepare a quantitative assessment of the fair value of our equity investments, which may include using both the market and income approaches which require judgment and the use of estimates, including discount rates, investee revenues and costs, and available comparable market data of private and public companies, among others. Valuations of such privately-held companies are inherently complex and uncertain due to the lack of liquid market for the company’s securities. In addition, such investments are inherently risky in that such companies are typically at an early stage of development, may have no or limited revenues, may not be or may never become profitable, may not be able to secure additional funding or their technologies, services or products may not be successfully developed or introduced into the market.
Income Taxes
We record income taxes under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect our estimation of the future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for book and tax purposes. We determine deferred income taxes based on the differences in accounting methods and timing between financial statement and income tax reporting. Accordingly, we determine the deferred
tax asset or liability for each temporary difference based on the enacted income tax rates expected to be in effect when we realize the underlying items of income and expense. We consider all relevant factors when assessing the likelihood of future realization of our deferred tax assets, including our recent earnings experience by jurisdiction, expectations of future taxable income and the carryforward periods available to us for tax reporting purposes, as well as assessing available tax planning strategies. We may establish a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount we believe is more likely than not to be realized. We classify deferred tax assets and liabilities as noncurrent on our consolidated balance sheet. Due to inherent complexities arising from the nature of our businesses, future changes in income tax law, tax sharing agreements or variances between our actual and anticipated operating results, we make certain judgments and estimates. Therefore, actual income taxes could materially vary from these estimates.
We record liabilities to address uncertain tax positions we have taken in previously filed tax returns or that we expect to take in a future tax return. The determination for required liabilities is based upon an analysis of each individual tax position, taking into consideration whether it is more likely than not that our tax position, based on technical merits, will be sustained upon examination. For those positions for which we conclude it is more likely than not it will be sustained, we recognize the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the taxing authority. The difference between the amount recognized and the total tax position is recorded as a liability. The ultimate resolution of these tax positions may be greater or less than the liabilities recorded.
Refer to “Note 12: Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on income taxes.