Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this prospectus. The management’s discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Any statements that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. When used, the words “believe,” “plan,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “target,” “estimate,” “expect” and the like, and/or future tense or conditional constructions (“will,” “may,” “could,” “should,” etc.), or similar expressions, identify certain of these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements in this quarterly report. The Company’s actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors. The Company does not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this quarterly report.
Critical Accounting Policy & Estimates
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section discusses our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, accrued expenses, financing operations, and contingencies and litigation. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. The most significant accounting estimates inherent in the preparation of our financial statements include estimates as to the appropriate carrying value of certain assets and liabilities which are not readily apparent from other sources. These accounting policies are described at relevant sections in this discussion and analysis and in the condensed consolidated financial statements included in this quarterly report.
OVERVIEW
Troika Media Group, Inc. was incorporated in Nevada in 2003. In October 2016, our secured lenders took control of the Company’s then operating subsidiaries which ceased operations and are included in discontinued operations. The Company is a transatlantic agency focusing on branding, digital marketing and performance media services, using actionable intelligence across all broadcast digital media and live experiences. On June 12, 2017, we commenced our current operations upon the merger with Troika Design Group, Inc., a strategic brand consultancy with deep expertise in entertainment media, sports, consumer goods and service brands. On June 29, 2018, we acquired all of the equity interests of Mission Culture LLC and Mission Media Holdings Limited, a company headquartered in London, with North American operations since 2009, as a brand experience and communications agency that specializes in consumer immersion through a cultural lens, via live experiences, brand partnerships, public relations and social and influencer engagement. On May 21, 2021, we acquired substantially all of the assets of Redeeem LLC, a peer-to-peer bitcoin and cryptocurrencies exchange founded in 2018.
The Impact of the Global COVID-19 Virus
In March 2020, the World Health Organization categorized the coronavirus (COVID-19) as a pandemic, and it continues to spread throughout the United States and the rest of the world with different geographical locations impacted more than others. The outbreak of COVID-19 and the resulting public and private sector measures to reduce its transmission, such as the imposition of social distancing and orders to work-from-home, stay-at-home and shelter-in-place, have adversely impacted our business and those of our clients. Businesses have adjusted, reduced, or suspended operating activities, which has negatively impacted the clients we service. We continue to believe our focus on our strategic strengths, including talent, our differentiated market strategy and the relevance of our services, including the longevity of our relationships, will continue to assist our Company as we navigate a rapidly changing marketplace. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have negatively impacted our results of operations, cash flows and financial position; however, the continued extent of the impact will vary depending on the duration and severity of the economic and operational impacts of COVID-19.
We took steps to protect the safety of our employees, with a large majority of our worldwide workforce working from home, while developing creative ideas to protect the health and well-being of our communities and setting up our people to help them do their best work for our clients while working remotely. With respect to managing costs, we have implemented multiple initiatives to align our expenses with changes in revenue. The steps taken across our agencies and corporate group include deferred merit increases, freezes on hiring and temporary labor, major cuts in non-essential spending, staff reductions, furloughs in markets where that option is available and salary reductions, including voluntary salary deferment for our senior corporate management team. In addition, we remain committed to and have intensified our efforts around cash flow discipline, including the identification of significant capital expenditures that can be deferred, and working capital management. We began to see the effects of COVID-19 on client spending, notably in the UK and US markets with our Mission subsidiaries throughout the second quarter of calendar 2020 with much of the work force of the UK subsidiary on furlough, and with our Troika Design subsidiary furloughed as March 2020 progressed. Due to mandatory stay at home orders and social distancing, our experiential business has been particularly impacted by COVID-19. Promotional and experiential events with the Company’s assistance are particularly susceptible to external factors were delayed by many of the Company’s Mission clients due to the effects of COVID-19. The Company had temporarily furloughed employees to reflect current reduced demands associated with those client sets. However, as of the first and second quarters of calendar 2021, we started to see business dramatically improve and expect greater improvement in our results in our next fiscal quarters. As cities have commenced openings with the improvement of vaccines distribution and infection rates declining, our client activities have doubled and there is a real optimism that the economic conditions are improving. Sports, Entertainment, Pharma clients are contracting our services across all entities at rates similar to 2019.
In the current environment, a major priority for us is preserving liquidity. Our primary liquidity sources are operating cash flow, cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments. Although we expect to experience a decrease in our cash flow from operations as a result of the impact of COVID-19, we have obtained relief under the CARES Act in the form of a Small Business Administration backed loans. In aggregate we received $1.7 million in SBA stimulus “Payroll Protection Program” funding in April 2020 of which the majority of these funds were used for payroll. As per the US Government rules, the funds used for payroll, healthcare benefits, and other applicable operating expenses can be forgiven and the Company reported them as such in December 2020 considering the Company believes we have substantially met these conditions. On August 14, 2020, the Company received an additional $500,000 in loans with 30 year terms under the SBA’s “Economic Injury Disaster Loan” program which the Company intends to use to address any cash shortfalls that may result from the current pandemic. In February 2021, the Company obtained additional relief under the CARES Act in the form of a Small Business Administration backed loans and received an additional $1.7 million in SBA stimulus “Payroll Protection Program” funds which will be used for payroll, healthcare benefits, and other applicable operating expenses. The Company believes we will substantially meet the conditions for forgiveness of this funding as well.
In the United Kingdom, as of April 1, 2020, Mission furloughed twenty-seven employees, saving £78,000 in April payroll, being made up of £55,000 of furlough monies from the government and £16,000 in associated payroll savings and applied for a 3-month rent holiday. In May 1, 2020, Mission put on furlough an additional 5 employees bringing the total to 32, alongside a 10% pay cut for all employees not furloughed, saving £111,000 in May payroll, being made up of £62,000 of furlough monies from the government, £33,000 of associated payroll savings and £16,000 in savings related to the pay cut. On April 1, 2020, Troika Design Group actioned a 15% salary reduction across the majority of the Los Angeles staff and furloughed one office manager for a total savings of $112,000 per month. Finally, certain members of the Company’s executive team deferred compensation temporarily. In August 2020, the Company received £50,000 in loans related to the COVID pandemic with an interest rate of 2.5% to be paid over five years beginning one year after receipt. The Company used these proceeds to address any cash shortfalls that resulted from the pandemic.
The extent to which the COVID-19 outbreak continues to impact the Company’s results will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning the severity of the virus and the actions to contain its impact. The Company’s revenue has declined by $16.2 million from $40.8 million to $24.6 million in the fiscal years ending June 30, 2019 and 2020, respectively. Based on information provided by business unit leaders, the Company believes that approximately $13.0 million or 80.2% of the $16.2 million decrease in revenue is directly attributable to the COVID pandemic. Our revenues further declined by $8.4 million from $24.6 million to $16.2 million due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the years ended June 30, 2020 and 2021, respectively. The Company continues to quantify with its business leaders how much of this decline was related to the outbreak, however the Company believes that the decrease in revenue is substantially due to the pandemic.
See, Risk Factors Related to the COVID-19 Virus and Pandemic Response in General
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020.
Our revenues for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 were $16,192,000 and $24,613,000, respectively, a decrease of approximately $8,421,000 or 34.2%. This decrease is predominately due to the underperformance of both the UK and US subsidiaries of Mission-Media Holdings Limited as a result of the COVID pandemic and a prohibition on the staging of live-events which is their primary source of income. Of the $8,421,000 decrease in revenue, $7,705,000 or 91.5%, is attributable to Mission-Media Holdings Limited of which $2,737,000 and $4,968,000 relate to the UK and US subsidiary, respectively.
The costs of revenue exclusive of operating expenses for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 were $7,504,000 and $11,636,000 respectively, a decrease of $4,132,000, or 35.5%. Directly correlated to the aforementioned reduction in revenue, the reduction in costs was driven primarily by the decrease in event production costs during the period due to the COVID pandemic and the prohibition of staging live-events. The gross profit margin for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 increased to 53.7% from 52.7% due to a higher proportion of consulting fees being generated in the most recent period which have a higher gross profit margin in relation fees related from live events.
The operating costs for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 were $27,671,000 and $33,260,000 respectively, a decrease of $5,589,000, or 16.8%. The driver of these cost savings was a $1,834,000 reduction on amortization costs related to intangibles, a $1,985,000 reduction in goodwill impairment expense, and a $1,867,000 reduction impairment expense relating to intangibles. This was offset by a $304,000 increase in professional fees primarily relating to legal fees associated with the Stephenson arbitration.
In the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, the Company recognized $3,140,000 of income from government grant. The funding was related to SBA-backed Paycheck Protection Program grants and received due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
In the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, the Company identified $6,319,000 of liabilities from discontinued operations in relation to amounts owed by SignalPoint Corp. a previously wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company.
As a result of the foregoing, the Company incurred a Net Loss of $15,997,000 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared with $14,447,000 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020.
LIQUIDITY & CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, compared with the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020:
As of June 30, 2021, the Company has a working capital deficit of $(4,004,000) compared with a deficit of $(14,619,000) at June 30, 2020. The decrease in working capital deficit was the result of an increase of $486,000 in accounts receivable, an increase of $527,000 in prepaid expenses, a decrease of $1,385,000 in convertible note payables, and a $10,360,000 increase in cash primarily driven by the proceeds from the Company’s initial public offering in April 2021. These decreases in working capital deficit were offset by an increase of $942,000 in contract liabilities and $1,089,000 in short term operating lease liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities increased by $4,505,000 from $(2,333,000) to $(6,838,000) for the years ended June 30, 2020 and 2021 respectively. This increase was the result of $3,140,000 in gains from stimulus funding, a decrease of $1,985,000 in impairment of goodwill, a decrease of $1,867,000 in impairment of intangibles, a $1,834,000 decrease in the amortization of intangibles, and a $2,673,000 decrease in accounts receivable. This was offset by $2,565,000 increase in contract liabilities relating to revenue, a $1,471,000 increase in accounts payable, a $463,000 increase in operating lease liabilities, a $477,000 increase in long-term liabilities, and a decrease of $6,319,000 in gain from the derecognition of liabilities from discontinued operations.
Net cash used in investing activities increased by $1,436,000 from $(98,000) to $(1,534,000) for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2020 and 2021 respectively as a result of $1,376,000 in cash being paid for the Redeeem acquisition and an increase of $60,000 in purchases of fixed assets
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $16,812,000 from $2,345,000 to $19,157,000 for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2020 and 2021, respectively. This increase was primarily the result of $20,702,000 in proceeds from the initial public offering net of offering costs. This was offset by a decrease of $976,000 in proceeds from the sale of Series D preferred shares, a decrease of $900,000 in proceeds relating to convertible note payables, and a $2,448,000 increase in payments settling related party note payables.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, the Company sold: 97,500 shares of Series D Preferred Stock at $10.00 per share for gross proceeds of $976,000.
As a result of the forgoing, the Company had an increase in cash of $10,360,000 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 Management’s plans to achieve operating profitability are as follows:
•
Enhancing creative solutions and recurring revenue delivered by the Company through data and technology acquisitions.
•
Increase Troika’s footprint in a major media markets, such as New York, Los Angeles and London through Mission’s operations.
•
Further the Company’s integration and business development strategy through potential acquisitions and increase revenues from existing customers.
•
Save costs in overhead through reduced headcount due to synergies achieved with Mission and with the potential acquisition targets.
•
Expand consulting services with existing Mission and Troika clients.
•
Increase Mission business development from Troika’s existing clientele.
Based on current management plans, the Company believes that the current cash on hand, anticipated cash from operations and proceeds from this equity financing is sufficient to conduct planned operations for one year from the issuance of the consolidated financial statements.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Daniel Jankowski Loan to the Company:
On December 19, 2018, Daniel Jankowski (“Lender”) made a loan to the Company in the amount of $1,300,000 (“Loan”). The Loan had a maturity date of June 15, 2019 (provided the maturity date may be extended an additional six (6) month period on a rolling basis) and carried an interest rate of 5% per annum. As additional consideration for the Loan, the Lender, or his designee, was granted five-year warrants to purchase 66,667 shares of the common stock of the Company at $0.75 per share. As of July 2019, the Company and the Lender agreed to convert the Loan into equity of the Company which resulted in the Lender, or his designees, entitled to receive 1,733,333 shares of the common stock of the Company and the Company paid €100,000 ($133,000) of the accrued interest in cash to the Lender. Subsequent to making the Loan, Mr. Jankowski was appointed to the Board of the Company and in July 2020 the 1,733,333 shares were issued to Mr. Jankowski and his assignees.
Daniel Jankowski and Thomas Ochocki Loan to Mission Media Limited:
On January 27, 2019, Daniel Jankowski and Thomas Ochocki (collectively the “Lenders”) entered into a facility agreement with Mission-Media Limited (“MML”) in order to provide certain funds allowing MML to exit administration in the United Kingdom. Mr. Ochocki, as primary lender, provided MML up to 1,594,211 GBP ($2,227,000) and Mr. Jankowski provided up to 992,895 GBP ($1,373,000). Mr. Ochocki was a member of the Board of the Company and subsequent to the loan, Mr. Jankowski was appointed to the Board. Both Lenders were appointed to the Board of Mission Media Holdings Limited. The loan had a repayment date of January 2022 and an interest rate of 0%. In April 2021, the balance of $2,227,000 was paid in full. Imputed interest of $3,000 and $40,000 were recorded for this facility agreement in the fiscal years ending June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Note Payables to Daniel Pappalardo and the Estate of Sally Pappalardo
As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, the Company owed the founder and CEO of Troika Design Group, Inc. Dan Pappalardo approximately $200,000 and $217,000, respectively. In April 2021, the Company paid $17,000 to Dan Pappalardo representing the miscellaneous expense reimbursements. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, the Company also owed the estate of his mother Sally Pappalardo $0 and $235,000, respectively. The loans were due and payable on demand and accrue interest at 10.0% per annum. In April 2021, the Company paid $300,000 to the estate of Sally Pappalardo representing the outstanding principal of $235,000 and accrued interest of $65,000. The holder provided the Company a signed release acknowledging all obligations under the note had been paid in full.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have not entered any off-balance sheet arrangements and do not have any holdings in variable interest entities.
Contractual Obligations
We have operating lease commitments and the following table summarizes these commitments at June 30, 2021:
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations discuss our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts and property and equipment valuation. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Management believes the following critical accounting policies, among others, affect its more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition: The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”), Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Revenues are recognized when control is transferred to customers in amounts that reflect the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods. Revenue recognition is evaluated through the following five steps: (i) identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer; (ii) identification of the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determination of the transaction price; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognition of revenue when or as a performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company recognizes primarily four revenue streams and they are retainer fees, project fees, reimbursement income, and fee income.
Retainer fees are non-refundable fixed amounts being received from a client often on a recurring basis and the performance obligation is the staff being available to provide consultation services. Consulting engagements do not incur a significant amount of direct costs however any costs are recognized as incurred. Consulting fees are recognized evenly throughout the term of the agreement.
Project fees are associated with the delivery of services and/or goods to a client and the revenue includes both the anticipated costs to deliver the product as well as the Company’s margin. As per ASC 606-10-25-31, the Company recognizes project fees over time by measuring the progress toward complete satisfaction of a performance obligation by measuring its performance in transferring control of the services contractually delivered to a client by applying the input method. Revenue is recognized based on the extent of inputs expended toward satisfying a performance obligation and it was determined that the best judge of inputs is the costs consumed by a project in relation to its total anticipated costs. As part of the close process the Company compiles a preliminary percentage of completion (POC) for each project which is the ratio of incurred costs to date in relation to the anticipated costs from the production team’s approved budgets. The POC ratio is then applied to the contracted revenue and the pro-rated revenue is then recognized accordingly.
Reimbursement income represents compensation relating to the out-of-pocket costs associated with a staging of a live event. As per 606-10-25-31, the Company recognizes reimbursement income over time by measuring the progress toward complete satisfaction of a performance obligation by measuring its performance in transferring control of the services contractually delivered to a client by applying the input method. The revenue is recognized based on the extent of inputs expended toward satisfying a performance obligation and it was determined that the best judge of input is the costs incurred to date in relation to the anticipated costs. As a result, unless an overage or saving is identified, the reimbursement income equates to the reimbursement costs incurred. Given that the Company contracts directly with the majority of the vendors and is liable for any overages, the Company is deemed a principal in this revenue transaction as they have control over the asset and transfer the asset themselves. As a result, this transaction is recorded gross rather than net.
Fee income represents the Company’s margin on the staging of a live event, is negotiated with the client prior and fixed. Based on ASC 606, the Company’s progress in satisfying the performance obligation in a contract is difficult to determine so as a result the fee income is only recognized at the conclusion of a project. Only upon confirmation the Company has performed all its contractual obligations as per the contract does the Company record fee income.
Goodwill: Goodwill is the excess of the purchase price paid over the fair value of the net assets of the acquired business. Goodwill is tested annually at June 30 for impairment. The annual qualitative or quantitative assessments involve determining an estimate of the fair value of reporting units in order to evaluate whether an impairment of the current carrying amount of goodwill exists. A qualitative assessment evaluates whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount before applying the two-step quantitative goodwill impairment test. The first step of a quantitative goodwill impairment test compares the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount including goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss may be recognized. The amount of impairment loss is determined by comparing the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill with the carrying amount. If the carrying amount exceeds the implied fair value then an impairment loss is recognized equal to that excess. A goodwill impairment charge of $1,985,000 was recorded as a result of the Company’s annual impairment assessment on June 30, 2020. The Company has adopted the provisions of ASU 2017-04-Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment. ASU 2017-04 requires goodwill impairments to be measured on the basis of the fair value of a reporting unit relative to the reporting unit’s carrying amount rather than on the basis of the implied amount of goodwill relative to the goodwill balance of the reporting unit. Thus, ASU 2017-04 permits an entity to record a goodwill impairment that is entirely or partly due to a decline in the fair value of other assets that, under existing GAAP, would not be impaired or have a reduced carrying amount. Furthermore, the ASU removes “the requirements for any reporting unit with a zero or negative carrying amount to perform a qualitative assessment and, if it fails that qualitative test, to perform Step 2 of the goodwill impairment test.” Instead, all reporting units, even those with a zero or negative carrying amount will apply the same impairment test. Accordingly, the goodwill of reporting unit or entity with zero or negative carrying values will not be impaired, even when conditions underlying the reporting unit/entity may indicate that goodwill is impaired.
We test our goodwill for impairment annually, or, under certain circumstances, more frequently, such as when events or circumstances indicate there may be impairment. We are required to write down the value of goodwill only when our testing determines the recorded amount of goodwill exceeds the fair value. Our annual measurement date for testing goodwill impairment is June 30.
None of the goodwill is deductible for income tax purposes
Intangible: Intangible assets with finite useful lives consist of tradenames, non-compete agreements, acquired workforce and customer relationships and are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives, which range from three to ten years. The estimated useful lives associated with finite-lived intangible assets are consistent with the estimated lives of the associated products and may be modified when circumstances warrant. Such assets are reviewed for impairment when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of an asset and its eventual disposition are less than its carrying amount. The amount of any impairment is measured as the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the impaired asset. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, the Company recorded $0 in impairment expense related to intangibles.
Contract Assets: The Company does not have any contract assets such as work-in-process. All trade receivables on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet are from contracts with customers.
Contract Costs: Costs incurred to obtain a contract are capitalized unless short term in nature. As a practical expedient, costs to obtain a contract that are short term in nature are expensed as incurred. The Company does not have any contract costs capitalized as of June 30, 2021 and 2020.
Contract Liabilities - Deferred Revenue: The Company’s contract liabilities consist of advance customer payments and deferred revenue. Deferred revenue results from transactions in which the Company has been paid for products by customers, but for which all revenue recognition criteria have not yet been met. Once all revenue recognition criteria have been met, the deferred revenues are recognized.
Advertising: The Company generally expenses marketing and advertising costs as incurred. During the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, the Company incurred $0 and $12,000, respectively, on marketing, trade shows and advertising.
The Company received rebates on advertising from co-operative advertising agreements with several vendors and suppliers. These rebates have been recorded as a reduction to the related advertising and marketing expense.
Beneficial Conversion Feature: The Company accounts for convertible notes payable in accordance with the guidelines established by the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options, Emerging Issues Task Force (“EITF”) 98-5, Accounting for Convertible Securities with Beneficial Conversion Features or Contingently Adjustable Conversion Ratios, and EITF 00-27, Application of Issue No 98-5 To Certain Convertible Instruments. The Beneficial Conversion Feature (“BCF”) of a convertible note is normally characterized as the convertible portion or feature of certain notes payable that provide a rate of conversion that is below market value or in-the-money when issued. The Company records a BCF related to the issuance of a convertible note when issued and also records the estimated fair value of any warrants issued with those convertible notes. Beneficial conversion features that are contingent upon the occurrence of a future event are recorded when the contingency is resolved.
The BCF of a convertible note is measured by allocating a portion of the note’s proceeds to the warrants, if applicable, and as a reduction of the carrying amount of the convertible note equal to the intrinsic value of the conversion feature, both of which are credited to additional paid-in-capital. The value of the proceeds received from a convertible note is then allocated between the conversion features and warrants on an allocated fair value basis. The allocated fair value is recorded in the financial statements as a debt discount (premium) from the face amount of the note and such discount is amortized over the expected term of the convertible note (or to the conversion date of the note, if sooner) and is charged to interest expense using interest method.
Stock-Based Compensation: The Company recognizes stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC Topic 718 “Stock Compensation”, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to employees and directors including employee stock options and employee stock purchases related to an Employee Stock Purchase Plan based on the estimated fair values.
For non-employee stock-based compensation, the Company has adopted ASC 2018-07, Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting which expands on the scope of ASC 718 to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring services from non-employees and requires stock-based compensation related to non-employees to be accounted for based on the fair value of the related stock or the fair value of the services at the grant date, whichever is more readily determinable in accordance with ASC Topic 718.
Foreign Currency Translation: The consolidated financial statements of the Company are presented in U.S. dollars. The functional currency for the Company is U.S. dollars for all entities other than Mission Media Limited whose operations are based in the United Kingdom and their functional currency is British Pound Sterling (GBP). Transactions in currencies other than the functional currencies are recorded using the appropriate exchange rate at the time of the transaction. All assets and liabilities are translated into U.S. Dollars at balance sheet date, stockholders’ equity is translated at historical rates and revenue and expense accounts are translated at the average exchange rate for the year or the reporting period. The translation adjustments are reported as a separate component of stockholders’ equity, captioned as accumulated other comprehensive (loss) income. Transaction gains and losses arising from exchange rate fluctuations on transactions denominated in a currency other than the functional currency are included in the statements of operations.
The relevant translation rates are as follows: for the year ended June 30, 2021 closing rate at 1.382800 US$: GBP, yearly average rate at 1.346692 US$: GBP, for the year ended June 30, 2020 closing rate at 1.238900 US$: GBP, yearly average rate at 1.262367 US$: GBP.
Income Taxes: The Company accounts for its income taxes in accordance with Income Taxes Topic of the FASB ASC 740, which requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
Income tax expense is based on reported earnings before income taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the impact of temporary differences between assets and liabilities recognized for consolidated financial reporting purposes and such amounts recognized for tax purposes, and are measured by applying enacted tax rates in effect in years in which the differences are expected to reverse.
The Company also follows the guidance related to accounting for income tax uncertainties. In accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, the Company recognizes the financial statement benefit of a tax position only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more likely than not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more likely than not threshold, the amount recognized in the financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority.