Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and certain other factors that may affect our future results. Our MD&A should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
This MD&A includes financial measures compiled in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") and certain non-GAAP measures. Please refer to the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section herein for information on the non-GAAP measures included in the MD&A, reconciliations to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, and the reasons why management believes each measure is useful to management and investors.
Company Overview
Trinity Industries, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries own businesses that are leading providers of railcar products and services in North America. Our rail-related businesses market their railcar products and services under the trade name TrinityRail®. The TrinityRail platform provides railcar leasing and management services, railcar manufacturing, and railcar maintenance and modification services. We also own businesses engaged in the manufacturing of products used on the nation's roadways and in traffic control.
We report our operating results in three principal business segments: (1) the Railcar Leasing and Management Services Group (the "Leasing Group"), which owns and operates a fleet of railcars and provides third-party fleet leasing, management, and administrative services; (2) the Rail Products Group, which manufactures and sells railcars and related parts and components, and provides railcar maintenance and modification services; and (3) All Other, which includes our highway products business and legal, environmental, and maintenance costs associated with non-operating facilities. In connection with the implementation of our rail-focused strategy, during 2020, we realigned certain activities previously reported in the All Other segment to now be presented within the Rail Products Group. The prior period results have been recast to reflect these changes and present results on a comparable basis.
Executive Summary
Recent Market Developments
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted global and North American economic conditions. The social and economic effects of the pandemic have been widespread and the situation continues to evolve. Federal, state and local governments continue to modify protective actions in response to evolving trends related to the spread of the disease. Authorities continue to encourage or require social distancing and wearing of masks. Although most states have reopened schools and many businesses, certain non-essential businesses remain closed, and state and local leaders continue to encourage many members of the public to work from home when possible.
During the third quarter, our senior leaders returned to the office full time, and the remainder of the Dallas-based employees began working at our headquarters facility on a rotating basis, subject to heightened safety protocols. Our manufacturing businesses within the United States continue to operate within critical infrastructure sectors as established by the Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency of the United States Department of Homeland Security, and we continue to believe that the majority of our North American customers and suppliers also operate businesses that are deemed essential. As a result, our rail manufacturing, rail maintenance, and highway products operations in the United States have continued to operate, subject to significantly enhanced voluntary and government-mandated safety protocols designed to protect the health of our operations workforce. Our manufacturing facilities in Mexico have also continued to operate, subject to enhanced health and safety protocols. These facilities operate within critical infrastructure sectors as currently established by the Mexico Federal Ministry of Health and Federal Ministry of Communications and Transportation. We have experienced a limited number of disruptions to our supply chain.
We continue to monitor the potential operational and financial impacts of the pandemic and other economic factors, and have taken appropriate measures to preserve cash and ensure sufficient liquidity. In addition to cost savings initiatives already underway, we have eliminated many non-essential expenditures and streamlined our workforce in response to current operating conditions. As described in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section below, as of December 31, 2020, we have committed liquidity of approximately $727 million. We believe we have sufficient liquidity and capital resources to fund our operating requirements as well as the other capital allocation and investment activities planned for 2021. We are currently, and believe we will continue to be, in compliance with any applicable debt covenants.
As previously reported, we concluded in the second quarter that the decline in leasing income for small cube covered hopper railcars would continue and recorded an impairment charge of $369.4 million, which is included in our results for the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 11 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information regarding additional impairment charges. To date, the Leasing Group has experienced an insignificant increase in lease payment delinquencies related to car types other than small cube covered hoppers and has granted limited rent payment extensions to a relatively small number of customers.
Although we have not experienced significant interruptions to our daily operations or a material impact to our operating costs, the economic pressures created by the pandemic have negatively impacted our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect that our results of operations will remain under pressure in the near term.
We will continue to monitor business conditions, including the impact of the pandemic, and will make appropriate adjustments to our operations and related financial projections and estimates as necessary. We can provide no assurance that we will not have additional impairment charges in future periods as a result of changes in market conditions, our operating results, changes in the assumptions utilized in our financial projections, or the financial performance of other investments in emerging technologies.
Please refer to the "Forward-Looking Statements" section above and Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the potential impacts of COVID-19 on our business.
Other Cyclical and Seasonal Trends Impacting Our Business
The industries in which we operate are cyclical in nature. Weaknesses in certain sectors of the North American and global economy may make it more difficult to sell or lease certain types of railcars. Additionally, adverse changes in commodity prices, including continued depressed prices in the crude oil market, or lower demand for certain commodities, could result in a decline in customer demand for various types of railcars. As noted previously, declines in crude oil prices and production have left the frac sand industry financially vulnerable. We continuously assess demand for our products and services and take steps to rationalize and diversify our leased railcar portfolio and align our manufacturing capacity appropriately. We diligently evaluate the creditworthiness of our customers and monitor performance of relevant market sectors, including the crude oil and frac sand markets; however, additional weaknesses in any of these market sectors could affect the financial viability of our underlying Leasing Group customers, which could continue to negatively impact our recurring leasing revenues and operating profits.
Additionally, current economic conditions within the industries in which our customers operate have resulted in reduced demand for railcars. These factors, combined with declining railcar loading volumes and a growing supply of underutilized railcar assets in North America, are pressuring railcar lease rates and utilization, as well as orders for new railcar equipment. While we currently expect this trend to continue in the near term, we believe that our integrated rail platform is designed to respond to cyclical changes in demand and perform throughout the railcar cycle.
Due to their transactional nature, railcar sales from the lease fleet are the primary driver of fluctuations in results in the Leasing Group. Results in our All Other Group are affected by seasonal fluctuations, with the second and third quarters historically being the quarters with the highest revenues.
Asset Impairments and Restructuring Activities
As described above, we recorded an impairment of long-lived assets of $396.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to our small cube covered hopper railcars, the planned divestiture of certain non-strategic maintenance facilities, and our investments in certain emerging technologies. See Note 11 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information, including a description of the key assumptions and other significant management judgments utilized in the impairment analysis.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, and in connection with our continued assessment of future needs to support our go-forward business strategy, we recognized restructuring charges of approximately $11.0 million, consisting of $7.8 million for severance costs, $5.3 million of non-cash charges primarily from the write-down of our corporate headquarters campus and certain other assets, and $0.6 million in contract termination costs, partially offset by a $2.7 million net gain on the disposition of a non-operating facility and certain related assets. We expect to identify additional streamlining and cost savings opportunities in the near term.
Financial and Operational Highlights
•Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1,999.4 million, representing a decrease of 33.5%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Our operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $124.5 million, compared to operating profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $416.3 million, and includes impairment charges of $396.4 million primarily associated with our small cube covered hopper railcars.
•The Leasing Group reported additions to the wholly-owned and partially-owned lease fleet of 3,340 railcars, for a total of 107,045 railcars as of December 31, 2020, an increase of 3.2% compared to December 31, 2019.
•The Leasing Group's lease fleet of 107,045 company-owned railcars was 94.5% utilized as of December 31, 2020, compared to a lease fleet utilization of 96.0% on 103,705 company-owned railcars as of December 31, 2019. Our company-owned lease fleet includes wholly-owned railcars, partially-owned railcars, and railcars under sale-leaseback arrangements.
•For the year ended December 31, 2020, we made a net investment in our lease fleet of approximately $463.5 million, which primarily includes new railcar additions and railcar modifications, net of deferred profit, and secondary market purchases; and is net of total proceeds from the sales of leased railcars owned more than one year at the time of sale.
•The total value of the railcar backlog at December 31, 2020 was $1.0 billion, compared to $1.8 billion at December 31, 2019. The Rail Products Group received orders for 5,980 railcars and delivered 11,530 railcars in 2020, in comparison to orders for 10,220 railcars and deliveries of 21,960 railcars in 2019.
•For the year ended December 31, 2020, our return on equity ("ROE") and Pre-Tax ROE were (10.3)% and 3.4%(1), respectively, in comparison to 5.6% and 9.6%(1), respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
•For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated operating cash flows from continuing operations and Total Free Cash Flow After Investments and Dividends ("Free Cash Flow") of $651.8 million and $112.8 million(1), respectively, in comparison to $396.7 million and $144.8 million(1), respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
(1) Non-GAAP financial measure. See the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section within this Form 10-K for a reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP measure and why management believes this measure is useful to management and investors.
See "Consolidated Results of Operations" and "Segment Discussion" below for additional information regarding our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020. See Part II, Item 7 of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources as of and for the year ended December 31, 2019, including a comparison to the year ended December 31, 2018.
Long-Term Enterprise Key Performance Indicators
Our key performance indicators for long-term performance are operating and free cash flow* growth, Pre-Tax ROE*, dividend growth, and book value per share growth. We believe when evaluated over time, these indicators collectively drive long-term sustainable value creation and measure the effectiveness of our value proposition for stockholders.
* Non-GAAP financial measure. See the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section within this Form 10-K for a reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP measure and why management believes this measure is useful to management and investors.
(1) Dividend yield is calculated as annual dividends paid per share divided by the closing stock price on the last trading day of each respective year.
(2) Book value per share is calculated as total stockholders' equity attributable to Trinity Industries, Inc., divided by the number of shares outstanding.
Capital Structure Updates
Early Redemption of TRL V - In March 2020, Trinity Rail Leasing V, L.P., a limited partnership (“TRL V”) and a limited purpose, indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company owned through TILC, redeemed its 2006 Secured Railcar Equipment Notes due May 2036, of which $104.7 million was outstanding at the redemption date. The fixed interest rate for these notes was at 5.90% per annum. The net book value of the assets securing TRL V at the time of redemption was $303.3 million.
TRL-2017 - In July 2020, Trinity Rail Leasing 2017 LLC (“TRL-2017”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, issued an additional $225.0 million of promissory notes pursuant to a provision in its existing loan agreement. The promissory notes bear interest at LIBOR plus 1.50% and have a stated final maturity date of 2025. Net proceeds received from the transaction were used to repay borrowings under TILC's secured warehouse credit facility and under the Company’s revolving credit facility, and for general corporate purposes.
TRL-2018 - In October 2020, Trinity Rail Leasing 2018 LLC (“TRL-2018”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, issued $155.5 million of Series 2020-1 Class A Secured Railcar Equipment Notes (the “2020-1 Notes”) under an existing indenture. The 2020-1 Notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 1.96% per annum and have a stated final maturity date of 2050. In a separate transaction during October 2020, TRL-2018 redeemed its Series 2018-1 Class A-1 Secured Railcar Equipment Notes, of which $153.1 million was outstanding at the redemption date. The fixed interest rate for these notes was 3.82% per annum.
New Share Repurchase Program - In October 2020, our Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program effective October 23, 2020 through December 31, 2021. The new share repurchase program authorized the Company to repurchase up to $250.0 million of its common stock.
TRL-2020 - In November 2020, Trinity Rail Leasing 2020 LLC (“TRL-2020”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Company, issued $370.8 million of TRL-2020’s Series 2020-2 Secured Railcar Equipment Notes. These notes bear interest at an all-in interest rate of 2.52% and have a stated final maturity date of 2050. Net proceeds received from the transaction were used to repay borrowings under TILC's secured warehouse credit facility, to redeem in full secured notes issued by TRIHC 2018 LLC, and for general corporate purposes.
See "Liquidity and Capital Resources" below for further information regarding these activities.
Litigation Updates
See Note 15 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for an update on the status of our Highway Products litigation.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenues
The tables below present revenues by segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Costs
Operating costs are comprised of cost of revenues; selling, engineering, and administrative costs; gains or losses on property disposals; impairment of long-lived assets; and restructuring activities. Operating costs by segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
Operating Profit (Loss)
Operating profit (loss) by segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was as follows:
Discussion of Consolidated Results
Revenues - Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1,999.4 million, representing a decrease of $1,005.7 million, or 33.5%, over the prior year, primarily related to lower deliveries in the Rail Products Group and fewer railcars sold from our lease fleet.
Cost of revenues - Our cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1,508.4 million, representing a decrease of $857.3 million, or 36.2%, over the prior year, primarily due to lower deliveries in the Rail Products Group and a lower volume of railcars sales in the Leasing Group.
Selling, engineering, and administrative expenses - Selling, engineering, and administrative expenses decreased by 13.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the prior year, primarily due to lower employee-related costs, including headcount reductions and adjustments to incentive-based compensation, and lower litigation-related expenses.
Impairment of long-lived assets - Impairment of long-lived assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $396.4 million, primarily related to our small cube covered hopper railcars, the planned divestiture of certain non-strategic maintenance facilities, and investments in certain emerging technologies. See Note 11 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information. We had no impairment of long-lived assets during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Restructuring activities, net - Our restructuring activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $11.0 million, primarily as a result of employee transition costs, asset write-downs related to our corporate headquarters facility and certain other assets, and contract termination costs, partially offset by a net gain on the disposition of a non-operating facility and certain related assets. Our restructuring activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $14.7 million, primarily as a result of write-downs related to underutilized assets in our manufacturing footprint and employee transition costs.
Operating profit (loss) - Operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $124.5 million, representing a decrease of 129.9%, compared to an operating profit of $416.3 million from the prior year, primarily from the impairment of long-lived assets, lower deliveries in the Rail Products Group, and a lower volume of railcar sales in the Leasing Group, partially offset by lower selling, engineering, and administrative expenses.
For further information regarding the operating results of individual segments, see "Segment Discussion" below.
Interest expense, net - Interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $216.0 million, compared to $214.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by higher debt obligations in the Leasing Group in connection with the Company's efforts to optimize its capital structure, as well as a $4.7 million early redemption premium associated with the redemption of TRL V's debt, partially offset by lower variable interest rates associated with TILC's warehouse loan facility and our revolving credit facility.
Pension plan settlement - Pension plan settlement charges associated with the termination of our pension plan totaled $151.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 10 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Income taxes - Our effective tax rate was a benefit of 54.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020, which differed from the U.S. statutory rate of 21.0% primarily due to the impact of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act"), partially offset by the portion of the non-cash small cube covered hopper railcar impairment charge that is not tax-effected because it is related to the noncontrolling interest. Our effective tax expense rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was 30.6%. This differed from the U.S. statutory rate of 21.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the impacts of state income tax expense, foreign branch taxes, and changes in state tax laws and apportionment.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted. The CARES Act was a stimulus package and part of a series of bills meant to address the economic uncertainties associated with COVID-19. Due to the enactment of the CARES Act, Trinity filed a carryback claim for the 2018 and 2019 tax losses to the 2013-2015 tax years, allowing us to recover taxes that were previously paid. The income taxes associated with the carryback claims were paid at a federal rate of 35.0%, rather than the current rate of 21.0% in effect beginning with the 2018 tax year. The net deferred tax liability was remeasured and a federal income tax receivable was set up to account for the net operating losses permitted to be carried back under the CARES Act, resulting in a tax benefit of $180.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Accordingly, the effective tax benefit rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a benefit of 36.5% due to the CARES Act.
Income tax refunds received, net of payments, differ from the current provision primarily based on when estimated tax payments were due as compared to when the related income was earned and taxable. Our income tax receivable from federal, state, and foreign jurisdictions was $445.8 million and $14.7 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Income tax refunds received, net of payments, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 totaled $62.5 million and $16.7 million, respectively.
Segment Discussion
Railcar Leasing and Management Services Group
(1) Includes revenues associated with sales-type leases of $160.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
(2) Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, we made a prospective change in the presentation of sales of railcars from the lease fleet. See Note 1 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
(3) Operating profit includes: depreciation; maintenance and compliance; rent; and selling, engineering, and administrative expenses. Amortization of deferred profit on railcars sold from the Rail Products Group to the Leasing Group is included in the operating profits of the Leasing Group, resulting in the recognition of depreciation expense based on our original manufacturing cost of the railcars. Interest expense is not a component of operating profit and includes the effect of hedges.
(4) Effective January 1, 2020, we revised the estimated useful lives and salvage values of certain railcar types in our lease fleet. This change in estimate resulted in a decrease in depreciation expense in the year ended December 31, 2020 of approximately $30.8 million. This decrease was partially offset by higher depreciation associated with growth in the lease fleet. See Note 1 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
(5) As a result of the impairment of long-lived assets related to our small cube covered hopper railcars recorded in the second quarter of 2020, our quarterly depreciation expense beginning in the third quarter of 2020 has decreased by approximately $3.5 million, for a total reduction of $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Total revenues for the Railcar Leasing and Management Services Group decreased by 28.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to prior year. Revenues related to sales of leased railcars owned one year or less decreased primarily due to a lower volume of railcars sold from the fleet. Additionally, leasing and management revenues decreased 1.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of lower utilization and lower lease rates on renewals, partially offset by growth in the lease fleet and higher lease rates associated with new railcar additions when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, information related to the sales of leased railcars is as follows:
(1) Includes revenues associated with sales-type leases of $160.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
(2) Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, we made a prospective change in the presentation of sales of railcars from the lease fleet. See Note 1 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Operating profit for the Leasing Group decreased by 13.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to a lower volume of railcar sales, partially offset by growth in the lease fleet and reduced operating expenses resulting from fewer maintenance compliance events scheduled during the current year period. Additionally, operating profit and operating profit margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 benefited from lower depreciation expense associated with the revisions to the estimated useful lives and salvage values of certain railcar types in our lease fleet, as well as the impact of the small cube covered hopper railcar impairment described above. The decrease in depreciation expense was partially offset by higher depreciation associated with growth in the lease fleet.
The Leasing Group generally uses its non-recourse warehouse loan facility or cash to provide initial funding for a portion of the purchase price of the railcars. After initial funding, the Leasing Group may obtain long-term financing for the railcars in the lease fleet through non-recourse asset-backed securities; long-term non-recourse operating leases pursuant to sale-leaseback transactions; long-term recourse debt such as equipment trust certificates; long-term non-recourse promissory notes; or third-party equity.
Information regarding the Leasing Group’s lease fleet is as follows:
(1) Includes 1,840 railcars under sale-leaseback arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
(2) Includes wholly-owned railcars, partially-owned railcars, and railcars under sale-leaseback arrangements.
Rail Products Group
* Not meaningful
Additional information related to our Rail Products Group backlog of railcars on a dollar and unit basis is summarized below:
(1) For the year ended December 31, 2020, the adjustment includes 550 railcars valued at $82 million, primarily from railcars that were removed from the backlog because of a change in the underlying financial condition of certain customers. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the adjustment includes 3,280 leased railcars that were removed from the backlog because of the financial condition of Leasing Group customers, and 625 railcars that resulted from order cancellations negotiated with customers for which the Company received compensation and recorded cancellation fees. Additionally, the adjustment includes 145 railcars for which the original order was satisfied with railcars from the Company's existing lease fleet. These adjustments resulted in a reduction of the backlog of approximately $364 million.
Revenues and cost of revenues for the Rail Products Group decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 by 45.9% and 41.8%, respectively, when compared to the prior year. These decreases primarily resulted from lower deliveries, pricing pressures, and a shift in the mix of railcars sold, as well as a lower volume of railcar modifications in our maintenance services business. The decrease in cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 was partially offset by increased costs from operational inefficiencies associated with lower manufacturing volumes.
Total backlog dollars decreased by 44.6% when compared to the prior year primarily from a reduction in orders received, as well as a 7.1% lower average selling price on railcars included in backlog as a result of pricing pressures. Approximately 61% of our railcar backlog value is expected to be delivered during 2021 with the remainder to be delivered thereafter into 2024. The orders in our backlog from the Leasing Group are fully supported by lease commitments with external customers. The final amount of backlog attributable to the Leasing Group may vary by the time of delivery as customers may choose to change their procurement decision.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, railcar shipments included sales to the Leasing Group of $566.1 million with a deferred profit of $26.5 million, representing 5,020 railcars, compared to $1,179.5 million with a deferred profit of $147.7 million, representing 9,363 railcars, in the comparable period in 2019. In 2020, the Leasing Group purchased 43.5% of our railcar production, compared to 42.6% in 2019.
All Other
* Not meaningful
Revenues and cost of revenues decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the prior year primarily from decreased demand in our highway products business. Operating profit was favorably impacted in the year ended December 31, 2020 by lower employee-related costs and lower costs associated with our non-operating facilities.
Corporate
Operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 9.5% when compared to the prior year primarily from lower employee-related costs, including headcount reductions and adjustments to incentive-based compensation, and lower litigation-related expenses, partially offset by technology investments and consulting costs associated with realigning our corporate structure to support our rail-focused strategy.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We expect to finance future operating requirements with cash, cash equivalents, and short-term marketable securities; cash flows from operations; and short-term debt, long-term debt, and equity. Debt instruments that we have utilized include the TILC warehouse facility, senior notes, convertible subordinated notes, asset-backed securities, non-recourse promissory notes, sale-leaseback transactions, and our revolving credit facility.
As of December 31, 2020, we have committed liquidity of $727.4 million. Our total available liquidity includes: $132.0 million of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents; $364.8 million unused and available under our revolving credit facility; and $230.6 million unused and available under the TILC warehouse facility based on the amount of warehouse-eligible, unpledged equipment. We believe we have access to adequate capital resources to fund operating requirements and are an active participant in the capital markets.
Liquidity Highlights
Early Redemption of TRL V - In March 2020, TRL V redeemed its 2006 Secured Railcar Equipment Notes due May 2036. The total cost of the redemption was $109.9 million, which included the repayment of $104.7 million of outstanding principal amount at the redemption date, the payment of a $4.7 million early redemption premium, and $0.5 million in accrued and unpaid interest.
TRL-2017 - In July 2020, TRL-2017 issued an additional $225.0 million of promissory notes pursuant to a provision in its existing loan agreement. The promissory notes bear interest at LIBOR plus 1.50% and have a stated final maturity date of 2025. Net proceeds received from the transaction were used to repay borrowings under TILC's secured warehouse credit facility and under the Company’s revolving credit facility, and for general corporate purposes.
TRL-2018 - In October 2020, TRL-2018 issued $155.5 million of Series 2020-1 Class A Secured Railcar Equipment Notes under an existing indenture. These notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 1.96% per annum and have a stated final maturity date of 2050. In a separate transaction during October 2020, TRL-2018 redeemed its Series 2018-1 Class A-1 Secured Railcar Equipment Notes, of which $153.1 million was outstanding at the redemption date. The fixed interest rate for these notes was 3.82% per annum.
TRL-2020 - In November 2020, TRL-2020 issued $370.8 million of TRL-2020’s Series 2020-2 Secured Railcar Equipment Notes. These notes bear interest at an all-in interest rate of 2.52% and have a stated final maturity date of 2050. Net proceeds received from the transaction were used to repay borrowings under TILC's secured warehouse credit facility, to redeem in full secured notes issued by TRIHC 2018 LLC, and for general corporate purposes.
Dividend Payments - In December 2020, our Board of Directors declared an 11% increase to our quarterly dividend from $0.19 per share to $0.21 per share. We paid $91.7 million in dividends to our common stockholders during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Completed Share Repurchase Authorization - In March 2019, our Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program effective March 7, 2019 through December 31, 2020. The share repurchase program authorized the Company to repurchase up to $350.0 million of its common stock, not to exceed 13.7 million shares. On April 24, 2020, as a result of then-current market conditions, the Board of Directors amended the repurchase program to remove the share limitation. In the third quarter of 2020, we completed this share repurchase program. Share repurchase activity under this program is as follows:
During the year ended December 31, 2019, in addition to the amounts reported above, we repurchased 2.6 million shares, at a cost of approximately $70.0 million, representing the final settlement of an accelerated share repurchase program, which was funded in November 2018 but completed in March 2019.
Active Share Repurchase Authorization - In October 2020, our Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program effective October 23, 2020 through December 31, 2021. The new share repurchase program authorized the Company to repurchase up to $250.0 million of its common stock. Share repurchase activity under this program is as follows:
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1) Primarily related to the spin-off of Arcosa, completed on November 1, 2018. These amounts have been reclassified as discontinued operations for all periods presented.
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $651.8 million compared to $396.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The changes in our operating assets and liabilities are as follows:
The changes in our operating assets and liabilities resulted in a net use of $190.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a net use of $79.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in the income tax receivable was primarily driven by anticipated tax refunds related to the loss carryback provisions included in recent tax legislation. Additionally, the changes in our operating assets and liabilities were impacted by a customer's election to exercise a purchase option on a sales-type lease, cyclical shifts, and working capital initiatives.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $532.9 million compared to $993.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Significant investing activities are as follows:
•We made a net investment in the lease fleet of $463.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $916.5 million in the prior year period. Our net investment in the lease fleet primarily includes new railcar additions and railcar modifications, net of deferred profit, and secondary market purchases; and is net of total proceeds from the sales of leased railcars.
Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $168.0 million compared to $526.5 million of cash provided by financing activities for the same period in 2019. Significant financing activities are as follows:
•During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had total borrowings of $1,561.4 million and total repayments of $1,442.9 million, for net proceeds of $118.5 million, primarily from debt proceeds to support our investment in the lease fleet, partially offset by the early redemption of TRL V. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we had total borrowings of $2,567.8 million and total repayments of $1,724.1 million, for net proceeds of $843.7 million, primarily related to the proceeds from the issuance of debt in support of our investment in the lease fleet.
•We paid $91.7 million and $82.1 million in dividends to our common stockholders during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
•We repurchased common stock under our authorized share repurchase programs totaling $191.3 million and $224.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Certain shares of stock repurchased during December 2020, totaling $1.8 million, were cash settled in January 2021 in accordance with normal settlement practices. The cash outlay for shares repurchased during year ended December 31, 2019 excludes approximately $70.0 million related to the repurchased shares that were funded in November 2018 under an accelerated share repurchase program but delivered in the first quarter of 2019.
Current Debt Obligations
The revolving credit facility contains several financial covenants that require the maintenance of ratios related to minimum interest coverage for the leasing and manufacturing operations and maximum leverage. In July 2020, we amended our revolving credit facility to increase the maximum leverage ratio to provide additional near-term flexibility through December 31, 2021. A summary of our financial covenants is detailed below:
(1) Defined as the ratio of consolidated total indebtedness to consolidated earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ("EBITDA") for the Borrower and its Restricted Subsidiaries for the period of four consecutive quarters ending with December 31, 2020.
(2) Defined as the ratio of the difference of (A) consolidated EBITDA less (B) consolidated capital expenditures - manufacturing and other to consolidated interest expense to the extent paid in cash, in each case for the Borrower and its Restricted Subsidiaries for the period of four consecutive quarters ending with December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all such financial covenants. Please refer to Note 8 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of our current debt obligations.
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information
Our Senior Notes are fully and unconditionally and jointly and severally guaranteed by certain of Trinity’s 100%-owned subsidiaries: Trinity Industries Leasing Company; Trinity North American Freight Car, Inc.; Trinity Rail Group, LLC; Trinity Tank Car, Inc.; Trinity Highway Products, LLC; and TrinityRail Maintenance Services, Inc. (collectively, the "Guarantor Subsidiaries”).
The Senior Notes indenture agreement includes customary provisions for the release of the guarantees by the Guarantor Subsidiaries upon the occurrence of certain allowed events including the release of one or more of the Combined Guarantor Subsidiaries as guarantor under our revolving credit facility. See Note 8 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The Senior Notes are not guaranteed by any of our remaining 100%-owned subsidiaries or partially-owned subsidiaries (“Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries”).
As of December 31, 2020, assets held by the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries included $76.7 million of restricted cash that was not available for distribution to Trinity Industries, Inc. (“Parent”), $6,238.3 million of equipment securing certain non-recourse debt, and $126.9 million of assets located in foreign locations.
The following tables include the summarized financial information for Parent and Guarantor Subsidiaries (together the obligor group) on a combined basis after elimination of intercompany transactions within the obligor group (in millions). Investments in and equity in the earnings of the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries (the non-obligor group) have been excluded.
(1) There were no net sales from the obligor group to Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries during the year ended December 31, 2020.
(2) Cost of revenues includes $194.0 million of purchases from Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries during the year ended December 31, 2020.
(3) Includes a $151.5 million pension plan settlement charge ($116.6 million, net of tax) and $253.4 million of additional income tax benefit that is attributable to the obligor group.
(4) Receivables, net of allowance includes $86.7 million of receivables from Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries as of December 31, 2020.
(5) Accounts payable includes $24.0 million of payables to Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries as of December 31, 2020.
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures for 2020 were $704.5 million with $602.2 million utilized for net lease fleet additions, which includes new railcar additions and railcar modifications, net of deferred profit, and secondary market purchases. Excluding proceeds from the sales of leased railcars of $138.7 million, our net investment in the lease fleet was $463.5 million.
For the full year 2021, we anticipate a net investment in our lease fleet of between $300 million and $350 million. Capital expenditures related to manufacturing and other activities, including expansion of our fleet maintenance capabilities and systems upgrades, are projected to range between $45 million and $60 million for the full year 2021.
Equity Investment
See Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for information about our investment in partially-owned leasing subsidiaries.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had letters of credit issued under our revolving credit facility in an aggregate amount of $35.2 million, the full amount of which is expected to expire in July 2021. Our letters of credit obligations support our various insurance programs and generally renew by their terms each year. See Note 8 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information about our corporate revolving credit facility.
Employee Retirement Plans
As disclosed in Note 10 of the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of December 31, 2020, the benefit obligation associated with our nonqualified retirement plan totaled $15.5 million. We continue to sponsor an employee savings plan under the existing 401(k) plan that covers substantially all domestic employees and includes a Company matching contribution of up to 6% each of eligible compensation, as well as a Supplemental Profit Sharing Plan (effective as of January 1, 2021, the Trinity Industries, Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan). These contributions totaled $11.4 million during 2020. Employer contributions to the 401(k) plan and the Trinity Industries, Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan for the year ending December 31, 2021 are expected to be $18.5 million, which includes the payment of the contributions accrued as of December 31, 2020, as well as the 2021 contributions pursuant to the plan design changes as described in Note 10 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Pension Plan Termination
On September 4, 2019, our Board of Directors approved the termination of the Trinity Industries, Inc. Consolidated Pension Plan (the "Pension Plan"), effective December 31, 2019. The Pension Plan was settled in the fourth quarter of 2020 and resulted in the Company no longer having any remaining funded pension plan obligations. Except for retirees receiving payments under the Pension Plan, participants had the choice of receiving a single lump sum payment or an annuity from a highly-rated insurance company that will pay and administer future benefit payments.
Upon settlement, we recognized a pre-tax non-cash pension settlement charge of $151.5 million, which was inclusive of all unamortized losses recorded in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss. The settlement charge was recognized in our Statement of Operations during the fourth quarter when the payments were made to those participants electing to receive a lump sum distribution and when the annuity contracts were purchased to settle all remaining outstanding pension obligations. The surplus of the Pension Plan of $23.6 million will be used, as prescribed in the applicable regulations, to fund obligations associated with the Company's defined contribution profit sharing plan and final pension administrative expenses. We expect that any remaining surplus would be used for other corporate purposes, subject to applicable taxes. See Note 10 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Stock-Based Compensation
We have a stock-based compensation plan covering our employees and our Board of Directors. See Note 13 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Derivative Instruments
We may use derivative instruments to mitigate the impact of changes in interest rates, both in anticipation of future debt issuances and to offset interest rate variability of certain floating rate debt issuances outstanding. We also may use derivative instruments from time to time to mitigate the impact of changes in natural gas and diesel fuel prices and changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Derivative instruments that are designated and qualify as cash flow hedges are accounted for in accordance with applicable accounting standards. See Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of how we utilize our derivative instruments.
LIBOR Transition
The United Kingdom's Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates the London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR"), has announced that it will no longer persuade or require banks to submit rates for the calculation of LIBOR after June 2023. In the U.S., the Alternative Reference Rates Committee has identified the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) as its preferred alternative to LIBOR. We currently have LIBOR-based contracts that extend beyond June 2023 including derivative instruments, promissory notes for TRL-2017, TILC's warehouse loan facility, and our revolving credit facility. After LIBOR is phased out, the interest rates for these obligations might be subject to change. The replacement of LIBOR with an alternative benchmark reference rate may adversely affect interest rates and result in higher borrowing costs under these agreements and any future agreements.
Contractual Obligation and Commercial Commitments
As of December 31, 2020, we had the following contractual obligations and commercial commitments:
(1) Excludes unamortized discount and debt issuance costs.
(2) Includes fixed rate interest obligations and interest on variable rate debt based on the outstanding balances and the applicable rates at December 31, 2020.
(3) Includes $332.5 million in purchase obligations for raw materials and components, primarily by the Rail Products Group.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $5.2 million and $5.0 million, respectively, of tax liabilities, including interest and penalties, related to uncertain tax positions. Because of the high degree of uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash outflows associated with these liabilities, we are unable to estimate the years in which settlement will occur with the respective taxing authorities, and, accordingly, such amounts are excluded from the table above. See Note 9 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations discusses our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies, among others, affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Long-lived Assets
Description of Estimate We routinely assess whether impairment indicators are present by monitoring for the existence of events or changes in circumstances that may indicate that the carrying amount of our long-lived assets, including our leased railcar fleet, might not be recoverable. Factors monitored include actual and forecasted industry-wide asset utilization, pricing indicators, asset attrition rates, and other similar metrics specific to the performance of our leased railcar fleet and other long-lived assets. Whenever an indicator of potential impairment is present, we assess recoverability by comparing the carrying value of the long-lived assets to the undiscounted future net cash flows we expect the assets to generate. If the recoverability test indicates that an impairment exists, we would recognize an impairment charge equal to the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value.
During the second quarter, the frac sand industry continued to experience economic pressure created by low oil prices, reduced fracking activity, and the ongoing economic impact of COVID-19. Significant price declines in the crude oil market resulted in a decline in customer demand for certain types of railcars. In particular, small cube covered hopper railcars are primarily used in North America to serve the frac sand industry. We believe that the collective impact of these developments, including the shift towards the use of in-basin sand, constituted a fundamental and other-than-temporary change in the future demand for this railcar type. Consequently, the cash flows and profitability of the frac sand industry continued to decline during the second quarter. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an impairment of long-lived assets of $396.4 million, of which $369.4 million was related to our second quarter impairment of our small cube covered hopper railcars. See Note 11 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
As of December 31, 2020, our net property, plant, and equipment totaled $7.0 billion, and the net book value of our amortizing intangible assets totaled $16.0 million.
Judgment and/or Uncertainty The estimates and judgments that most significantly affect the fair value calculations in our recoverability test include assumptions regarding revenue and operating profit; the remaining useful life over which an asset is expected to generate cash flows; and expectations regarding lease rates, lease renewals, and lease fleet utilization. The measurement of an impairment loss involves a number of management judgments, including the selection of an appropriate discount rate, consideration of market quotes for comparable assets as available, and estimates regarding final disposition proceeds.
With respect to the impairment of our small cube covered hopper railcars, significant management judgment was used to determine the key assumptions utilized in our impairment analysis, the substantial majority of which represent unobservable (Level 3) inputs. These assumptions include, but are not limited to: estimates regarding the remaining useful life over which the railcars are expected to generate cash flows; average lease rates; railcar utilization percentages; operating expenses; and the selection of an appropriate discount rate. Management selected these estimates and assumptions based on our railcar industry expertise. We also consulted with third-party energy and frac sand industry experts to gain insights with respect to the long-term outlook for these underlying markets.
Potential Impact if Results Differ If actual results are not consistent with management's estimates and assumptions used to calculate estimated future cash flows, we could be exposed to additional impairment losses that may be material. We believe that the assumptions used in our impairment analyses are reasonable; however, given the uncertainties of the economy and its potential impact on our businesses, it is possible that impairments of remaining long-lived assets may be required in future periods as a result of changes in our operating results or our assumptions.
With respect to the second quarter impairment charge related to our small cube covered hopper railcars, a 0.5% increase in the discount rate would have resulted in an increase to the impairment charge of $12.4 million, and a 0.5% decrease in the discount rate would have resulted in a decrease to the impairment charge of $13.7 million. Additionally, a 5% increase or decrease in the average lease rate would have resulted in a change in the impairment charge of $11.2 million.
Income Taxes
Description of Estimate We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method prescribed by ASC 740. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amount of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and other tax attributes using currently enacted tax rates. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in the provision for income taxes in the period that includes the enactment date. Our net deferred tax liabilities totaled $1,042.5 million as of December 31, 2020, which includes valuation allowances of $25.2 million.
For further information regarding income taxes, see Note 9 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Judgment and/or Uncertainty Management is required to estimate the timing of the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities, make assumptions about the future deductibility of deferred tax assets and assess deferred tax liabilities based on enacted law and tax rates for the appropriate tax jurisdictions to determine the amount of such deferred tax assets and liabilities. We assess whether a valuation allowance should be established against deferred tax assets based on consideration of all available evidence, both positive and negative, using a more likely than not standard. This assessment considers, among other matters: the nature, frequency, and severity of recent losses; a forecast of future profitability; the duration of statutory carryback and carryforward periods; our experience with tax attributes expiring unused; and tax planning alternatives.
Potential Impact if Results Differ Changes in the calculated deferred tax assets and liabilities may occur in certain circumstances, including statutory income tax rate changes, statutory tax law changes, or changes in our structure or tax status.
If such changes take place, there is a risk that our effective tax rate could increase or decrease in any period, impacting our net earnings.
Goodwill
Description of Estimate Goodwill is required to be tested for impairment at least annually, or on an interim basis if events or circumstances change indicating that the carrying amount of the goodwill might be impaired. The quantitative goodwill impairment test is a two-step process with step one requiring the comparison of the reporting unit's estimated fair value with the carrying amount of its net assets. If necessary, step two of the impairment test determines the amount of goodwill impairment to be recorded when the reporting unit's recorded net assets exceed its fair value. Impairment is assessed at the “reporting unit” level by applying a fair value-based test for each unit with recorded goodwill. Goodwill totaled $208.8 million as of December 31, 2020.
Judgment and/or Uncertainty The estimates and judgments that most significantly affect the fair value calculations are assumptions related to revenue and operating profit results, discount rates, terminal growth rates, and exit multiples. We consider these to be Level 3 inputs in the fair value hierarchy, as they involve unobservable inputs for which there is little or no market data and thus require management to develop its own assumptions.
Potential Impact if Results Differ We believe that the assumptions used in our impairment analysis are reasonable; however, given the uncertainties of the economy and its potential impact on our businesses, there can be no assurance that our estimates and assumptions regarding the fair value of our reporting units will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. Additionally, variations in any of these assumptions may result in different calculations in fair value that could result in an impairment charge.
Based on our annual goodwill impairment test performed at the reporting unit level as of December 31, 2020, we concluded that there was no impairment of goodwill and that none of the reporting units evaluated was at risk of failing the first step of the goodwill impairment test. A reporting unit is considered to be at risk if its estimated fair value does not exceed the carrying value of its net assets by 10% or more.
An increase or decrease in the discount rate or a reduction to the terminal growth rate of 100 basis points would not have resulted in an impairment of goodwill for any of our reporting units.
Variable Interest Entities
Description of Estimate We continuously evaluate our investments and other contractual arrangements with third party entities to determine if our variable interests are considered a variable interest entity ("VIE"). Consolidation is required for VIEs in which we are the primary beneficiary.
We have determined that we are the primary beneficiary for TRIP Holdings and RIV 2013. At December 31, 2020, the carrying value of our investment in TRIP Holdings and RIV 2013 totaled $145.9 million.
For further information regarding our partially-owned leasing subsidiaries, see Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Judgment and/or Uncertainty The determination of whether an entity is considered a VIE and, if so, if we are the primary beneficiary of the VIE, is highly subjective and is dependent on the specific facts and circumstances of each investment. Factors considered in these assessments include, but are not limited to, the entity's structure and equity ownership, the contractual terms, the key decision making powers, and the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits of the VIE.
Potential Impact if Results Differ Changes in the design or nature of the activities of a VIE, or our involvement with a VIE, could result in a change in conclusion of our status as a primary beneficiary. Such change could result in the consolidation or deconsolidation of the subsidiary, thus impacting financial results.
Insurance
Description of Estimate We are effectively self-insured for workers' compensation and employee health care claims. Third-party administrators process all such claims. As of December 31, 2020, our liabilities associated with workers' compensation and group medical insurance were $55.5 million and $6.4 million, respectively.
Judgment and/or Uncertainty We accrue our workers' compensation and group medical liabilities based upon independent actuarial studies. These liabilities are calculated based upon loss development factors, which contemplate a number of variables, including claims history and expected trends. These loss development factors are determined in consultation with third-party actuaries.
Potential Impact if Results Differ To the extent actuarial assumptions change and claims experience rates differ from historical rates, our liability may change.
A 10% change in our insurance liabilities could impact net earnings by approximately $4.8 million.
Contingencies and Litigation
Description of Estimate We are involved in claims and lawsuits incidental to our business arising from various matters, including product warranty, personal injury, environmental issues, workplace laws, and various governmental regulations. We evaluate our exposure to such matters periodically and establish accruals for these contingencies when a range of loss can be reasonably estimated. As of December 31, 2020, the range of reasonably possible losses for such matters is $7.0 million to $14.5 million, which includes our rights in indemnity and recourse to third parties of approximately $5.3 million.
For further information regarding our contingencies and litigation matters, see Note 15 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Judgment and/or Uncertainty Assessments of contingencies are based on information obtained from internal and external legal counsel, including recent legal decisions and loss experience in similar situations. Based on information currently available with respect to such claims and lawsuits, including information as to which we are aware but for which we have not been served with legal process, it is management's opinion that the ultimate outcome of all such claims and litigation, including settlements, in aggregate will not have a material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition.
Potential Impact if Results Differ Due to the uncertain nature of these matters, there can be no assurance that we will not become involved in future litigation or other proceedings or, if we were found to be responsible or liable in any litigation or proceeding, that such costs would not be material to us. Additionally, changes in claims and lawsuits filed, settled or dismissed and differences between actual and estimated settlement costs or our rights in indemnity and recourse to third parties could impact operating results.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We have included financial measures compiled in accordance with GAAP and certain non-GAAP measures in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to provide management and investors with additional information regarding our financial results. Non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for our reporting results prepared in accordance with GAAP and, as calculated, may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures for other companies. For each non-GAAP financial measure, we provide a reconciliation to the most comparable GAAP measure.
Pre-Tax Return on Equity
Pre-Tax Return on Equity (“Pre-Tax ROE”) is defined as a ratio for which (i) the numerator is calculated as income or loss from continuing operations, adjusted to exclude the effects of the provision or benefit for income taxes, net income or loss attributable to noncontrolling interest, and certain other adjustments, which include restructuring activities, the controlling interest portion of impairment of long-lived assets, early redemption of debt, and pension plan settlement; and (ii) the denominator is calculated as average stockholders’ equity (which excludes noncontrolling interest), adjusted to exclude accumulated other comprehensive income or loss. In the following table, the numerator and denominator of our Pre-Tax ROE calculation are reconciled to income from continuing operations and stockholders’ equity, respectively, which are the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures. Management believes that Pre-Tax ROE is a useful measure to both management and investors as it provides an indication of the economic return on the Company’s investments over time. Pre-Tax ROE is used in consideration of the Company’s expected tax position in the near-term.
(1) Excludes $81.3 million of non-cash impairment of long-lived asset charges associated with the noncontrolling interest recorded in the second quarter of 2020.
(2) Average total stockholders' equity and average adjusted stockholders' equity as of and for the year ended December 31, 2018 is calculated using ending balances as of December 31, 2018 because taking an average of beginning and ending stockholders' equity in 2018 would not have given effect to the reduction to stockholders' equity that occurred as a result of the spin-off of Arcosa on November 1, 2018.
(3) Return on Equity is calculated as income from continuing operations divided by average total stockholders' equity.
(4) Pre-Tax Return on Equity is calculated as adjusted profit before tax divided by average adjusted stockholders' equity, each as defined and reconciled above.
Free Cash Flow
Total Free Cash Flow After Investments and Dividends ("Free Cash Flow") is a non-GAAP financial measure and is defined as net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations as computed in accordance with GAAP, plus cash proceeds from sales of leased railcars owned more than one year at the time of sale, less capital expenditures for manufacturing, dividends paid, and Equity CapEx for new leased railcars. Equity CapEx for new leased railcars is defined as leasing capital expenditures, net of sold lease fleet railcars owned one year or less, adjusted to exclude net proceeds (repayments) of debt. We believe Free Cash Flow is useful to both management and investors as it provides a relevant measure of liquidity and a useful basis for assessing our ability to fund our operations and repay our debt. Free Cash Flow is reconciled to net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, in the following table.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for information about recent accounting pronouncements.