Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with Tronox Holdings plc's consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other sections in this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that involve risks and uncertainties, and actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of numerous factors. Forward-looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. Forward-looking statements also can be identified by words such as “future,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “predicts,” “will,” “would,” “could,” “can,” “may,” and similar terms. There are important factors that could cause our actual results, level of activity, performance or achievements to differ materially from the results, level of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. In particular, you should consider the numerous risks and uncertainties outlined in Item 1A. “Risk Factors.”
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains certain financial measures, in particular the presentation of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) and Adjusted EBITDA, which are not presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). We are presenting these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures because we believe they provide us and readers of this Form 10-K with additional insight into our operational performance relative to earlier periods and relative to our competitors. We do not intend for these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures to be a substitute for any U.S. GAAP financial information. Readers of these statements should use these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures only in conjunction with the comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures. A reconciliation of net income (loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA is also provided herein.
Executive Overview
Tronox Holdings plc (referred to herein as "Tronox", "we", "us", or "our") operates titanium-bearing mineral sand mines and beneficiation operations in Australia, South Africa and Brazil to produce feedstock materials that can be processed into TiO2 for pigment, high purity titanium chemicals, including titanium tetrachloride, and Ultrafine© titanium dioxide used in certain specialty applications. It is our long-term strategic goal to be vertically integrated and consume all of our feedstock materials in our own nine TiO2 pigment facilities which we operate in the United States, Australia, Brazil, UK, France, the Netherlands, China and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (“KSA”). We believe that vertical integration is the best way to achieve our ultimate goal of delivering low cost, high-quality pigment to our coatings and other TiO2 customers throughout the world. The mining, beneficiation and smelting of titanium bearing mineral sands creates meaningful quantities of zircon, which we also supply to customers around the world.
We are a public limited company formed under the laws of England and Wales. Tronox was formerly listed on the New York Stock Exchange as Tronox Limited, a company formed under the laws of Western Australia. However, in March 2019, we re-domiciled to the United Kingdom, and as a result of the re-domiciling, Tronox Limited became a wholly-owned subsidiary of Tronox Holdings plc. Another significant corporate milestone occurred on April 10, 2019 when we completed the acquisition from National Industrialization Company ("Tasnee") of the TiO2 business of The National Titanium Dioxide Company Limited (“Cristal”) (the “Cristal Transaction”). The Cristal Transaction doubled our size and expanded the number of TiO2 pigment facilities we operate from three to nine and gave us control of several new mines, particularly in Australia. In order to obtain
regulatory approval for the Cristal Transaction, we were required to divest Cristal's North American TiO2 business, which was sold in May 2019. See Note 3 for further details on the Cristal Transaction.
Business Environment
The following discussion includes trends and factors that may affect future operating results:
Throughout the current COVID-19 pandemic, our operations have been designated as essential to support the continued manufacturing of products such as food and medical packaging, medical equipment, pharmaceuticals, and personal protective gear.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our industry and business and the Company has taken, and will continue to take, measures, to minimize the impact to our operations and maintain liquidity. In response to the initial pandemic, some of these measures have included delaying capital expenditures, delaying merit increases, increased working capital management cost reductions and incremental borrowings to maintain incremental liquidity. We will continue to monitor the pandemic, related impact to our business and will take additional precautions as deemed necessary.
During the second and third quarters of 2020, the Company experienced a significant reduction in TiO2 and Zircon sales volumes which was in line with expectations as a result of the decline in global GDP. Sales in the fourth quarter of 2020 increased 13% compared to the prior year period. Sequentially, revenues increased 16% in the fourth quarter compared to the third quarter of 2020 driven by a continued demand recovery as well as delivery on our synergy targets from the Cristal Transaction. In the fourth quarter of 2020, TiO2 sales volumes increased in the Asia, Europe, Middle East and Africa regions with slight decrease in North America. Average TiO2 selling prices were stable in the North American market and were slightly up in the Asia, Europe, Middle East, Africa and South and Central American regions. Based upon current conditions we believe our TiO2 business will continue to benefit from an expected global industry recovery in 2021.
Gross profit increased sequentially from the third quarter to the fourth quarter of 2020 due to the favorable impacts of TiO2 and Zircon sales volumes as well as favorable impact of foreign currency on sales. Gross profit was also positively impacted by $10 million for synergies realized in relation to the Cristal Transaction however was more than offset by a negative impact of $17 million on foreign currency on costs of goods sold primarily due to the South African rand and Australian dollar. In addition, the fourth quarter included a $4 million reimbursement from claims related to the Ginkgo concentrator failure we inherited as part of the Cristal Transaction.
As of December 31, 2020, our total available liquidity was $1,041 million, including $619 million in cash and cash equivalents and $422 million available under revolving credit agreements including $285 million available under our Asset Backed Lending ("ABL") facility. Our total debt was $3.3 billion and net debt to trailing-twelve month Adjusted EBITDA was 4.1x.
Additionally, consistent with our previously stated capital allocation priorities, in December 2020, the Company made a voluntary prepayment of $200 million on its Term Loan Facility. The Company anticipates making a voluntary repayment of $300 million on the Term Loan Facility during the first quarter of 2021 from the cash on our Consolidated Balance Sheet originally intended for the TTI acquisition. There are no upcoming maturities on the Company's term loan or bonds until 2024. The Company also has no financial covenants on its term loan or bonds and only one springing financial covenant on its ABL facility which we do not expect to be triggered based on our current scenario planning.
Pro Forma Income Statement Information
The acquisition of the TiO2 business of Cristal on April 10, 2019 impacts the comparability of the reported results for 2020 compared to 2019. Since Tronox and Cristal have combined their respective businesses effective with the merger date of April 10, 2019, the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects the results of the combined business, without any pro forma adjustments, while the year ended December 31, 2019 reflect the results of the combined business from April 10, 2019. To assist with a discussion of the 2020 and 2019 results on a comparable basis, certain supplemental unaudited pro forma income statement information is provided on a consolidated basis and is referred to as "pro forma information".
The pro forma information has been prepared on a basis consistent with Article 11 of Regulation S-X, assuming the merger and merger-related divestitures of Cristal’s North American TiO2 business and the 8120 paper laminate grade had been consummated on January 1, 2018. In preparing this pro forma information, the historical financial information has been adjusted to give effect to pro forma adjustments that are (i) directly attributable to the business combination and other transactions presented herein, such as the merger-related divestitures, (ii) factually supportable, and (iii) expected to have a continuing impact on the combined entity’s consolidated results. The pro forma information is based on management’s assumptions and is presented
for illustrative purposes and does not purport to represent what the results of operations would actually have been if the business combination and merger-related divestitures had occurred as of the dates indicated or what the results would be for any future periods. Also, the pro forma information does not include the impact of any revenue, cost or other operation synergies in the periods prior to the acquisition that may result from the business combination or any related restructuring costs.
Consolidated Results of Operations from Continuing Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
_____________________
(1) The pro forma amounts have been prepared on a basis consistent with Article 11 of Regulation S-X. See "Supplemental Pro Forma Information" section of this MD&A for further detail.
(2) EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are Non-U.S. GAAP financials measures. Please refer to the “Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures” section of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for a discussion of these measures and a reconciliation of these measures to Net income (loss) from continuing operations.
Reported net sales of $2,758 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 4% compared to $2,642 million for the same period in 2019. The year ended December 31, 2020 includes approximately $352 million of revenue from Cristal operations for the first quarter of 2020 and the first nine days of April 2020 for which there were no comparable amounts in the prior year period given the acquisition closed on April 10, 2019. Excluding this Cristal revenue, revenue decreased 9% primarily due to lower TiO2 sales volumes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as lower Zircon average selling prices. On a pro forma basis, net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $250 million in comparison to the same period in 2019 primarily due to the decreases in sales volumes of TiO2 and pig iron as well as lower average selling prices of Zircon. Net sales by type of product for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
The table below presents reported revenue by product:
The table below presents pro forma revenue by product:
On a reported basis, for the year ended December 31, 2020, TiO2 revenue increased $127 million, or 6%, compared to the prior year. Given the acquisition of Cristal on April 10, 2019, there is approximately $306 million of revenue in the first quarter of 2020 and first nine days of April 2020 for which there were no comparable amounts in the same period of the prior year. Excluding this revenue generated from the Cristal operations, TiO2 revenue decreased by $179 million due to a $152 million decrease in sales volumes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and a decrease of $42 million in average selling prices. Foreign currency positively impacted TiO2 revenue by $15 million due primarily to the strengthening of the Euro. Zircon revenues for the Cristal operation in the first quarter of 2020 and first nine days of April 2020 were approximately $17 million. Excluding this Cristal related revenue, Zircon revenue decreased $24 million primarily due to a $34 million reduction in average selling prices partially offset by an $11 million increase in sales volumes. Feedstock and other products revenues for the Cristal operations in the first quarter of 2020 and first nine days of April 2020 were approximately $29 million. Excluding this Cristal related revenue, feedstock and other products revenue decreased $32 million primarily due to lower sales volumes of CP slag, ilmenite, and rutile prime.
On a pro forma basis, for the year ended December 31, 2020, TiO2 revenue was lower by $198 million or 8% compared to the prior year driven by a 7% or $160 million decrease in sales volumes, a 2% decrease in average selling prices impacting revenue by $47 million and a $1 million decrease in product mix. Foreign currency increased TiO2 revenue by $10 million due to the strengthening of the Euro. Zircon revenue declined $27 million, or 9%, due to a 13% decrease in average selling prices partially offset by a 4% increase in sales volumes. Feedstock and other product revenue was lower by $25 million, or 8%, compared to the prior year due to decreases in ilmenite sales and decreases in CP slag sales volumes.
On a reported basis, our gross margin of $621 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 23% of net sales compared to 18% of net sales for the same period in 2019. The increase in gross margin is primarily due to:
•the favorable impact of 4 points due to the value of the inventory of Cristal being stepped up to fair value on the acquisition date in the prior year period, which resulted in the recognition of higher expense the prior year period;
•the favorable impact of 4 points due to the synergies realized from the Cristal Transaction;
•the net favorable impact of 3 points due to changes in foreign exchange rates, primarily due to the South African Rand, Euro and Brazilian Real;
•the favorable impact of 1 point due to the recognition of a $19 million charge for contract losses expected to be incurred on the 8120 supply agreement with Venator in the prior year period;
•the unfavorable impact of 3 points primarily due to a decrease in average selling prices of TiO2 and Zircon;
•the unfavorable impact of 2 points due to inflationary cost pressures and unfavorable fixed overhead absorption, including idle facility charges and lower of cost or market charges, on lower volumes as we reduced production to match demand;
•the unfavorable impact of 1 point due to sales volumes and product mix; and
•the unfavorable impact of 1 point due to deferred margin recognized in the year-ago period which did not recur during the current period.
On a pro forma basis, our gross margin of $621 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 23% of net sales compared to 21% of net sales for the same period in 2019. The increase in gross margin is primarily due to:
•the favorable impact of 4 points due to the synergies realized from the Cristal Transaction;
•the net favorable impact of 3 points due to changes in foreign exchange rates, primarily due to the South African Rand, Euro and Brazilian Real;
•the favorable impact of 1 point due to sales volumes and product mix;
•the unfavorable impact of 3 points primarily due to a decrease in average selling prices of TiO2 and Zircon;
•the unfavorable impact of 2 points due to inflationary cost pressures and unfavorable fixed overhead absorption, including idle facility charges and lower of cost or market charges, on lower volumes as we reduced production to match demand; and
•the unfavorable impact of 1 point due to deferred margin recognized in the year-ago period which did not recur during the current period.
On a reported basis, selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses remained consistent for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. Given the acquisition of Cristal on April 10, 2019, there are approximately $23 million of expenses in the first quarter of 2020 and the first nine days of April 2020 for which there were no comparable amounts in the same period of the prior year. Excluding the effect of Cristal, SG&A expenses decreased $23 million primarily driven by $13 million of lower professional fees, a decrease of $12 million in travel and entertainment expenses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, a $6 million decrease in research and development expenses, lower integration costs of $5 million and lower agent commissions of $3 million partially offset by $12 million increase in employee costs primarily driven by higher incentive compensation, higher costs of $2 million for IT and communication expenses, and higher costs of $3 million related to the transitional service agreement associated with the Cristal acquisition. On a pro forma basis, selling, general and administrative expenses decreased primarily due to $21 million of synergies, lower travel and entertainment expenses of $13 million partially offset by transaction costs of $14 million included in 2020 related to the TTI acquisition of which all transaction costs in 2019 related to the Cristal Transaction were excluded for proforma purposes, $9 million increase in incentive compensation and $6 million due to merit increases.
On both a reported and pro forma basis, we recorded restructuring expenses of $3 million for employee-related costs associated with headcount reductions during the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 4 of notes to consolidated financial statements.
On a reported basis, income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $271 million, increased by $176 million or 185% compared to the same period in 2019 which is primarily attributable to the higher gross margin and lower restructuring charges.
On a pro forma basis, income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $271 million, an increase of $3 million compared to $268 million in the prior year due to lower SG&A expenses and lower restructuring costs partially offset by the lower gross margin in the current year.
On both a reported basis and a proforma basis, Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net sales was 24% for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 1 point from 23% in the prior year. On a reported basis, the higher gross profit, as a result of the reflection of synergies related to the Cristal Transaction, were the primary drivers of the year-over-year increase in Adjusted EBITDA percentage. On a proforma basis, the lower SG&A expenses as a result of the reflection of synergies related to the Cristal Transaction, offset by the lower gross profit was the primary driver of the increase in Adjusted EBITDA percentage.
On a reported basis and a pro forma basis, interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $12 million and $18 million, respectively, compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to lower average debt outstanding balances and lower average interest rates mainly on the Term Loan Facility and Standard Bank Term Loan Facility.
On a reported and pro forma basis, interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $10 million and $4 million, respectively, compared to the prior year primarily due to lower cash balances from the use of cash and previously restricted cash in the second quarter of 2019 for the acquisition of the Cristal Transaction as well as the overall decrease in interest rates on our cash investments period over period.
Loss on extinguishment of debt of $2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from the voluntary prepayment of $200 million on our Term Loan Facility in December 2020.
On a reported basis and pro forma basis, other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of $4 million net realized and unrealized foreign currency gains, an approximate $2 million adjustment associated with a curtailment gain due to the freezing of plan benefits partially offset by pension settlements, and a $11 million reimbursement from claims related to the Ginkgo concentrator failure we inherited as part of the Cristal Transaction, and $5 million associated with the monthly technical service fee relating to the Jazan slagger we receive from AMIC. Refer to Note 24 for further information. On a reported basis, other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily consisted of $5 million net realized and unrealized foreign currency gains and a $2 million adjustment associated with a settlement gain related to the Cristal U.S. pension plan.
We maintain full valuation allowances related to the total net deferred tax assets in Australia and the United Kingdom. For entities acquired in the Cristal Transaction, we have full valuation allowances in Australia, Saudi Arabia, and Switzerland. The provisions for income taxes associated with these jurisdictions include no tax benefits with respect to losses incurred and tax expense only to the extent of current tax payments. Additionally, we have valuation allowances against other specific tax assets.
On a reported basis, the effective tax rate was (773)% and (16)% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The large negative effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 is caused by the release of valuation allowances for deferred tax assets in the U.S. and Brazil, partially offset by the recording of valuation allowances in Saudi Arabia and the U.K. The net impact was $905 million benefit to the income tax provision. Refer to Note 8 for further information. Additionally, the effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are influenced by a variety of factors, primarily income and losses in jurisdictions with valuation allowances, disallowable expenditures, restructuring impacts, and our jurisdictional mix of income at tax rates different than the U.K. statutory rate.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
A discussion of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 versus December 31, 2018 is included in Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Results of Operation”, included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
There was an other comprehensive loss of $20 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to other comprehensive income of $11 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 representing a reduction of $31 million year over year. This reduction was primarily driven by negative movements year-over year foreign currency translation adjustments of $23 million coupled with an increase of $7 million of comprehensive losses associated with pension and post retirement plans. Unrecognized losses on derivative instruments of $12 million year over year was largely offset by $11 million of recognized gains on derivatives during the same period.
A discussion of our comprehensive (loss) income for the year ended December 31, 2019 versus December 31, 2018 is included in Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Other Comprehensive (Loss) Income”, included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During 2020, our liquidity increased by $393 million to $1,041 million.
The table below presents our liquidity, including amounts available under our credit facilities, as of the following dates:
Historically, we have funded our operations and met our commitments through cash generated by operations, issuance of unsecured notes, bank financings and borrowings under lines of credit. In the next twelve months, we expect that our operations
and available borrowings under our debt refinancing and revolving credit agreements (see Note 15 of notes to consolidated financial statements) will provide sufficient cash for our operating expenses, capital expenditures, interest payments and debt repayments. This is predicated on our achieving our forecast which could be negatively impacted by items outside of our control, in particular, macroeconomic conditions including the economic impacts caused by continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Consistent with our actions in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, if negative events occur in the future, we may need to reduce our capital spend, cut back on operating costs, and other items within our control to maintain appropriate liquidity.
Working capital (calculated as current assets less current liabilities) was $1.7 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $1.4 billion at December 31, 2019.
As of and for the year ended December 31, 2020, the non-guarantor subsidiaries of our Senior Notes due 2025 represented approximately 17% of our total consolidated liabilities, approximately 27% of our total consolidated assets, approximately 42% of our total consolidated net sales and approximately 45% of our Consolidated EBITDA (as such term is defined in the 2025 Indenture). In addition, as of December 31, 2020, our non-guarantor subsidiaries had $791 million of total consolidated liabilities (including trade payables but excluding intercompany liabilities), all of which would have been structurally senior to the 2025 Notes. See Note 15 of notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information.
At December 31, 2020, we had outstanding letters of credit and bank guarantees of $71 million. See Note 15 of notes to consolidated financial statements.
Principal factors that could affect our ability to obtain cash from external sources include (i) debt covenants that limit our total borrowing capacity; (ii) increasing interest rates applicable to our floating rate debt; (iii) increasing demands from third parties for financial assurance or credit enhancement; (iv) credit rating downgrades, which could limit our access to additional debt; (v) a decrease in the market price of our common stock and debt obligations; and (vi) volatility in public debt and equity markets.
As of December 31, 2020, our credit rating with Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s changed from December 31, 2019 from B1 positive to B1 stable outlook and from B stable to B negative outlook, respectively.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
We consider all investments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents were invested in money market funds and we also receive earnings credits for some balances left in our bank operating accounts. We maintain cash and cash equivalents in bank deposit and money market accounts that may exceed federally insured limits. The financial institutions where our cash and cash equivalents are held are highly rated and geographically dispersed, and we have a policy to limit the amount of credit exposure with any one institution. We have not experienced any losses in such accounts and believe we are not exposed to significant credit risk.
The use of our cash includes payment of our operating expenses, capital expenditures, servicing our interest and debt repayment obligations, making pension contributions and making quarterly dividend payments.
Repatriation of Cash
At December 31, 2020, we held $619 million in cash and cash equivalents in these respective jurisdictions: $298 million in the United States, $49 million in South Africa, $80 million in Australia, $75 million in Brazil, $33 million in Saudi Arabia, $33 million in China, $50 million in Europe and $1 million in India. Our credit facilities limit transfers of funds from subsidiaries in the United States to certain foreign subsidiaries. In addition, at December 31, 2020, we held $29 million of restricted cash of which $18 million is in Europe and is related to the termination fee associated with the TTI acquisition, $10 million is in Australia related to performance bonds and $1 million is in Saudi Arabia related to vendor supply agreement guarantees.
Tronox Holdings plc has foreign subsidiaries with undistributed earnings at December 31, 2020. We have made no provision for deferred taxes related to these undistributed earnings because they are considered indefinitely reinvested in the foreign jurisdictions.
Debt Obligations
In March 2020, under an abundance of caution given the uncertainty associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company took precautionary measures and drew down $200 million in the aggregate of its outstanding borrowings under its Wells Fargo, Standard Bank, and Emirates revolvers in order to increase liquidity and preserve financial flexibility. As discussed below, the Company repaid the outstanding balances of these short-term credit facilities with a portion of the proceeds of the $500 million 6.5% senior secured notes due 2025. Additionally, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, our KSA subsidiary drew down $13 million on its SABB Credit Facility for local working capital purposes. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company
repaid the full $13 million on the SABB Credit Facility. At December 31, 2020, there were no short term debt balances with the exception of the $58 million included in "Long term debt due within one year" on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
In December 2020, the Company made a voluntary prepayment of $200 million on the Term Loan Facility. No prepayment penalties were required as result of this principal prepayment. As a result of the prepayment, we recorded approximately $2 million in "Loss on extinguishment of debt" in our Consolidated Statement of Operations.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our long-term debt, net of unamortized discount and debt issuance costs was $3.3 billion and $3.0 billion, respectively.
At both December 31, 2020 and 2019, our net debt (the excess of our debt over cash and cash equivalents) was $2.7 billion. See Note 15 of notes to consolidated financial statements.
In January 2021, the Company announced the termination of the TTI Acquisition. As a result of the termination, the Company paid to the seller, Eramet, an $18 million termination fee in January 2021. The $18 million was recorded within "Restricted Cash" on our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020. Additionally, consistent with our previously stated capital allocation priorities, the Company anticipates making a voluntary repayment of $300 million on the Term Loan Facility during the first quarter of 2021 from the cash on our Consolidated Balance Sheet originally intended for the TTI acquisition.
On February 22, 2021, we announced the launch of a possible refinancing of (a) our First Lien Term Loan Credit Agreement, dated as of September 22, 2017, with a new term loan facility, and (b) our Revolving Syndicated Facility Agreement, dated as of September 22, 2017, with a new cash flow revolving facility.
Cash Flows
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table presents cash flow from continuing operations for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows provided by Operating Activities - Cash provided by our operating activities is driven by net income from continuing operations adjusted for non-cash items and changes in working capital items. The following table summarizes our net cash provided by (used in) operating activities for 2020 and 2019:
Net cash provided by operating activities was $355 million in 2020 as compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $412 million in 2019. The decrease of $57 million period over period is primarily due to an increase of $210 million use of cash for net assets and liabilities which more than offset a $153 million improvement in net income from continuing operations - net of non-cash adjustments. The higher use of cash for working capital was primarily driven by increases in accounts receivable,
inventories and prepaid and other current assets of $49 million, $21 million and $29 million, respectively. These increases were coupled with an increased use of cash in long-term other assets and liabilities of $68 million.
Cash Flows used in Investing Activities - Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $229 million as compared to $1,185 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $956 million decrease in use of cash year over year is primarily driven by the cash paid of approximately $1,675 million for the acquisition of Cristal partially offset by the proceeds of $701 million received from the sale of the Cristal North America business in the prior period. Capital expenditures of $195 million during the current year were slightly lower than prior year capital expenditure levels of $198 million, which is attributable to a decrease in capital spending during the current year in an effort to preserve liquidity due to the COVID-19 pandemic partially offset by prior year capital expenditures not including Cristal for the first three months and first nine days of April of 2019 as the Cristal Transaction closed on April 10, 2020. In addition, the current year also includes $36 million for a loan to AMIC related to a titanium slag smelter facility (see Note 24 of notes to the consolidated financial statements) as compared to $25 million in the prior period.
Cash Flows (used in) provided by Financing Activities - Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $214 million as compared to cash used in financing activities of $638 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The current year is primarily comprised of $500 million proceeds from the issuances of the 6.5% Senior Secured Notes due 2025 (see Note 15 to the notes to the consolidated financial statements). Partially offsetting these proceeds was a use of cash of $233 million for the repayment of long-term debt, primarily on the Term Loan Facility, $40 million for dividend payments and $10 million for debt issuance costs. The cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by repayments of long term debt of $387 million versus proceeds of only $222 million from debt, repurchases of common stock of $288 million, the Company's redemption of Exxaro's 26% ownership interest in one of Tronox's South African subsidiary (see Note 24 of notes to consolidated financial statements) for $148 million and $27 million of dividends paid.
Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
A discussion of our cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2019 versus December 31, 2018 is included in Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Cash Flows”, included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth information relating to our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
__________________
(1)We calculated the Term Loan interest at a LIBOR plus a margin of 3.0%. See Note 15 of notes to our consolidated financial statements.
(2)Includes obligations to purchase requirements of process chemicals, supplies, utilities and services. We have various purchase commitments for materials, supplies, and services entered into in the ordinary course of business. Included in the purchase commitments table above are contracts, which require minimum volume purchases that extend beyond one year or are renewable annually and have been renewed for 2020. Certain contracts allow for changes in minimum required purchase volumes in the event of a temporary or permanent shutdown of a facility. We believe that all of our purchase obligations will be utilized in our normal operations.
(3)The table excludes contingent obligations, as well as any possible payments for uncertain tax positions given the inability to estimate the possible amounts and timing of any such payments.
(4)Pension and other post-retirement benefit ("OPEB") obligations of $326 million include estimates of pension plan contributions and expected future benefit payments for unfunded pension and OPEB plans. Pension plan contributions are forecasted for 2021 only. Expected future unfunded pension and OPEB benefit payments are forecasted only through 2030. Contribution and unfunded benefit payment estimates are based upon current valuation assumptions. Estimates of pension contributions after 2021 and unfunded benefit payments after 2030 are not included in the table because the timing of their resolution cannot be estimated. Refer to Note 23 in notes to consolidated financial statements for further discussion on our pension and OPEB plans.
(5)Asset retirement obligations are shown at the undiscounted and uninflated values.
Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, which are used by management to measure performance, are not presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We define EBITDA as net income (loss) excluding the impact of income taxes, interest expense, interest income and depreciation, depletion and amortization. We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA excluding the impact of nonrecurring items such as restructuring charges, gain or loss on debt extinguishments, impairment charges, gains or losses on sale of assets, acquisition-related transaction costs and pension settlements and curtailment gains or losses. Adjusted EBITDA also excludes non-cash items such as share-based compensation costs and pension and postretirement costs. Additionally, we exclude from Adjusted EBITDA, realized and unrealized foreign currency remeasurement gains and losses.
Management believes that EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors, as it is commonly used in the industry as a means of evaluating operating performance. We do not intend for these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures to be a substitute for any U.S. GAAP financial information. Readers of these statements should use these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures only in conjunction with the comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures. Since other companies may calculate EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, as presented herein, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Management believes these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures:
•reflect our ongoing business in a manner that allows for meaningful period-to-period comparison and analysis of trends in our business, as they exclude income and expense that are not reflective of ongoing operating results;
•provide useful information in understanding and evaluating our operating results and comparing financial results across periods; and
•provide a normalized view of our operating performance by excluding items that are either noncash or infrequently occurring.
Adjusted EBITDA is one of the primary measures management uses for planning and budgeting processes, and to monitor and evaluate financial and operating results. In addition, Adjusted EBITDA is a factor in evaluating management’s performance when determining incentive compensation.
The following table reconciles net income (loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
________________
(a)Represents a pre-tax charge related to the recognition of a step-up in value of inventories as a result of purchase accounting.
(b)Represents a pre-tax charge for the impairment and loss on sale of the assets of our Tronox Electrolytic Operations which was recorded in "Impairment loss" in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. See Note 6 of notes to consolidated financial statements.
(c)Represents a pre-tax charge for the estimated losses we expect to incur under the supply agreement with Venator. See Note 3 of notes to consolidated financial statements.
(d)Represents non-cash share-based compensation. See Note 22 of notes to consolidated financial statements.
(e)2020 amount represents transaction costs associated with the TTI acquisition which were recorded in "Selling, general and administrative expenses" in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. 2019 and 2018 amounts represent transaction costs associated with the Cristal Transaction which were recorded in “Selling, general and administrative expenses” in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
(f)Represents amounts for employee-related costs, including severance, which was recorded in “Restructuring” in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. See Note 4 of notes to consolidated financial statements.
(g)Represents integration costs associated with the Cristal Transaction after the acquisition which were recorded in "Selling, general and administrative expenses" in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
(h)2020 amount represents the loss in connection with a voluntary prepayment on the Term Loan Facility. See Note 15 of notes to consolidated financial statements. 2019 amount represents the loss in connection with the modification of the Wells Fargo Revolver and termination of the ABSA Revolver and a voluntary prepayment made on the Term Loan Facility. 2018 amount represents the $30 million loss in connection with the redemption of senior notes, including a call premium of $22 million.
(i)Represents realized and unrealized gains and losses associated with foreign currency remeasurement related to third-party and intercompany receivables and liabilities denominated in a currency other than the functional currency of the entity holding them, which are included in "Other income (expense), net" in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Prior to the first quarter of 2019, realized gains and losses associated with third-party receivables and liabilities had been included in Adjusted EBITDA. Commencing with 2019, we are now excluding these amounts from Adjusted EBITDA and prior period amounts have been revised for comparability purposes. The exclusion of all of the realized and unrealized gains and losses is consistent with the reporting of Adjusted EBITDA we make to our lenders.
(j)2020 amount represents a curtailment gain due to the freezing of plan benefits partially offset by pension settlements. 2019 amount represents settlement gain related to the U.S. Pension Plan (acquired as part of the Cristal Transaction). 2018 amount represents settlement gain related to the former U.S. postretirement medical plan.
(k)Represents the payment to Exxaro for capital gains tax on the disposal of its ordinary shares in Tronox Holdings plc included in "Other income (expense), net" in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
(l)Represents the reversal of an accrual as a result of a tax settlement.
(m)2020 amount represents reimbursement from claims related to the Ginkgo concentrator failure we inherited as a part of the Cristal Transaction.
(n)Includes noncash pension and postretirement costs, accretion expense, severance expense, and other items included in “Selling general and administrative expenses” and “Cost of goods sold” in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
The following table reconciles net income from continuing operations to Adjusted EBITDA on a pro forma basis for the periods presented (see footnotes under the as reported Adjusted EBITDA table for discussion of adjustments to derive Adjusted EBITDA):
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions regarding matters that are inherently uncertain and that ultimately affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The estimates and assumptions are based on management’s experience and understanding of current facts and circumstances. These estimates may differ from actual results. Certain of our accounting policies are considered critical, as they are both important to reflect our financial position and results of operations and require significant or complex judgment on the part of management. The following is a summary of certain accounting policies considered critical by management.
Asset Retirement Obligations
To the extent a legal obligation exists, an asset retirement obligation (“ARO”) is recorded at its estimated fair value and accretion expense is recognized over time as the discounted liability is accreted to its expected settlement value. Because AROs represent financial obligations to be settled in the future, uncertainties exist in estimating the timing and amount of the associated costs to be incurred. Fair value is measured using expected future cash outflows, adjusted for expected inflation and discounted at our credit-adjusted risk-free interest rate. No market-risk premium has been included in our calculation of ARO balances since we
can make no reliable estimate. Management believes these estimates and assumptions are reasonable; however, they are inherently uncertain. Refer to Notes 19 to the consolidated financial statements for a summary of the estimates and assumptions utilized. At December 31, 2020, AROs were $166 million of which the long-term portion of $157 million is recorded in "Asset retirement obligations" and the short-term portion of $9 million is recorded in "Accrued liabilities" in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Environmental Matters
Liabilities for environmental matters are recognized when remedial efforts are probable and the costs can be reasonably estimated. Such liabilities are based on our best estimate of the undiscounted future costs required to complete the remedial work. The recorded liabilities are adjusted periodically as remediation efforts progress or as additional technical, regulatory or legal information becomes available. Given the uncertainties regarding the status of laws, regulations, enforcement policies, the impact of other potentially responsible parties, technology and information related to individual sites, we do not believe it is possible to develop an estimate of the range or reasonably possible environmental loss in excess of our recorded liabilities. At December 31, 2020, environmental liabilities were $67 million, primarily related to the Cristal Transaction (see Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements).
For further discussion, see Environmental Matters included elsewhere in this section entitled, "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" and Notes 2 and 20 to the consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
We have operations in several countries around the world and are subject to income and similar taxes in these countries. The estimation of the amounts of income tax involves the interpretation of complex tax laws and regulations and how foreign taxes affect domestic taxes, as well as the analysis of the realizability of deferred tax assets, tax audit findings and uncertain tax positions. Although we believe our tax accruals are adequate, differences may occur in the future, depending on the resolution of pending and new tax matters.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. A valuation allowance is provided against a deferred tax asset when it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. We periodically assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets, and reflect any changes in our estimates in the valuation allowance with a corresponding adjustment to earnings or other comprehensive income (loss) as appropriate. ASC 740, Income Taxes, requires that all available positive and negative evidence be weighted to determine whether a valuation allowance should be recorded.
The amount of income taxes we pay are subject to ongoing audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, which may result in proposed assessments. Our estimate for the potential outcome for any uncertain tax issue is highly judgmental. We assess our income tax positions, and record tax benefits for all years subject to examination based upon our evaluation of the facts, circumstances and information available at the reporting date. For those tax positions for which it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will be sustained, we record the amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. Interest and penalties are accrued as part of tax expense, where applicable. If we do not believe that it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will be sustained, no tax benefit is recognized.
See Notes 2 and 8 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Contingencies
From time to time, we may be subject to lawsuits, investigations and disputes (some of which involve substantial amounts claimed) arising out of the conduct of our business, including matters relating to commercial transactions, prior acquisitions and divestitures including our acquisition of Cristal, employee benefit plans, intellectual property, and environmental, health and safety matters. We recognize a liability for any contingency that is probable of occurrence and reasonably estimable. We continually assess the likelihood of adverse judgments of outcomes in these matters, as well as potential ranges of possible losses (taking into consideration any insurance recoveries), based on a careful analysis of each matter with the assistance of outside legal counsel and, if applicable, other experts. Such contingencies are significant and the accounting requires considerable management judgments in analyzing each matter to assess the likely outcome and the need for establishing appropriate liabilities and providing adequate disclosures.
Refer to Notes 2 and 20 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Long-Lived Assets
Key estimates related to long-lived assets (property, plant and equipment, mineral leaseholds, and intangible assets) include useful lives, recoverability of carrying values, and the existence of any asset retirement obligations. As a result of future decisions, such estimates could be significantly modified. The estimated useful lives of property, plant and equipment range from three to forty years, and depreciation is recognized on a straight-line basis. Useful lives are estimated based upon our historical experience, engineering estimates, and industry information. These estimates include an assumption regarding periodic maintenance. Mineral leaseholds are depreciated over their useful lives as determined under the units of production method. Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortized on the straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. The amortization methods and remaining useful lives are reviewed quarterly.
We evaluate the recoverability of the carrying value of long-lived assets that are held and used whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Under such circumstances, we assess whether the projected undiscounted cash flows of our long-lived assets are sufficient to recover the carrying amount of the asset group being assessed. If the undiscounted projected cash flows are not sufficient, we calculate the impairment amount by discounting the projected cash flows using our weighted-average cost of capital. For assets that satisfy the criteria to be classified as held for sale, an impairment loss, if any, is recognized to the extent the carrying amount exceeds fair value, less cost to sell. The amount of the impairment of long-lived assets is written off against earnings in the period in which the impairment is determined.
Pension and Postretirement Benefits
We provide pension benefits for qualifying employees in the United States and internationally, with the largest in the United Kingdom. Because pension benefits represent financial obligations that will ultimately be settled in the future with employees who meet eligibility requirements, uncertainties exist in estimating the timing and amount of future payments, and significant estimates are required to calculate pension expense and liabilities relating to these plans. The company utilizes the services of independent actuaries, whose models are used to help facilitate these calculations. Several key assumptions are used in actuarial models to calculate pension expense and liability amounts recorded in the financial statements; the most significant variables in the models are the expected rate of return on plan assets, the discount rate, and the expected rate of compensation increase. Management believes the assumptions used in the actuarial calculations are reasonable, reflect the company’s experience and expectations for the future and are within accepted practices in each of the respective geographic locations in which it operates. However, actual results in any given year often differ from actuarial assumptions due to economic events and different rates of retirement, mortality, and turnover. Refer to Notes 2 and 23 to the consolidated financial statements for a summary of the plan assumptions and additional information on our pension arrangements.
Expected Return on Plan Assets - In forming the assumption of the long-term rate of return on plan assets, we consider the expected earnings on funds already invested, earnings on contributions expected to be made in the current year, and earnings on reinvested returns. The long-term rate of return estimation methodology for the plans is based on a capital asset pricing model using historical data and a forecasted earnings model. An expected return on plan assets analysis is performed which incorporates the current portfolio allocation, historical asset-class returns, and an assessment of expected future performance using asset-class risk factors. A 100 basis point change in these expected long-term rates of return, with all other variables held constant, would change our pension expense by approximately $5 million.
Discount Rate - The discount rates selected for estimation of the actuarial present value of the benefit obligations are determined based on the prevailing market rate for high-quality, fixed-income debt instruments with maturities corresponding to the expected timing of benefit payments as of the annual measurement date for each of the various plans. These rates change from year to year based on market conditions that affect corporate bond yields. A 100 basis points change in discount rates, with all other variables held constant, would decrease/increase our pension expense by approximately $2 million. A 100 basis points reduction in discount rates would increase the PBO by approximately $80 million whereas a 100 basis point increase in discount rates would have a favorable impact to the PBO of approximately $68 million.
Rates of Compensation Increase - We determine these rates based on review of the underlying long-term salary increase trend characteristic of the local labor markets and historical experience, as well as comparison to peer companies. A 100 basis points change in the expected rate of compensation increase, with all other variables held constant, would change our pension expense by approximately $1 million and would impact the PBO by approximately $6 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for recently issued accounting pronouncements.
Environmental Matters
We are subject to a broad array of international, federal, state, and local laws and regulations relating to safety, pollution, protection of the environment, and the generation, storage, handling, transportation, treatment, disposal, and remediation of hazardous substances and waste materials. In the ordinary course of business, we are subject to frequent environmental inspections and monitoring, and occasional investigations by governmental enforcement authorities. Under these laws, we are or may be required to obtain or maintain permits or licenses in connection with our operations. In addition, under these laws, we are or may be required to remove or mitigate the effects on the environment of the disposal or release of chemical, petroleum, low-level radioactive and other substances at our facilities. We may incur future costs for capital improvements and general compliance under environmental, health, and safety laws, including costs to acquire, maintain, and repair pollution control equipment. Environmental laws and regulations are becoming increasingly stringent, and compliance costs are significant and will continue to be significant in the foreseeable future. There can be no assurance that such laws and regulations or any environmental law or regulation enacted in the future is not likely to have a material effect on our business. We believe we are in compliance with applicable environmental rules and regulations in all material respects.
Refer to Item 3. Legal Proceedings for further information.
Supplemental Pro Forma Information
To assist in the discussion of the 2020 and 2019 results on a comparable basis, certain supplemental unaudited pro forma income statement and adjusted EBITDA information is provided on a consolidated basis. The pro forma information has been prepared on a basis consistent with Article 11 of Regulation S-X, assuming the merger and merger-related divestitures of Cristal's North American TiO2 business and the 8120 paper laminate grade had been consummated on January 1, 2018. The unaudited pro forma financial information reflects certain adjustments related to the acquisition, such as:
(1) conforming the accounting policies of Cristal to those applied by Tronox;
(2) conversion to U.S. GAAP from IFRS for Cristal;
(3) the elimination of transactions between Tronox and Cristal;
(4) recording certain incremental expenses resulting from purchase accounting adjustments, such as inventory step-up amortization, depreciation, depletion and amortization expense in connection with fair value adjustments to property, plant and equipment, mineral leases and intangibles assets;
(5) recording the contract loss on the sale of the 8120 product line as a charge in the first quarter of 2018;
(6) recording the effect on interest expense related to borrowings in connection with the Cristal Transaction;
and
(7) recording the related tax effects and impacts to EPS for the shares issued in conjunction with the transaction.
In preparing this pro forma information, the historical financial information has been adjusted to give effect to pro forma adjustments that are (i) directly attributable to the business combination and other transactions presented herein, such as the merger-related divestitures, (ii) factually supportable, and (iii) expected to have a continuing impact on the combined entity's consolidated results. The pro forma information is based on management's assumptions and is presented for illustrative purposes and does not purport to represent what the results of operations would actually have been if the business combination and merger-related divestitures had occurred as of the dates indicated or what the results would be for any future periods. Also, the pro forma information does not include the impact of any revenue, cost or other operating synergies that may result from the business combination or any related restructuring costs.
Events that are not expected to have a continuing impact on the combined results (nonrecurring income/charges) are excluded from the unaudited pro forma information.
The unaudited pro forma statement of operations and adjusted EBITDA have been presented for information purposes only and is not necessarily indicative of what Tronox's results actually would have been had the merger been completed on January 1, 2018. In addition, the unaudited pro forma information does not purport to project the future operating results of the Company.
The following unaudited pro forma information includes:
•Pro forma statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019
•Pro forma Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2019
Proforma Information for the year ended December 31, 2020:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the pro forma statement of operations and pro forma Adjusted EBITDA information were the same as the as reported statement of operations and as reported Adjusted EBITDA information.
(b) The adjustment to net sales includes $11 million to eliminate sales between Tronox and Cristal and $2 million to eliminate revenue associated with the divestiture of the 8120 paper laminate product grade.
(c) The adjustment to cost of goods sold includes (i) a credit of $11 million for the elimination of sales between Tronox and Cristal, (ii) a $1 million for the decrease in depreciation and depletion expense as a result of fair value adjustments to property, plant and equipment and mineral leases, and (iii) a credit of $98 million related to the amortizing of the step up in value of inventory. For pro forma purposes, the inventory step up was pushed back to 2018. Cost of goods sold also includes a reclassification of expenses of $21 million from SG&A to cost of goods sold for distribution costs as part of our accounting policy alignment.
(d) The adjustment is for the elimination of $19 million in non-recurring contract losses incurred on the 8120 supply agreement with Venator.
(e) The adjustment to SG&A includes the elimination of $33 million in non-recurring acquisition-related transaction costs incurred, the reclassification of $21 million in expenses from SG&A to cost of goods sold, and a $2 million increase in amortization expense as a result of the fair value adjustment to intangible assets.
(f) The adjustment to interest expense of $1 million reflects interest incurred on incremental borrowings under the Wells Fargo Revolver used to close the Cristal Transaction.
(g) The adjustment to interest income of $6 million reflects the elimination of interest earned on cash balances that were used to acquire Cristal.
(h) The adjustment to NCI of $10 million reflects the component of the inventory step-up which is attributable to our non-controlling interest.
(i) Represents an adjustment to reflect ordinary shares issued to Tasnee as part of the purchase price consideration.