Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion summarizes the significant factors affecting the operating results, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows of our Company as of and for the periods presented below. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with Item 6 - “Selected Financial Data” and the audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto, included elsewhere within this Annual Report. The statements in this discussion regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding our future performance, liquidity and capital resources and all other non-historical statements in this discussion are forward-looking statements and are based on the beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management and are made as of the date of this Annual Report. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere within this Annual Report, particularly in Item 1A - “Risk Factors.” Definitions of capitalized terms not defined herein appear in the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
2020 Highlights
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net income of $7.9 million and Adjusted EBITDA of $299.5 million. Our year-to-date results were significantly impacted by the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as unfavorable net raw material timing, while our fourth quarter results reflected a strong recovery in demand, most notably in automotive, construction, and appliance applications. This demand recovery included continued strength in packaging, protective sheeting, and consumer electronics, which had been more resilient through the pandemic. Refer to the discussion below for further information and refer to “Non-GAAP Performance Measures” for discussion of our use of non-GAAP measures in evaluating our performance and a reconciliation of these measures. Other highlights for the year are described below.
Proposed Acquisition of the Arkema Business
On December 14, 2020, the Company entered into a binding offer to acquire the Arkema business, inclusive of its PMMA and MMA businesses, for a purchase price of €1.137 billion (approximately $1.36 billion). PMMA is a transparent and rigid plastic with a wide range of end uses, and complements Trinseo’s existing offerings across several end markets including automotive, building & construction, medical and consumer electronics. The Arkema business has established brand names such as Plexiglas® in the Americas, Altuglas®, Solarkote® and Oroglas®, and a number of niche applications. The transaction is expected to close in mid-2021 subject to customary closing conditions and regulatory approvals, including prior consultations with certain of Arkema’s works councils. The Company expects to fund the acquisition with up to $250.0 million of existing cash with the remainder from new debt financing. In connection with the agreement with Arkema, the Company entered into a debt commitment letter on December 14, 2020, pursuant to which we will obtain financing for the transaction consisting of a $400.0 million senior secured credit facility, a $350.0 million secured bridge facility, and a $450.0 million unsecured bridge facility. Additionally, on December 15, 2020, the Company entered into a forward currency hedge arrangement for €950.0 million to economically hedge the euro-denominated purchase price.
Exploration of Potential Divestiture of Synthetic Rubber Business
In December 2020, the Company announced that we are exploring the potential divestiture of our Synthetic Rubber business. While we are evaluating the best strategy to pursue for our Synthetic Rubber business, we continue to believe that this business remains a valuable asset with potential for growth in the global tire market.
New Segmentation
Effective October 1, 2020, the Company realigned our reporting segments to reflect the new model under which the business will be managed and results will be reviewed by the chief executive officer, who is the Company’s chief operating decision maker. Following this change, the Company is reporting operating results for seven segments, five of which remain unchanged from the Company’s previous segmentation: Latex Binders, Synthetic Rubber, Feedstocks, Polystyrene, and Americas Styrenics. The Company’s Performance Plastics segment, which included a variety of compounds and blends as well as the results of the ABS, SAN, TPE, and PC businesses, was reorganized into two standalone reporting segments, Engineered Materials and Base Plastics. The new Engineered Materials segment includes the Company’s compounds and blends products sold into higher growth and value applications, such as consumer electronics and medical, as well as the Company’s TPE products which are sold into a variety of applications including footwear and automotive. The new Base Plastics segment contains the results of the remaining businesses, including the ABS, SAN, and PC businesses, as well as compounds and blends for automotive and other applications. This segmentation change will provide enhanced clarity to investors by placing the results of the Company’s products sold into engineered materials applications into a single reporting segment, which aligns with the Company’s strategy to focus our efforts and investments in these applications, as they tend to be less cyclical and offer significantly higher growth and margin potential.
Prior period financial information included within this Annual Report has been recast from the previous presentation to reflect the Company’s new organizational structure.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The Company noted adverse market and industry conditions beginning to emerge in mid-March 2020 stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic, which created an environment with historically-low demand, mainly in our Base Plastics and Synthetic Rubber segments, resulting from reduced sales to automotive and tire applications. To mitigate the impacts of the adverse conditions caused by COVID-19, our management took cost management and liquidity-focused actions to reduce and control operating costs and capital expenditures, to manage working capital, and to reduce our utility costs. As a result of these actions, the Company achieved strong cash generation and year-end liquidity. During the second half of the year, the Company observed significant demand recovery in many of our end markets, such as automotive, construction, and appliances.
Through the fourth quarter, the Company has continued operations at all of our manufacturing locations and has not experienced any material disruptions in our supply chain, which has allowed us to continue meeting customer demand. Our procurement and supply chain teams continue to update contingency plans in the event of a significant disruption or shutdown so that future customer demand can continue to be met with timeliness and quality. The Company has been actively responding to this situation to adjust our business operations, and will continue to monitor developments and take action as needed.
Impairment of Boehlen styrene monomer and Schkopau PBR Assets
In 2020, the Company continued our strategy to focus efforts and increase investments in certain product offerings serving the following applications, which are less cyclical and offer significantly higher growth and margin potential: CASE applications within the Latex Binders segment; and engineered materials applications, including consumer electronics, medical, and TPE applications. As a result of continuing this strategy and other management considerations, in March 2020, the Company initiated a consultation process with the Economic Council and Works Councils of Trinseo Deutschland regarding the disposition of our styrene monomer assets in Boehlen, Germany and our polybutadiene rubber (“PBR,” specifically Ni-PBR and Nd-PBR) assets in Schkopau, Germany. Based on the Company’s evaluation of these assets, we determined that their full carrying value was not recoverable and, as a result, we recorded an impairment charge on the assets of approximately $38.3 million in March 2020. This impairment charge is recorded within “Impairment charges” on the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. In May 2020,
the Company made the determination to mothball our PBR production assets in Schkopau, Germany, which was completed in December 2020. The impacts of this decision and the resulting measures taken by the Company are not material to our financial statements. In October 2020, the Company entered into certain long-term raw material supply agreements for use in our Boehlen styrene monomer facility. As a result of the more favorable cost position and operational flexibility achieved from these agreements, management has made the decision to continue operations at this facility.
Results of Operations
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018
The table below sets forth our historical results of operations, and these results as a percentage of net sales for the periods indicated. Refer to the Company’s Form 10-K filed on February 28, 2020 for explanations of our results of operations for 2019 in comparison to 2018.
2020 vs. 2019
Net Sales
Of the 20% decrease in net sales, 14% was due to lower selling prices resulting mainly from the pass through of lower raw material costs. An additional 6% decrease was due to lower sales volume, primarily within the Base Plastics, Feedstocks, and Synthetic Rubber segments, and mainly due to the impacts related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of Sales
Of the 21% decrease in cost of sales, 16% was due to lower raw material costs, primarily from styrene and butadiene, as well as a 5% decrease due to lower sales volume primarily from the Base Plastics, Feedstocks, and Synthetic Rubber segments.
Gross Profit
The decrease in gross profit of 4% was primarily to lower sales volumes related to COVID-19 as well as an unfavorable net raw material timing impact in comparison to the prior year. See the segment discussion below for further information.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The $47.6 million, or 16%, decrease in selling, general, and administrative expenses was due to several factors. Lower advisory and professional fees, mainly related to the Company’s transition of business and technical services from Dow, which was largely completed in the first quarter of 2020, resulted in a $28.2 million decrease. Also contributing to the decrease were various management actions taken to control operating costs in response to COVID-19, including a $10.2 million decrease in travel-related expenses, as well as a decrease in restructuring costs of $8.2 million, primarily related to the Company's corporate restructuring program, which was initiated in the fourth quarter of 2019. Partially offsetting these decreases was an increase in acquisition costs of $7.5 million, which was principally attributable to the costs incurred in 2020 related to the proposed acquisition of the Arkema business.
Equity in Earnings of Unconsolidated Affiliates
The decrease in equity earnings of $52.0 million was due to lower equity earnings from Americas Styrenics, mainly attributable to lower styrene margins and volume-related impacts from COVID-19 in the current year.
Impairment Charges
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded combined impairment charges of $39.1 million on our Boehlen styrene monomer assets and Schkopau PBR assets. Refer to Note 13 for further information.
Interest Expense, Net
The $4.3 million, or 11%, increase in interest expense, net was primarily attributable to a $7.4 million reduction in interest benefit recorded as a result of the Company’s entry into a new CCS arrangement in February 2020. This was partially offset by the net decrease in interest expense of $2.6 million attributable to lower interest rates during 2020 as compared to 2019.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.8 million, which included $6.2 million of expense related to the non-service cost components of net periodic benefit cost. Partially offsetting these expenses were net foreign exchange transaction gains for the period of $4.9 million. Net foreign transaction gains included $23.9 million of net foreign exchange transaction gains primarily from the remeasurement of our euro-denominated payables due to the relative changes in rates between the U.S. dollar and the euro during the period. The net foreign transaction gains were partially offset by $19.0 million of losses from our foreign exchange forward contracts, including a $7.3 million gain recognized in income from the change in fair value of the forward currency hedge arrangement on the euro-denominated purchase price on the proposed acquisition of the Arkema business, more than offset by losses recorded on other foreign exchange forward contracts. Other expense, net also included $0.5 million of net other miscellaneous expenses during the period.
Other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $4.0 million, which included $6.4 million of expense related to the non-service cost components of net periodic benefit cost. Partially offsetting these expenses was a net gain of $2.5 million recorded in conjunction with our acquisition of latex binders production assets and related site infrastructure in Rheinmünster, Germany, consisting of a bargain purchase gain of $4.7 million offset by expense of $2.2 million for certain jurisdictional asset transfer taxes incurred related to the acquisition. Refer to Note 4 of the consolidated financial statements for more information. Further offsetting these expenses were net foreign exchange transaction gains for the period of $1.8 million. Net foreign transaction gains included $8.0 million of gains from our foreign exchange forward contracts, which were partially offset by $6.2 million of foreign exchange transaction losses primarily from the remeasurement of our euro-denominated payables due to the relative changes in rates between the U.S. dollar and the euro during the period. Other expense, net also included $1.9 million of net other miscellaneous expenses during the period.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes was $37.8 million and $12.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, which resulted in an effective tax rate of 83% and 12%, respectively. The increase in the provision for income taxes was
primarily driven by the one-time deferred tax benefit of $65.0 million recorded in the prior year as a result of changes in the Swiss federal and cantonal tax rules. This prior year one-time benefit was partially offset by a $25.3 million valuation allowance for the portion of the cantonal deferred tax asset that more likely than not will expire before utilization. Refer to Note 14 in the consolidated financial statements for further information. Excluding this one-time net benefit of $39.7 million in the prior year, the provision for income taxes decreased $14.5 million, due primarily to the decrease in income before income taxes.
Selected Segment Information
The Company’s reportable segments are as follows: Latex Binders, Synthetic Rubber, Engineered Materials, Base Plastics, Polystyrene, Feedstocks, and Americas Styrenics. Refer to Item 1 - Business for a description of our segments, including a detailed overview, products and end uses, and competition and customers.
The following sections present net sales, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA margin by segment for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. Intersegment sales have been eliminated. Refer to Note 19 in the consolidated financial statements for a detailed definition of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of income before income taxes to segment Adjusted EBITDA. Refer to the Company’s Form 10-K filed on February 28, 2020 for explanations of our segment results for 2019 in comparison to 2018 for our unchanged segments from 2019, including Latex Binders, Synthetic Rubber, Polystyrene, Feedstocks, and Americas Styrenics. Explanations of our segment results for 2019 in comparison to 2018 in Engineered Materials and Base Plastics, which changed in 2020 as a result of our change in segmentation effective October 1, 2020, as described in Item 1 - Business, are described below.
Latex Binders Segment
2020 vs. 2019
Of the 15% decrease in net sales, 15%, or nearly all of the decrease, was due to lower pricing from the pass through of lower raw material costs.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased by $0.4 million compared to the prior year, primarily due to a decrease of $6.4 million, or 8%, from a negative net timing variance as well as a decrease of $2.0 million, or 2%, from lower volume and a decrease of $1.9 million, or 2%, due to higher fixed costs. These decreases were partially offset by an increase of $6.7 million, or 8%, mainly due to improved portfolio and product mix, as well as commercial excellence actions, and an increase of $4.2 million, or 5%, attributable to lower freight and utility costs.
Synthetic Rubber Segment
2020 vs. 2019
Of the 28% decrease in net sales, 16% was due to lower pricing from the pass through of lower raw material costs, mainly from styrene and butadiene. An additional decrease of 13% was attributable to lower sales volume from weaker demand in the global tire market due to COVID-19.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased by $39.0 million, or 96%, compared to the prior year. Lower sales volume, particularly in SSBR and mainly from COVID-19 impacts, resulted in a $26.9 million, or 66%, decrease, and lower margins resulted in an $8.4 million, or 21%, decrease primarily due to unfavorable net raw material timing impacts and lower margins on ESBR sales. Additionally, higher fixed costs, mainly due to a lower level of fixed cost absorption, resulted in a decrease of $2.4 million, or 6%, decrease.
Engineered Materials Segment
2020 vs. 2019
The 7% decrease in net sales was attributable to a 4% decrease in sales volume, due to COVID-19 impacts, as well as a 3% decrease in pricing from the pass through of lower raw material costs.
Adjusted EBITDA increased by $3.3 million, or 10%, compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily due to a $4.5 million, or 14%, increase in margins, primarily due to commercial excellence pricing actions. Also contributing to the increase was an $0.8 million, or 3%, increase due to lower fixed costs. These effects were partially offset by a decrease of $3.2 million, or 10%, from lower sales volume.
2019 vs. 2018
Net sales were relatively consistent between 2018 and 2019, attributable to a 4% decrease in prices, almost entirely offset by a 4% increase in sales volume, mainly to consumer electronics applications in Asia.
Adjusted EBITDA increased by $17.7 million, or 128%, compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily due to a $18.3 million, or 132%, increase in margins as raw material costs, such as PC, declined considerably during the period. Also contributing to the increase was a $1.7 million, or 12%, increase in sales volume. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $2.4 million, or 17%, from higher fixed costs due to the Company’s growth investments and lower fixed cost absorption in 2019.
Base Plastics Segment
2020 vs. 2019
Of the 21% decrease in net sales, 12% was due to lower sales volume, primarily related to lower sales to automotive applications from COVID-19 impacts, and 10% was due to lower pricing from the pass through of lower raw material costs.
Adjusted EBITDA increased by $7.6 million, or 7%, compared to the prior year. This increase was due to a $31.8 million, or 31%, increase in margins as a result of favorable pricing actions and tighter market conditions in the second
half of the year. An additional $10.4 million, or 10%, increase was due to lower fixed costs. These effects were partially offset by lower sales volume of $33.7 million, or 33%.
2019 vs. 2018
The 15% decrease in net sales was primarily attributable to a 12% decline in pricing from the pass through of lower raw material costs, such as styrene, as well as a 3% decrease due to currency impacts.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased by $71.5 million, or 41%, compared to the prior year. Lower margins, mainly related to PC, resulted in a $62.3 million, or 36%, decrease, due primarily to general market weakness including impacts from an increase in supply in the PC market. Also contributing to the decrease was a $10.2 million, or 6%, decrease due to higher fixed costs from growth investments, including the ramping up of the new ABS facility in China, as well as lower fixed cost absorption in the current year.
Polystyrene Segment
2020 vs. 2019
Of the 14% decrease in net sales, 19% was due to lower pricing from the pass through of lower styrene costs to our customers. This was partially offset by an increase of 4% due to increased sales volume.
Adjusted EBITDA increased by $26.3 million, or 48%, compared to the prior year. Higher margins, primarily from pricing initiatives and tighter market conditions, resulted in a $20.9 million, or 38%, increase. Also contributing to the increase was a $6.3 million, or 12%, increase in sales volume.
Feedstocks Segment
2020 vs. 2019
Of the 47% decrease in net sales, 24% was due to lower styrene-related sales volume and 23% was due to lower pricing from the pass through of lower styrene prices.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased by $1.4 million, or 20%, compared to the prior year. Lower margins resulted in a $6.3 million, or 90%, decrease, due to unfavorable net timing and portfolio mix. An additional 27% decrease was attributable to currency impacts and miscellaneous expense in the segment. These decreases were partially offset by lower fixed costs driven by the Company’s overall cost reduction initiatives, which resulted in an 84% increase.
Americas Styrenics Segment
*The results of this segment are comprised entirely of earnings from Americas Styrenics, our equity method investment. As such, Adjusted EBITDA related to this segment is included within “Equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliates” in the consolidated statements of operations.
2020 vs. 2019
The 44% decrease in Adjusted EBITDA was mainly due to lower styrene margins in North America, volume-related impacts from COVID-19, and the impact from the planned turnaround at its St. James, Louisiana styrene facility in the first quarter of 2020.
Outlook
As discussed above in “2020 Highlights,” despite the adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and the end markets in which we operate during the first half of 2020, market conditions improved in the second half of the year. The Company’s Adjusted EBITDA in the fourth quarter of 2020 was our highest quarterly result in more than two years and we have observed continued market recovery thus far in the first quarter of 2021. In December 2020, the Company announced the proposed acquisition of the Arkema business as the first step in our transformation into an advanced specialty and sustainable solutions provider. This transaction is expected to close in mid-2021. In addition, we will continue to pursue additional growth and business optimization activities, which, in combination with our business excellence initiatives and the full realization of the corporate restructuring initiated in late 2019, we expect to result in higher year-over-year profitability in 2021.
Non-GAAP Performance Measures
We present Adjusted EBITDA as a non-GAAP financial performance measure, which we define as income from continuing operations before interest expense, net; provision for income taxes; depreciation and amortization expense; loss on extinguishment of long-term debt; asset impairment charges; gains or losses on the dispositions of businesses and assets; restructuring charges; acquisition related costs and benefits, and other items. In doing so, we are providing management, investors, and credit rating agencies with an indicator of our ongoing performance and business trends, removing the impact of transactions and events that we would not consider a part of our core operations.
There are limitations to using the financial performance measures such as Adjusted EBITDA. This performance measure is not intended to represent net income or other measures of financial performance. As such, it should not be used as an alternative to net income as an indicator of operating performance. Other companies in our industry may define Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do. As a result, it may be difficult to use this or similarly-named financial measures that other companies may use, to compare the performance of those companies to our performance. We compensate for these limitations by providing a reconciliation of this performance measure to our net income, which is determined in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”).
Adjusted EBITDA is calculated as follows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. For discussion related to 2018 activity, refer to the Company’s Form 10-K filed on February 28, 2020.
(a) EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial performance measure that we refer to in making operating decisions because we believe it provides our management as well as our investors and credit agencies with meaningful information regarding the Company’s operational performance. We believe the use of EBITDA as a metric assists our board of directors, management and investors in comparing our operating performance on a consistent basis. Other companies in our industry may define EBITDA differently than we do. As a result, it may be difficult to use EBITDA, or similarly-named financial measures that other companies may use, to compare the performance of those companies to our performance. We compensate for these limitations by providing reconciliations of our EBITDA results to our net income, which is determined in accordance with GAAP.
(b) Restructuring and other charges for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 primarily relate to employee termination benefit charges as well as contract termination charges incurred in connection with the Company’s corporate restructuring program, as well as charges incurred for other restructuring programs. Restructuring and other charges for the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily relate to employee termination benefit charges incurred in connection with restructuring in our Synthetic Rubber segment. Additionally, a portion of the restructuring and other charges for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 relate to decommissioning and employee termination benefit charges incurred in connection with the upgrade and replacement of our compounding facility in Terneuzen, The Netherlands as well as our decision to cease manufacturing activities at our latex binders manufacturing facility in Livorno, Italy. Refer to Note 20 in the consolidated financial statements for further information regarding restructuring activities.
Note that the accelerated depreciation charges incurred as part of both the Company’s corporate restructuring program and the upgrade and replacement of the Company’s compounding facility in Terneuzen, The Netherlands are included within the “Depreciation and amortization” caption above, and therefore are not included as a separate adjustment within this caption.
(c) Acquisition transaction and integration net costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 relate to expenses incurred for the Company’s proposed acquisition of the Arkema business. Acquisition transaction and integration net benefit amounts for the year ended December 31, 2019 are primarily comprised of the bargain purchase gain recorded in conjunction with the Company’s acquisition of latex binders production assets and related site infrastructure in Rheinmünster, Germany, partially offset by certain jurisdictional asset transfer taxes and advisory and professional fees incurred related to this acquisition.
(d) The acquisition purchase price hedge gain for the year ended December 31, 2020 relates to the change in fair value of the Company’s forward currency hedge arrangement that economically hedges the euro-denominated purchase price of the proposed acquisition of the Arkema business, which is projected to close in mid-2021. Refer to Note 12 in the consolidated financial statements for further information.
(e) Asset impairment charges or write-offs for the year ended December 31, 2020 relate to the impairment of the Company’s styrene monomer assets in Boehlen, Germany and PBR assets in Schkopau, Germany. Refer to Note 13 in the consolidated financial statements for further information. Asset impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2018 relate to the impairment of certain corporate long-lived assets.
(f) Other items for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 relate to fees incurred in conjunction with certain of the Company’s strategic initiatives as well as advisory and professional fees incurred in conjunction with our initiative to transition business services from Dow, including certain administrative services such as accounts payable, logistics, and IT services, which was substantially completed in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
The table below summarizes our primary sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. We have derived the summarized cash flow information from our audited financial statements. Refer to the Company’s Form 10-K filed on February 28, 2020 for discussion related to 2018.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $255.4 million. Net
cash provided by operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $106.2 million, which was driven by the Company’s liquidity-focused actions during the year, including reduced operating expenses and working capital management. As a result of these initiatives as well as the impact of lower raw material prices and sales volumes, inventories decreased $69.8 million and accounts receivable decreased $57.4 million. Also contributing to the increase was a $6.0 million increase in income taxes payable, related to the Company’s higher provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020. These impacts were partially offset by the decrease in other liabilities of $16.9 million and the increase in other assets of $12.2 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $322.5 million, inclusive of $110.0 million in dividends from Americas Styrenics. Net cash provided by operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $129.3 million, noting decreases in inventories of $70.7 million and accounts receivable of $66.6 million. This activity was partially offset by a decrease in income taxes payable of $10.9 million. The decrease in inventories was primarily due to lower days sales in inventory as well as decreased raw material prices. Accounts receivable at the end of 2019 decreased relative to the end of 2018 primarily due to decreased raw material prices as well as lower volumes. The decrease in income taxes payable was primarily due to the overall reduction in earnings before income taxes.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $24.2 million, primarily resulting from capital expenditures of $82.3 million as well as cash paid for a cost method investment of $5.5 million. This activity was partially offset by proceeds from the settlement of hedging instruments of $51.6 million and proceeds of $11.9 million from the sale of our former latex binders manufacturing facility in Livorno, Italy.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $109.3 million, primarily resulting from capital expenditures of $110.1 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $104.3 million. This activity was primarily due to $61.8 million of dividends paid, $25.0 million of payments related to the repurchase of ordinary shares, $12.6 million net repayments of short-term borrowings, and $6.9 million of net principal payments related to our 2024 Term Loan B during the period. Additionally, net cash used in financing activities included $0.6 million of withholding taxes paid related to the vesting of certain Restricted Share Units (“RSUs”) during the period, partially offset by $2.6 million of proceeds received from the exercise of option awards.
Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $206.7 million. This activity was primarily due to $119.7 million of payments related to the repurchase of ordinary shares, $65.7 million of dividends paid, $7.0 million of net principal payments related to our 2024 Term Loan B during the period, and $10.6 million net repayments of short-term borrowings. Additionally, net cash used in financing activities included $4.6 million of withholding taxes paid related to the vesting of certain RSUs during the period, partially offset by $0.9 million of proceeds received from the exercise of option awards.
Free Cash Flow
We use Free Cash Flow as a non-GAAP measure to evaluate and discuss the Company’s liquidity position and results. Free Cash Flow is defined as cash from operating activities, less capital expenditures. We believe that Free Cash Flow provides an indicator of the Company’s ongoing ability to generate cash through core operations, as it excludes the cash impacts of various financing transactions as well as cash flows from business combinations that are not considered organic in nature. We also believe that Free Cash Flow provides management and investors with a useful analytical indicator of our ability to service our indebtedness, pay dividends (when declared), and meet our ongoing cash obligations.
Free Cash Flow is not intended to represent cash flows from operations as defined by GAAP, and therefore, should not be used as an alternative for that measure. Other companies in our industry may define Free Cash Flow differently than we do. As a result, it may be difficult to use this or similarly-named financial measures that other companies may use, to compare the liquidity and cash generation of those companies to our own. We compensate for these limitations by providing a reconciliation to cash provided by operating activities, which is determined in accordance with GAAP.
Refer to the discussion above for significant impacts to cash provided by operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Refer to the Company’s Form 10-K filed on February 28, 2020 for discussion related to 2018.
Capital Resources, Indebtedness and Liquidity
We require cash principally for day-to-day operations, including the purchase of raw materials for production, to finance capital investments and other initiatives, to service our outstanding indebtedness, and to fund the return of capital to shareholders via dividend payments and ordinary share repurchases, when deemed appropriate. Our sources of liquidity include cash on hand, cash flow from operations, and amounts available under the Senior Credit Facility and the Accounts Receivable Securitization Facility (discussed further below).
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $1,188.0 million and $1,194.7 million, respectively, in outstanding indebtedness and $983.8 million and $963.5 million, respectively, in working capital. In addition, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $172.8 million and $153.5 million, respectively, of foreign cash and cash equivalents on our
consolidated balance sheets, outside of our country of domicile of Luxembourg, all of which is readily convertible into other foreign currencies, including the U.S. dollar. Our intention is not to permanently reinvest our foreign cash and cash equivalents. Accordingly, we record deferred income tax liabilities related to the unremitted earnings of our subsidiaries. For a detailed description of the Company’s debt structure, borrowing rates, and expected future payment obligations, refer to Note 11 in the consolidated financial statements.
The following table outlines our outstanding indebtedness as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and the associated interest expense, including amortization of deferred financing fees and issuance discounts. Effective interest rates for the borrowings included in the table below exclude the impact of deferred financing fee amortization, certain other fees charged to interest expense (such as fees for unused commitment fees during the period), and the impacts of derivatives designated as hedging instruments.
Our Senior Credit Facility includes the 2022 Revolving Facility, which matures in September 2022 and has a borrowing capacity of $375.0 million. On April 3, 2020, the Company drew down $100.0 million from the 2022 Revolving Facility, which we repaid on July 24, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no outstanding borrowings and had $360.0 million (net of $15.0 million outstanding letters of credit) of funds available for borrowing under this facility. Further, as of December 31, 2020, the Company is required to pay a quarterly commitment fee in respect of any unused commitments under the 2022 Revolving Facility equal to 0.375% per annum. The 2022 Revolving Facility contains a springing covenant which applies when 30% ($112.5 million) or more is drawn from the facility, and would require the Company to meet a first lien net leverage ratio not to exceed 2.0x at the end of each financial quarter. As of December 31, 2020, the first lien net leverage ratio (as defined in our secured credit agreement) was 0.4x.
Also included in our Senior Credit Facility is our 2024 Term Loan B, which had original principal of $700.0 million, maturing in September 2024, requires scheduled quarterly payments in amounts equal to 0.25% of the original principal. The stated interest rate on our 2024 Term Loan B is LIBOR plus 2.00% (subject to a 0.00% LIBOR floor). During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company made net payments of $6.9 million on the 2024 Term Loan B, with an additional $7.0 million of scheduled future payments classified as current debt on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020.
Our 2025 Senior Notes issued under the Indenture include $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.375% senior notes that mature on September 1, 2025. Interest on the 2025 Senior Notes is payable semi-annually on May 3 and November 3 of each year. These notes may be redeemed prior to their maturity at the option of the Company under certain circumstances at specific redemption prices. Refer to Note 11 in the consolidated financial statements for further information.
We also continue to maintain our Accounts Receivable Securitization Facility, which matures in September 2021 and has an outstanding borrowing capacity of $150.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under this facility and the Company had approximately $135.2 million of accounts receivable available to support this facility, based on the pool of eligible accounts receivable.
Our ability to raise additional financing and our borrowing costs may be impacted by short- and long-term debt ratings assigned by independent rating agencies, which are based, in significant part, on our performance as measured by certain credit metrics such as interest coverage and leverage ratios.
We and our subsidiaries, affiliates, or significant shareholders may from time to time seek to retire or purchase our outstanding debt through cash purchases in the open market, privately negotiated transactions, exchange transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases or exchanges, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material.
Trinseo Materials Operating S.C.A. and Trinseo Materials Finance, Inc. (the “Issuers” of our 2025 Senior Notes and “Borrowers” under our Senior Credit Facility) are dependent upon the cash generation and receipt of distributions and dividends or other payments from our subsidiaries and joint venture in order to satisfy their debt obligations. There are no known significant restrictions by third parties on the ability of subsidiaries of the Company to disburse or dividend funds to the Issuers and the Borrowers in order to satisfy these obligations. However, as the Company’s subsidiaries are located in a variety of jurisdictions, the Company can give no assurances that our subsidiaries will not face transfer restrictions in the future due to regulatory or other reasons beyond our control.
The Senior Credit Facility and Indenture also limit the ability of the Borrowers and Issuers, respectively, to pay dividends or make other distributions to Trinseo S.A., which could then be used to make distributions to shareholders. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company declared total dividends of $1.28 per ordinary share, or $49.7 million, of which $4.3 million, inclusive of dividend equivalents, remains accrued as of December 31, 2020 and the majority of which was paid in January 2021. These dividends are well within the available capacity under the terms of the restrictive covenants contained in the Senior Credit Facility and Indenture. Further, significant additional capacity continues to be available under the terms of these covenants to support expected future dividends to shareholders, should the Company continue to declare them.
The Company’s cash flow generation in recent years has been strong, and the Company generated positive cash flows during the year ended December 31, 2020 despite the challenges presented by extremely weak economic conditions due to COVID-19. During the year ended December 31, 2020, under authority from our board of directors, the Company purchased approximately 0.8 million ordinary shares from our shareholders through open market transactions for an aggregate purchase price of $25.0 million. We believe that funds provided by operations, our existing cash, cash equivalent, and restricted cash balances, borrowings available under our 2022 Revolving Facility and our Accounts Receivable Securitization Facility will be adequate to meet planned operating and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months under current operating conditions.
Further, we also believe that our financial resources will allow us to manage the anticipated impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations for the foreseeable future, which could include lower demand, reductions in revenue or delays in payments from customers and other third parties. Our ability to generate cash from operations to pay our indebtedness and meet other liquidity needs is subject to certain risks described herein and under Item 1A - Risk Factors. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all the covenants and default provisions under our debt agreements. Refer to Note 11 in the consolidated financial statements for further information on the details of the covenant requirements.
Derivative Instruments
The Company’s ongoing business operations expose it to various risks, including fluctuating foreign exchange rates and interest rate risk. To manage this risk, the Company periodically enters into derivative financial instruments, such as foreign exchange forward contracts and interest rate swap agreements. A summary of these derivative financial instrument programs is described below; however, refer to Note 12 of the consolidated financial statements for further information. The Company does not hold or enter into financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes.
Foreign Exchange Forward Contracts
Certain subsidiaries have assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than their respective functional currencies, which creates foreign exchange risk. Our principal strategy in managing exposure to changes in foreign currency exchange rates is to naturally hedge the foreign currency-denominated liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets against corresponding assets of the same currency such that any changes in liabilities due to fluctuations in exchange rates are offset by changes in their corresponding foreign currency assets. In order to further reduce our exposure, the Company uses foreign exchange forward contracts to economically hedge the impact of the variability in exchange rates on our assets and liabilities denominated in certain foreign currencies. These derivative contracts are not designated for hedge accounting treatment.
Foreign Exchange Cash Flow Hedges
The Company also enters into forward contracts with the objective of managing the currency risk associated with forecasted U.S. dollar-denominated raw materials purchases by one of our subsidiaries whose functional currency is the euro. By entering into these forward contracts, which are designated as cash flow hedges, the Company buys a designated amount of U.S. dollars and sells euros at the prevailing market rate to mitigate the risk associated with the fluctuations in the euro-to-U.S. dollar foreign currency exchange rate.
Interest Rate Swaps
The Company enters into interest rate swap agreements to manage our exposure to variability in interest payments associated with the Company’s variable rate debt. Under these interest rate swap agreements, which are designated as cash flow hedges, the Company is effectively converting a portion of our variable rate borrowings into a fixed rate obligation to mitigate the risk of variability in interest rates.
Net Investment Hedge
The Company has certain fixed-for-fixed cross currency swaps (“CCS”), swapping U.S. dollar principal and interest payments on our 2025 Senior Notes for euro-denominated payments, which were designated as a hedge of the Company’s net investment in certain European subsidiaries under the forward method through March 31, 2018 through the original CCS agreement entered into on September 1, 2017 (“2017 CCS”). As such, changes in their fair value, to the extent effective, were recorded within the cumulative translation adjustment account as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income or loss (“AOCI”) through March 31, 2018.
Effective April 1, 2018, in conjunction with the adoption of previously issued hedging accounting guidance, the Company elected as an accounting policy to re-designate the 2017 CCS as a net investment hedge (and any future similar hedges) under the spot method. As such, changes in the fair value of the 2017 CCS that were included in the assessment of effectiveness (changes due to spot foreign exchange rates) were recorded as cumulative foreign currency translation within AOCI, and will remain in AOCI until either the sale or substantially complete liquidation of the subsidiary. As an additional accounting policy election applied to similar hedges under this standard, the initial value of any component excluded from the assessment of effectiveness is recognized in income using a systematic and rational method over the life of the hedging instrument. Any difference between the change in the fair value of the excluded component and amounts recognized in income under that systematic and rational method is recognized in AOCI. The Company has elected to amortize the initial excluded component value as a reduction of “Interest expense, net” in the consolidated statements of operations using the straight-line method over the remaining term of the 2017 CCS. Additionally, the Company recognizes the accrual of periodic USD and euro-denominated interest receipts and payments under the terms of CCS arrangements, including the 2017 CCS, within “Interest expense, net” in the consolidated statements of operations.
On February 26, 2020, the Company settled our 2017 CCS and replaced it with a new CCS arrangement (the “2020 CCS”) that carried substantially the same terms as the 2017 CCS and also is designated as a net investment hedge under the spot method. Upon settlement of the 2017 CCS, the Company realized net cash proceeds of $51.6 million. The remaining $13.8 million unamortized balance of the initial excluded component related to the 2017 CCS at the time of settlement is no longer being amortized following the settlement and will remain in AOCI until either the sale or substantially complete liquidation of the relevant subsidiaries.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The following table reflects our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020. Amounts we pay in future periods may vary from those reflected in the table:
(1) We have certain raw material purchase contracts where we are required to purchase certain minimum volumes at the then prevailing market prices. These commitments have remaining terms ranging from one to seven years. The table above includes our raw material purchase commitments under contracts with a remaining term in excess of one year. In certain raw material purchase contracts, we have the right to purchase less than required minimums and pay a liquidated damages fee, or, in case of a permanent plant shutdown, to terminate the contracts. In such cases these obligations would be less than the obligations shown in the table above.
(2) The long-term indebtedness line in the table includes obligations on our outstanding borrowing amounts as of December 31, 2020, which are related to the 2024 Term Loan B and the 2025 Senior Notes. The impacts of certain fixed-for-fixed cross currency swaps, which are discussed in Note 12 of the consolidated financial statements, as well as all other debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020 totaling $10.7 million are not included in this line.
(3) Interest payments on debt are calculated for future periods using interest rates in effect as of December 31, 2020. The amounts above include estimated interest on the 2024 Term Loan B and the related effects of interest rate swap agreements, as well as interest on the 2025 Senior Notes; however, they do not include the impacts of certain fixed-for-fixed cross currency swaps. Interest on the 2024 Term Loan B is payable quarterly and interest on the 2025 Senior Notes is payable semi-annually on each May 3 and November 3. Refer to